Chapter C
CHARTER
C:1

ARTICLE 1
Incorporation: Form of Government: Powers
1-1. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the town of Marshfield within the corporate limits
established by law shall continue to be a body corporate and politic with
perpetual succession under the name "Town of Marshfield."
1-2. Form of Government.
The administration of the fiscal, prudential and municipal affairs of the town
shall be vested in an executive branch to consist of the board of selectmen
and other elected officers and a legislative branch to consist of the open
town meeting.
1-3. Powers.
Subject only to express limitations on the exercise of any power of function
by a town in the constitution or statutes of the commonwealth it is the intent
and purpose of the voters of Marshfield to retain and secure through the
adoption of this charter all of the powers it is possible to secure for the town
under the constitution and statutes of the commonwealth.
1-4. Construction.
The powers of the town under this charter are to be construed liberally
in favor of the town and the specific mention of particular powers is not
intended to limit in any way the general powers of the town as stated in
section 1-3.
1-1 CHARTER 1-4
C:3

ARTICLE 2
Town Meeting
2-1.
The legislative powers of the town shall be exercised by a town meeting
open to all registered voters of the town.
2-2.
At least one member of each elected Board shall be present at each session
of Town Meeting. Appointed officers and members of any appointed
Commission, Committee or Study Group shall attend if so requested by
appointing authorities.
2-3.
The Town Meeting Warrant shall either be published in a newspaper with
general circulation in the town, or shall be mailed to every household in
which a registered voter resides, no later than two weeks prior to the
opening of the first session of town meeting.
2-4.
The Warrant for the Annual Town Meeting shall open for submission
of articles on the first (1st) Monday in January and shall close on
the fourth (4th) Monday in January. For Special Town Meetings, the
Warrant shall open no later than 30 days prior to the opening of the first
session and shall remain open for 10 days.
(A)
The Board of Selectmen shall give notice of the opening and closing of
the Town Meeting Warrant at least seven (7) days prior to such opening
or closing to all elected boards, appointed committees and department
heads, and shall post such notice in at least ten (10) prominent
locations in the Town, including but not limited to the Public Library
and Town Hall. Such notice shall be published in a newspaper with
general circulation in the Town at least seven (7) days prior to such
opening.
(B)
If the Board of Selectmen at a duly called public meeting shall declare
that an emergency exists requiring action by the Town at the earliest
possible time then the provisions of this paragraph 2-4 shall not apply.
An emergency for purposes of this Charter shall mean a sudden,
generally unexpected occurrence or set of circumstances demanding
immediate action. [Added 4-30-2011]
(C)
2-1 CHARTER 2-4
C:5

ARTICLE 3
Elected Officials
3-1. General Provisions.
3-2. Elected Town Boards, Duties, Terms, etc.
Elective offices. The offices to be filled by ballot of the whole town shall
be, 1) a board of selectmen, 2) a board of assessors, 3) a board of public
works, 4) a planning board, 5) a board of health, 6) trustees of the
Veterans Memorial, 7) a school committee, 8) a moderator, 9) a town
clerk, 10) a housing authority.
(A)
Eligibility. Any registered voter of the town shall be eligible to hold any
elective town office; but no elected town official shall simultaneously
hold any other elected town office. This section (B) shall not apply to
any person who has received or receives tenure of office under the
provision of c41S19B, C of the General Laws.1
(B)
Election. The regular election for town office shall be held annually on
the date fixed by by-law.
(C)
Selectmen.
Composition, Term of Office. There shall be a board of selectmen
consisting of three (3) members elected for three-year overlapping
terms, so arranged that the term of one member shall expire each
year. They shall receive for their services such compensation as
may annually be provided for that purpose by appropriation.
(A)
Powers and Duties in General. The executive powers of the town
shall be vested in the board of selectmen, and shall be exercised by
them or jointly through the town agencies and offices. The board
of selectmen shall cause the laws and orders for the government
of the town to be enforced, and shall cause a record of all their
official acts to be kept. In addition to aforesaid powers and duties,
they shall exercise such powers and duties as are and may be
provided by the General Laws, this charter, by-law and/or vote of
the town meeting. The Planning Board shall be consulted for a
written recommendation by the Board of Selectmen prior to any
action on the use and siting of any town owned property.
(B)
Appointments. The selectmen shall appoint, for fixed terms of one
year, election officers, director of veterans' affairs, and a town
counsel, and for a fixed term, as provided in Art. 4, a town
administrator for a fixed term as provided in Article 4, a Facilities
Manager; and for a three-year term, a town accountant. They shall
appoint for fixed overlapping terms of three years, so that the term
of at least one member expires each year; the members of the
(C)
3-2-1.
1. Editor's Note: Reference is to MGL c. 41, §§ 19B and 19C.
3-1 CHARTER 3-2
C:7
board of appeals, library trustees, registrars of voters, advisory
board and the following commissions: conservation, recreation,
historical, development and industrial, council for aging, airport,
communications, and the following committees: insurance, school
building, permanent site and needs, capital budget, beautification
and study groups in accordance with Art. 7 hereof.
Unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by-law, they shall
have the power to appoint department heads, other appointed
board, commission and committee members, and other town
officials and employees as authorized or as may be authorized
by the General Laws, this charter, by-law or Town Meeting and
for whom appointment is not otherwise provided.
1)
In consideration of the unique historical background and the
special historic significance of the town the selectmen may,
with the approval of the Historical Commission, appoint a town
historian for a term not to exceed seven years. The historian
shall perform such duties as the Historical Commission may
from time to time designate and may receive reimbursement
for expenses to be within the amount so appropriated by the
town meeting.
2)
Investigations. The board of selectmen may investigate and may
authorize the town administrator to investigate the affairs of the
town and the conduct of any town department, including all elected
boards, offices or agencies, and any doubtful claims against the
town and take any action relative thereto. The report of the results
of such investigation shall be placed on file in the office of the board
of selectmen.
(D)
Building Inspection Department. There shall be a Building
Inspection Department administered by the Inspector of Buildings,
who shall be appointed by the Selectmen. The Building Inspection
Department shall have responsibility for administration of the town
building code by-law or as amended or superseded by state
regulation. The local Building Inspector, Local Inspector for Wires,
Local Inspector for Gas, Local Inspector for Plumbing and other
inspectors as from time to time are determined necessary and their
assistants shall be appointed annually by the Selectmen unless
otherwise provided for by the General Laws.
(E)
Board of Assessors.
Composition, Term of Office. The board of assessors shall consist
of three (3) members elected to three-year overlapping terms, so
arranged that the term of one member shall expire each year.
(A)
Compensation. The members of the board of assessors shall receive
for their services such compensation as may annually be provided
for that purpose by appropriation.
(B)
3-2-2.
3-2 MARSHFIELD CODE 3-2
C:8
Powers and Duties in General. The board of assessors shall have all
powers and duties as set forth in the applicable provisions of the
General Laws or as may be authorized by this charter or by-law.
(C)
Board of Public Works.
Composition, Term of Office. The board of public works shall
consist of three (3) members elected for three-year overlapping
terms so arranged that one term expires each year. They shall
receive for their services such compensation as may annually be
provided for that purpose by appropriation.
(A)
Powers and Duties in General. The board of public works elected
under section 3-2-3 shall be responsible for organizing and
administering the following functions: construction and
maintenance, highways, water and sewer systems, tree care, and
parks, including landscaping and ground maintenance of all town
buildings and property, and such other public works and related
functions as may from time to time be vested in it through the
General Laws, this charter, by-law or vote of the town meeting; and
to this end the board shall, following each annual town election:
(a) select from its membership a chairman, a vice-chairman, and a
clerk for the ensuing year; and (b) be administratively organized
into the following divisions: highway, water, trees, and cemeteries
and parks. The board of public works, by a majority vote of its
full membership, shall appoint a superintendent of public works for
an initial term of three years and annually thereafter and shall fix
his compensation within limits of an appropriation made for that
purpose. The superintendent shall: (a) be especially qualified by
education, training, and experience to perform the duties of the
office and have such other qualifications as may be determined by
by-law; (b) exercise and perform, under the board's supervision
and direction, those public works functions for which the board
is responsible; and (c) appoint, subject to approval by the board,
such assistants, agents, and other employees as the exercise and
performance of his powers, rights, and duties may require. The
superintendent shall give the town a surety bond for the faithful
performance of his duties in such sum and upon such conditions as
the board may require; shall keep the board fully informed as to
the public works needs of the town; shall keep a full and complete
record of his operations; shall render to the board, as often as it
may require, a full report thereon; and annually or more often shall
prepare a synopsis of such reports for publication.
(B)
Engineering Department.
Organization. There shall be an engineering department
administered by the Superintendent of Public Works.
1
Duties – Administrative. The engineering department shall
provide the town with engineering services by town employees
2
(C)
3-2-3.
3-2 CHARTER 3-2
C:9
and by contracting with qualified architectural/engineering
firms.
Duties – General. The Engineering Department shall certify
that all subdivision, sewerage and other such plans and
specifications required by town by-laws conform to such bylaws
and shall be responsible for maintenance of assessors'
and town maps and certification of plans and specifications
for public works construction projects. The Engineering
Department shall provide onsite inspection to assure proper
construction performance in accordance with subdivision
plans and site plan approvals made by the Board of Appeals.
The Engineering Department shall also provide engineering
and other technical assistance to the Planning Board, Board of
Health, Conservation Commission, Facilities Manager or any
other town board or commission, reasonably requesting such
service.
The Engineering Department shall have final approval
responsibility for all plans and specifications relating to
new construction and/or alterations or modifications of
any existing town owned structure and shall consult with
the Facilities Manager on all town owned buildings.
A)
When reasonably requested the department shall supply
engineering information to the town meeting.
B)
3
Planning Board.
Composition, Term of Office. The planning board shall consist of
five members elected to five-year overlapping terms so arranged
that the term of one member shall expire each year.
(A)
Compensation. The planning board shall receive for their services
such compensation as may annually be provided for that purpose
by appropriation.
(B)
Powers and Duties. The planning board shall from time to time
make careful studies and when necessary prepare plans of the
resources, potentials and needs of the town, and upon the
completion of any such study, shall submit to the selectmen and
town such part or parts thereof as said board may deem advisable
and from time to time may extend or perfect such plan. A master
plan for the Town is to be updated or revised in its entirety every
10 years or as the Planning Board or others deem advisable out of
funds to be provided by appropriation. In carrying out its tasks the
planning board may employ the town Engineering Department or
outside consulting firms when special skills are required.
The Planning Board, by a majority vote of its full membership
shall appoint a Town Planner and staff as may be provided by
appropriation.
1)
(C)
3-2-4.
3-2 MARSHFIELD CODE 3-2
C:10
The planning board shall regulate the subdivision of land
within the meaning of the subdivision control law of the
General Laws.2
2)
The planning board shall serve in an advisory capacity to any
town department as required or requested.
3)
In addition to all powers and duties set forth herein, the planning
board shall have all such powers and duties as set forth in
applicable provisions of the General Laws or as may be authorized
by this charter or by by-law.
(D)
Board of Health.
Composition, Term of Office. The board of health shall consist of
three (3) members elected to three-year overlapping terms, so
arranged that the term of one member shall expire each year.
(A)
Compensation. The members of the board of health shall receive
for their services such compensation as may annually be provided
for that purpose by appropriation.
(B)
Powers and Duties in General. The board of health shall have all
powers and duties as set forth in the applicable provisions of the
General Laws or as may be created by by-law or this charter.
(C)
3-2-5.
Trustees of Veterans Memorial. There shall be a board of trustees of
the Veterans Memorial, which shall be elected and have the power and
duties as set forth in the pertinent section of the General Laws (c41 S
105).
3-2-6.
School Committee.
Composition, Term of Office. The school committee shall consist of
five members elected to three-year overlapping terms so arranged
that the term of two members shall expire each year for each of two
years and the term of one member shall expire on the third year.
(A)
Powers and Duties. The school committee shall have all the powers
and duties a school committee may have under the Constitution
and General Laws of the Commonwealth, and it shall have such
additional power and duties as may be authorized by this charter
or by by-law. The Planning Board shall be consulted for a written
recommendation by the School Committee prior to any action on
the use or siting of any town owned property.
(B)
3-2-7.
Moderator.
(A) Term of Office. A moderator shall be elected for a 3 year term.
3-2-8.
2. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
3-2 CHARTER 3-2
C:11
3-3. Vacancies.
Should a vacancy occur in any elected office, board, commission or
committee, such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the appropriate
provisions of the General Laws (Selectmen c41 S10: Moderator c39 S14;
Town Clerk 41 S14; all other boards and commissions c.41 S11). No vacancy
shall be filled until 14 days after public notice of such vacancy.
Compensation. The moderator shall receive for his/her services
such compensation as may annually be provided for that purpose
by appropriation.
(B)
Duties. The moderator shall preside at all sessions of the town
meetings, regulate the proceedings, decide all questions of order,
make public declaration of all votes and perform such other duties
as may from time to time be assigned to the office through bylaw
or vote of the town meeting or by this charter. In addition
thereto he/she shall have the duties set forth in ch. 39, Sec.15, of
the General Laws.
(C)
Temporary Absence. The town meeting may at any session elect a
moderator pro tempore to preside in the moderator's absence or if
and when he/she declines to preside.
(D)
Town Clerk.
Term of Office. The town clerk shall be elected for a term of three
years. He/she shall receive for his/her service such compensation
as may annually be provided for that purpose by appropriations.
(A)
Powers and Duties. The town clerk shall have the power and duties
as set forth in the applicable provisions of the General Laws and
such additional power and duties as may be authorized by this
charter or by by-law.
(B)
By-Laws. All town by-laws shall be filed with the town clerk. The
town clerk shall publish, and make available, at reasonable cost,
copies of the by-laws and this charter to all persons requesting
them.
(C)
3-2-9.
Housing Authority. There shall be a Housing Authority, four members of
which shall be elected and one member appointed by the Governor of
the Commonwealth which shall have the power and duties as set forth
in the pertinent sections of the General Laws, as may be accepted by
the town meeting.
3-2-10.
3-2 MARSHFIELD CODE 3-3
C:12
ARTICLE 4
Appointed Town Officials, Boards, Commissions and Committees
4-1. Duties, Terms, etc.
Town Administrator.
Qualifications. The qualifications of Town Administrator shall be
established by personnel By-Law.
(A)
Term. The Board of Selectmen, by a majority vote of its full
membership, shall appoint a Town Administrator for an initial term
of three years and at its discretion for successive terms thereafter
which will not exceed three years each and shall fix his/her
compensation within limits of an appropriation made for that
purpose.
(B)
Personnel By-Laws. Except as provided herein, the office shall not
be subject to any personnel by-law of the Town.
(C)
Residential Requirements. The Town Administrator need not be a
resident of the town or Commonwealth.
(D)
Other Offices. He/she shall devote full time to the office and shall
not hold any other public office, elective or appointive except as
provided herein. He/she shall not engage in any other business
or occupation during his term, unless such action is approved in
writing by the board of selectmen.
(E)
Powers and Duties General. Except as otherwise authorized, the
town administrator will report to the selectmen's office every
business day, and will be engaged in such varied activities as the
following: preparing the agenda for each weekly meeting of the
board; handling all correspondence for the selectmen; receiving
and carrying out decisions and instructions from them;
coordinating the work of the several departments under the
jurisdiction of the selectmen with other town departments and
with state, county, or private agencies; providing the board with
factual information upon which they make decisions and formulate
policies; and receiving and adjusting complaints or making
referrals to the proper governmental or private agency. The town
administrator shall attend all town meetings.
(F)
Powers and Duties – Specific. The Town Administrator duties shall
include but not be limited to:
Administer the personnel by-law as voted by the town and as
may be determined by collective bargaining agreements.
1)
Maintain a full and complete inventory of the town's property
both real and personal.
2)
3) Supervise and maintain a central purchasing department.
(G)
4-1-1.
4-1 CHARTER 4-1
C:13
Shall be an ex-officio non-voting member of all elected and
appointed boards and commissions and committees.
4)
Shall keep informed and report to the selectmen on
developments in municipal administration, grants etc. at both
the state and federal level.
5)
Vacancy. Shall be filled as soon as reasonably possible. Temporary
appointment for a period of no longer than four months may be
made by selectmen in the absence of a fully qualified individual.
(H)
(I) Removal. As provided in Section 8-2 of this charter.
Facilities Manager.
The Board of Selectmen, by a majority vote of its full membership,
in consultation with the Superintendent of Schools and Town
Administrator, shall appoint a Facilities Manager for an initial term
of three years and at its discretion for successive terms thereafter
each of which shall not exceed three (3) years and shall fix
compensation within limits of an appropriation made for that
purpose.
(A)
The Facilities Manager will be accountable to the Superintendent
of Schools for school operated buildings and to the Town
Administrator for all other Town owned buildings, in consultation
with the Engineering Department as required, excluding the waste
treatment building(s) and water department infrastructure
buildings and shall have a budget appropriate to his/her
responsibilities and duties.
(B)
Duties. The Facilities Manager shall prepare an inventory of all
town owned buildings and facilities, assess their conditions and
needs, and prepare a long-term plan for the preventive
maintenance and improvement of town buildings within the
purview of this position.
The Facilities Manager shall implement and manage all
programs that ensure the proper operation and maintenance
of town buildings and systems therein and oversee other work
that may be required. He/she shall arrange for annual
contracts related to maintenance of town facilities and be a
procurement coordinator for supplies necessary to the
performance of the position.
1)
In addition, the Facilities Manager shall be involved ex-officio
on all capital building projects and shall consult with the
Engineering Department and Building Department as needed.
2)
(C)
4-1-2.
Legal Counsel.
Term of Office. The Town Counsel shall be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen for a term of one year, said term to commence on July
(A)
4-1-3.
4-1 MARSHFIELD CODE 4-1
C:14
4-2. Vacancy.
Should a vacancy occur in any office, board or commission, such vacancy
shall be filled in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the General
Laws. Vacancies on Committees or Study Groups may be filled by the
appointing authority. No vacancy shall be filled until 14 days after public
notice of vacancy.
1 of each year, except where a vacancy exists, in which case the
appointee shall complete the remainder of the current term. "Town
Counsel" as used in this Charter, may refer to an individual or a law
firm hired by the Selectmen to provide legal services to the Town.
Town Counsel may serve on either a full time or part time basis, in
the discretion of the appointing authority, subject to the amount of
compensation appropriated for that purpose by the Town.
Duties. The Town Counsel shall:
1) Be the legal counsel for the Town in its corporate capacity.
Provide legal consultation and advice to all boards, officers and
employees of the Town, as may be authorized by the Board of
Selectmen or its designee.
2)
Review all Town Meeting Warrant Articles prior to each Town
Meeting and advise the Board of Selectmen and relevant town
boards, officers and employees regarding the legality of such
articles.
3)
Attend all Annual and Special Town Meetings, and provide
such legal consultation and advice as may be requested by
Town Meeting.
4)
Conduct or oversee all litigation, including administrative
proceedings, in which the Town, its boards or officers are
involved in their official capacity, to the extent such legal
services are not provided by the town's insurance carriers.
5)
Review and approve as to form all contracts to which the Town
is a party.
6)
(B)
Treasurer/Collector. There shall be a Treasurer/Collector appointed by
the Board of Selectmen for a term of three (3) years.
4-1-4.
4-1 CHARTER 4-2
C:15

ARTICLE 5
Finances and Fiscal Procedures
5-1. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the town shall be as required by the General Laws.
5-2. Submission of Budget and Budget Message.
On or before the last Monday of January, the selectmen assisted by the Town
Administrator shall file with the advisory board a proposed budget for the
ensuing fiscal year with an accompanying budget message and supporting
documents.
5-3. Budget Message.
The message of the selectmen shall explain the budget for all town
agencies, both in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs. It shall
outline proposed financial policies of the town for the ensuing fiscal year,
describe important features of the budget including capital expenditures,
indicate any major variations from the current year in financial policies,
expenditures and revenues together with reasons for such changes,
summarize the town's debt position and include other material as the
selectmen may require.
5-4. The Budget.
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all town funds and
activities, including Enterprise Accounts and the budget adopted by the
school committee for the ensuing fiscal year. Except for the school budget or
as may otherwise be required by statute or by this charter, it shall be in the
form which the selectmen may require. In their presentation of the budget
the selectmen shall utilize modern concepts of fiscal presentation, so as to
furnish maximum information and provide the best financial control. The
budget shall show in detail all estimated income from the proposed property
tax levy and other sources and all proposed expenditures, including debt
service for the following year. The budget shall be arranged to show the
actual and estimated income and expenditures for the previous, current and
ensuing fiscal years and shall indicate in separate sections:
Proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal
year, detailed by agency and position in terms of work programs, and
the method of financing such expenditures;
(A)
Proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed
by town agency, and the proposed method of financing each such
capital expenditure; and
(B)
Estimated surplus revenue and free cash at the end of the current fiscal
year, including estimated balances in any special accounts established
for specific purposes.
(C)
5-1 CHARTER 5-5
C:17
5-5. Action on the budget.
5-6. Capital Improvement Program. [Amended 4-30-2011]
Town officers, board and committees shall, by the third Friday in November
of each year, submit to the Capital Budget Committee all requests for
capital projects and all information concerning such projects proposed to
be undertaken in the next fiscal year. In addition, no later than the third
Friday in November of each year, all town officers, boards and committees
shall submit to the Capital Budget Committee a capital budget plan listing
all capital projects then in effect and anticipated in the following five (5)
fiscal years. Capital projects for consideration at a Special Town Meeting
should be of an emergency nature only and shall be submitted to the Capital
Budget Committee as promptly as the emergency circumstances allow prior
to the date of a Special Town Meeting. The Capital Budget Committee will
review all current project requests and five year capital budget plans and:
5-7. Financial Public Records.
A summary of the budget and capital improvements program and related
warrant articles as adopted by the town meeting shall be prepared by
the Town Administrator under the direction of the Selectmen and made
available at the offices of both the Town Clerk and Selectmen for
examination by the public not more than thirty (30) days after their
adoption. These provisions shall not affect the availability of the annual
town report, the town warrant or the report of the advisory board.
The board of selectmen and the advisory board shall jointly hold one
or more public hearings on the proposed budget not less than fourteen
(14) days prior to the town meeting at which it is to be submitted for
adoption.
(A)
Develop a capital budget article to be presented to the next Annual
Town Meeting or Special Town Meeting with recommendations; and
(A)
Incorporate all capital budget plans into an overall town capital budget
program. The capital improvement program is to be developed and
administered in accordance with the capital budget bylaws.
(B)
5-5 MARSHFIELD CODE 5-7
C:18
ARTICLE 6
General Organization
6-1. General.
6-2. Contracts.
All contracts involving the Town, whether or not requiring expenditure of
funds, shall be reviewed by Town Counsel for form and content.
Subject to the Massachusetts General Laws and the provisions of this
charter, the town meeting may by by-law create, establish, organize,
reorganize, consolidate or abolish any town board, commission,
committee, department, office or agency in whole or in part as they
deem necessary or advisable and shall prescribe the function of all such
entities.
(A)
All appointments and promotion of town officers and employees shall
be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by
examination or other evidence of competence and suitability.
(B)
No board, commission, committee or study group shall be appointed
until the appointing authority clearly sets forth the objectives, duties,
authority and term of such body, unless such information is contained in
the legislation establishing such body. The foregoing shall not apply to
such bodies existing at the adoption of this charter, but the appointing
authority shall give such guidance and direction as any such existing
body may reasonable request.
(C)
6-1 CHARTER 6-2
C:19

ARTICLE 7
Procedures
7-1. Meetings General.
All multiple member boards, commissions or committees of the town
whether elected or appointed or otherwise constituted, shall meet within
30 days of appointment and regularly at such times and places within the
town as they may prescribe. Special meetings of any board, commission,
or committee shall be held on the call of the respective chairman or by
one third of the members thereof by suitable written notice delivered to
the residence or place of business of each member at least twenty-four
hours in advance of the time set. A copy of the said notice shall also
be posted on the town bulletin board(s). Special meetings of any board,
commission, or committee shall also be called within two (2) weeks after the
date of the filing with the town clerk of a petition signed by at least twentyfive
(25) registered voters and which states the purpose or purposes for
which the meeting is to be called. All meetings of all boards, commissions
and committees shall be open and public, provided, however, that the
committee, commission or board may recess for the purpose of discussing
in a closed or executive session limited to its own membership, any matter
which would tend to defame or prejudice the character or reputation of
any person, which would affect the public security, or which might have
a direct fiscal effect on the town provided that the general subject matter
for consideration is expressed in the motion calling for such session and
that final action on the matter is not taken until the board, commission or
committee comes back into formal session, except as provided in Sec.23A,
ch.39 of the General Laws.3
7-2. Agendas.
At least twenty-four hours before any meeting of a board, commission or
committee is to be held an agenda containing all items which are scheduled
to come before the board, commission or committee at the meeting shall
be posted on the town bulletin board(s). No action taken on a matter
not included in the posted agenda shall be effective unless the board,
commission or committee first adopts by a separate vote a resolution
declaring that a reasonable cause exists and stating such cause.
7-3. Rules and Journal.
Each board, commission or committee shall determine their own rules and
order of business unless otherwise provided by this charter or by-law and
shall provide for keeping a journal of their proceedings. Those rules and
journals shall be a public record kept available in a place convenient to the
public at all times and certified copies shall be kept available in the office of
the town clerk.
3. Editor's Note: Section 23A of MGL c. 39 was repealed by St. 2009, c. 28.
7-1 CHARTER 7-4
C:21
7-4. Voting.
Except on procedural matters, votes of all boards, commissions, committees
shall be taken by a call of the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal,
provided however, that if the vote is unanimous only that fact need be
recorded.
7-5. Quorum.
A majority of the members of the board, commission or committee shall
constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time
and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and
subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the board, committee or
commission; no other action of the board, commission or committee shall be
valid or binding unless ratified by the affirmative vote of the majority of the
full board, commission or committee.
7-4 MARSHFIELD CODE 7-5
C:22
ARTICLE 8
Recall and Removal
8-1. Recall.
Who can be recalled. Any holder of an elective office, as defined in
Article 3, may be recalled therefrom by the registered voters of the
town as herein provided.
8-1-1.
Recall Petition. Any one hundred (100) registered voters of the town
may file with the Town Clerk an affidavit on documents issued by the
Town Clerk containing the name of the officer sought to be recalled and
a statement of the grounds for recall. Anyone obtaining the affidavit
documents from the Town Clerk, must return the affidavit documents to
the Town Clerk within 14 days with the signatures of the one hundred
(100) registered voters. The Town Clerk shall thereupon deliver to
said voters making the affidavit copies of petition blanks demanding
such recall, copies of which shall be kept available. The blanks shall
be issued by the Town Clerk with his/her signature and official seal
attached thereto. They shall be dated, shall be addressed to the
selectmen and shall contain the names of all persons to whom they
are issued, the name of the person whose recall is sought, the grounds
of recall as stated in the affidavit, and shall demand the election of
a successor in said office. A copy of the petition shall be entered in
a record book to be kept in the office of the Town Clerk. The recall
petition shall be returned and filed with the Town Clerk within twentyone
(21) days after the filing of the affidavit, and shall have been signed
by at least fifteen (15) per cent of the registered voters of each precinct,
who shall add to their signatures the street and number if any, of
their residences. The Town Clerk shall within twenty-four (24) hours
of receipt submit the petition to the registrars of voters in the town,
and the registrars shall within fourteen (14) days certify thereon the
number of signatures which are names of registered voters of the town.
8-1-2.
Selectmen's Action on Receiving Petition. If the petition shall be found
and certified by the Town Clerk to be sufficient he/she shall submit
the same with the certificate to the selectmen without delay, and the
selectmen shall forthwith give written notice of the receipt of the
certificate to the officer sought to be recalled and shall, if the officer
does not resign within five (5) days thereafter, order an election to
be held on a date fixed by them not less than sixty (60) nor more
than seventy (70) days after the date of the town clerk's certificate
that a sufficient petition has been filed. Provided however, that if any
other town election is to occur within ninety (90) days after date of
the certificate, the selectmen shall postpone the holding of the recall
election to the date of such other election. If a vacancy occurs in
said office after a recall election has been ordered, the election shall
nevertheless proceed as provided in the election.
8-1-3.
Nomination of Candidates. Any officer sought to be removed may be
a candidate to succeed himself/herself, and unless he/she requests
8-1-4.
8-1 CHARTER 8-1
C:23
8-2. Removals and Suspensions.
otherwise in writing, the town clerk shall place his/her name on the
ballot without nomination. The nomination of other candidates, the
publication of the warrant for the removal election, and the conduct of
the same, shall all be in accordance with the provisions of law relating
to elections, unless otherwise provided in this section.
Incumbent Holds Office until election. The incumbent shall continue
to perform the duties of his office until the recall election. If then
re-elected, he/she shall continue in office for the remainder of his
unexpired term, subject to recall as before, except as provided in this
section. If not re-elected in the recall election, he shall be deemed
removed upon the qualification of his successor, who shall hold office
during the unexpired term. If the successor fails to qualify within five
(5) days after receiving notification of his election, the incumbent shall
thereupon be deemed removed and the office vacant.
8-1-5.
Applicability. Any appointed officer, including a member of any
appointed board, commission, committee, or any appointed salaried
employee of the town, not subject to the provisions of the state civil
service law, and whose position is not subject to any collective
bargaining agreement between the town and its employees, whether
appointed for a fixed or an indefinite term, may be suspended or
removed from office by the appointing authority for good cause. The
term cause shall include, but not be limited to the following: Incapacity
other than temporary illness, inefficiency, absenteeism, insubordination
and conduct unbecoming the office.
8-2-1.
Temporary Suspension. Any appointed officer or salaried employee of
the town may be suspended from office by the appointing authority if
such action is deemed by them to be necessary to protect the interests
of the town. However, no suspension shall be for more than thirty
(30) days. Suspension may be coterminous with removal and shall not
interfere with the rights of the officer or employee under the removal
procedure given below.
8-2-2.
The appointing authority when removing any such officer or employee
shall act in accordance with the following procedure:
The employee shall be served with a written notice to show cause
why the employee should not be removed and a statement of
the cause or causes therefore shall be delivered by registered or
certified mail to the last known address of the person sought to be
removed.
(A)
Within five (5) days of delivery of such notice the officer or
employee may request a public hearing at which he/she may be
represented by counsel, shall be entitled to present evidence, call
witness and to question any witness appearing at the hearing,
which hearing shall be held within 15 days of receipt of such notice.
(B)
8-2-3.
8-1 MARSHFIELD CODE 8-2
C:24
Between one (1) and ten (10) days after the public hearing is
adjourned, or if the officer or employee fails to request a public
hearing between six (6) and fifteen (15) days after delivery of the
notice of intent to remove the appointing authority shall take final
action, whether removing the officer or employee or notifying him/
her that the notice is rescinded.
(C)
Nothing in this section shall be construed as granting a right to such a
hearing when a person who has been appointed to a fixed term is not
reappointed when his/her original term expires.
8-2-4.
8-2 CHARTER 8-2
C:25

ARTICLE 9
General Provisions
9-1. Charter Changes.
This charter may be replaced, revised or amended in accordance with the
procedures made available by article 89 of the amendments to the state
constitution and any legislation enacted to implement the said amendment.
9-2. Severability.
The provisions of this charter are severable. If any provision of this charter
is held invalid, the other provisions of the charter shall not be affected
thereby. If the application of the charter or any of its provisions to any
person or circumstance is held invalid, the application of this charter and its
provisions to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
9-3. Specific Provisions Shall Prevail.
To the extent that any specific provision of this charter shall conflict with
any provision expressed in general terms, the specific provisions shall
prevail.
9-4. Rules and Regulations.
A copy of all rules and regulations adopted by an officer, board, commission,
committee, department or agency of the town shall be filed in the office of
the town clerk and made available for review by any person who requests
such information.
9-1 CHARTER 9-4
C:27

ARTICLE 10
Transition Provision
10-1. Continuation of Existing Laws.
All general laws, special laws, town by-laws, votes, rules and regulations of
or pertaining to the town which are in force when this charter takes effect
and which are not specifically repealed or amended or rescinded by due
course of law or expire by their own limitation.
10-2. Continuation of Government.
All committees, commissions, boards, departments, officers and other
agencies of the town shall continue to perform their duties until
reappointed, re-elected, or until successors to their respective positions are
duly appointed or elected or their duties have been transferred.
10-3. Continuation of Administrative Personnel.
Any person holding an office or position in the administrative services of the
town, or any person serving in the employment of the town shall retain such
office or position and shall continue to perform his duties until provisions
shall have been made in accordance with this charter for the performance
of the said duties by another person or agency; provided however, that no
person in the permanent full time service or employment of the town shall
forfeit his pay grade or time in service. All such persons shall be retained in
a capacity as similar to their former capacity as it is practical so to do.
10-4. Transfer of Records and Property.
All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any office, department,
or agency or part thereof, the powers and duties of which are assigned in
whole or in part to another office or agency shall be transferred forthwith
to the office, department or agency to which such powers and duties and
assigned.
10-5. Adoption of Certain Acts.
The provisions of Chapter 41 Section 103 of the General Laws are hereby
adopted. Said section establishes a purchasing department authorized to
purchase all supplies for the town and for every department thereof.
10-6. Effective Date.
This charter shall become effective July 1, 1976.
10-1 CHARTER 10-6
C:29
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
10-6 MARSHFIELD CODE 10-6
C:30
ARTICLE I
Approval of Codification
[The codification of the General Bylaws as Division 2 (Chapters 5
through 294) of the Town Code was approved by the Annual Town
Meeting 4-24-2017 by Arts. 9 and 10.]
CHARTER 10-6
C:31
Chapter 5
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Committees and other agencies — See Ch. 52.
Eminent domain — See Ch. 80.
Finance and budget — See Ch. 95.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 170.
Personnel — See Ch. 188.
Sale of property — See Ch. 201.
Town Meeting rules — See Ch. A901.
10-6 MARSHFIELD CODE 10-6
C:32
ARTICLE I
Town Meetings
[Adopted as Art. 1 of the General Bylaws]
§ 5-1. Notice.
Notice of every Annual and Special Town Meeting shall be given by posting
attested copies of the warrant for such meetings at 10 public places in
different parts of the Town not less than seven days before the holding
of said Annual Meeting and 14 days before holding of any Special Town
Meeting.
§ 5-2. Distribution of warrant. [Amended 10-15-2007 STM by Art.
20]
In addition to the legal notification required by the foregoing section,
the final printed warrant shall be available and ready for distribution to
residents four weeks preceding the Annual or Special Town Meeting every
year.
§ 5-3. Quorum. [Amended 1979 ATM by Art. 42; 1988 ATM by Art.
15]
There will be no quorum for Town Meetings.
§ 5-4. Consideration of article at subsequent or adjourned session.
No article may be considered at a subsequent or adjourned session of the
Town Meeting unless postponed by motion for that purpose during the same
session at which the article was first voted.
§ 5-5. Voice votes. [Amended 4-28-1997 STM by Art. 1]
Where, by statute, a vote of the Town Meeting is required to be greater
than a majority vote, the Moderator may call for a voice vote. If, in the
Moderator's judgment, the voice vote indicates that substantially all of the
Town Meeting members have voted affirmatively, he or she may dispense
with the need to take a count and record the vote and may declare the
particular question to have been voted affirmatively. If seven or more Town
Meeting members challenge the Moderator's decision, a count shall be
taken and the vote recorded.
§ 5-6. Articles to be voted by lottery. [Amended 4-27-2006 ATM by
Art. 18 and Art. 20]
Town Meeting articles will be voted by lottery for articles following the
operating budget articles in the case of the Annual Town Meeting and for all
articles in the case of the Special Town Meeting. Each article will be drawn
separately. A proponent of an article, with the permission of the Moderator,
may propose linkage of similar articles.
§ 5-1 CHARTER § 5-7
C:33
§ 5-7. Purpose of Special Town Meetings. [Amended 4-27-2006 ATM
by Art. 18 and Art. 20]
Except as otherwise provided in MGL c. 39, § 10, no Special Town Meetings
shall be called by the Board of Selectmen except for the purpose of
considering matters not anticipated at the time of the most recent Annual
Town Meeting, which matters the Selectmen, in their discretion, decide
should be acted upon by the Town prior to the next scheduled Annual Town
Meeting.
§ 5-8. Preparation of warrant. [Amended 4-27-2008 ATM by Art. 30;
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The Town Clerk's office will assume the responsibility of the printing,
distribution and delivery of the Annual Town/Special Town Meeting
warrant. The Selectmen will prepare all articles in final form before sending
the warrant to the Town Clerk's office.
§ 5-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 5-8
C:34
ARTICLE II
Certain Powers of Town Officers
[Adopted as Art. 3 of the General Bylaws]
§ 5-9. Litigation and other proceedings.
The Selectmen shall have authority to prosecute and compromise all
litigation to which the Town is a party and to appear either personally or by
counsel in proceedings before any tribunal, unless it is otherwise specially
ordered by the Town.
§ 5-10. Execution of deeds.
Whenever it shall be necessary to execute any deed conveying land, the
same shall be executed by the Treasurer/Collector in behalf of the Town,
unless the Town shall otherwise vote in any special case.
§ 5-9 CHARTER § 5-10
C:35

ARTICLE III
Town Hall
[Adopted as Art. 46 of the General Bylaws]
§ 5-11. Operational management.
The Board of Selectmen or its designee shall have the authority and
responsibility for the day to day operational management of the Town Hall
so that the Selectmen may establish and control operating hours of all
departments within Town Hall.
§ 5-11 CHARTER § 5-11
C:37

ARTICLE IV
Resolutions
[Adopted 1980 ATM by Art. 35 (Art. 51 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 5-12. Review by Selectmen.
The Board of Selectmen, within 30 days after a Town Meeting, shall discuss
in open session any resolution passed at such meeting.
§ 5-12 CHARTER § 5-12
C:39
Chapter 16
ANIMALS
§ 5-12 MARSHFIELD CODE § 5-12
C:40
ARTICLE I
Dog Licenses
[Adopted 1985 ATM by Art. 52 (Art. 49 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 16-1. Unlicensed dogs.
No person who owns, keeps or otherwise has the control of any dog which
has not been licensed pursuant to MGL c. 140 shall allow such dog to
remain within the Town of Marshfield after June 30 of any license period.
§ 16-2. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of this article shall be $10 for each offense to be
paid to the Town Clerk when dog is licensed.
§ 16-1 CHARTER § 16-2
C:41

ARTICLE II
Animal Control
[Adopted 1990 ATM by Art. 37 (Art. 27 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 16-3. Restraint of dogs. [Amended 4-27-2008 ATM by Art. 32;
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
No dog shall be allowed in any public place or on any lands, beaches or
ways within the Town unless it is effectively restrained by a chain or leash
and under the direct and positive control of its owner or handler.
§ 16-4. Restraint of domestic livestock.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to enforce this section
of the General Bylaws of the Town. All dogs found running at large
within the Town may be impounded, and thereafter the Animal Control
Officer shall make a complete registry of the dog including the breed,
if discernible, color, sex and identification tag or marks. If the dog is
licensed, he shall note the name and address of the owner and shall
send notice by mail, to the owner, that the dog has been impounded.
If the owner of the dog is unknown, or if the owner does not respond
to said notice within two days, written notice of the impounding of the
dog shall be posted in one or more public buildings of the Town in a
conspicuous place.
A.
The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the use of hunting dogs
for hunting purposes during appropriate hunting season. This section
shall not prohibit the training of hunting or working dogs and shall not
prohibit field trials for hunting and working dogs when conducted by a
responsible person.
B.
The penalty for violation of this section shall be $25 for a first offense.
The penalty for each ensuing offense shall be as follows: second offense:
$50; third offense: $75; fourth offense and each additional: $100. The
penalty for dogs running at large and which are deemed to be a
nuisance or dangerous (either through a previous dog bite or by
determination of the Animal Control Officer) will be $200. All penalties
shall be imposed on the owner or keeper and shall be cumulative as
they relate to the individual rather than to any specific dog.
C.
No person who owns, rents, keeps or otherwise has the care, custody
or control of any hoofed animal or other domestic animal, with the
exception of dogs and cats, shall allow any such animal to run at large
or unrestrained in any public way or place to which the public has
a right of access. No such animal shall be tied or tethered in such a
manner that it may reach any public way or place to which the public
has a right of access.
A.
The penalty for violation of this section shall be $10 for the first offense
and $20 for each subsequent offense. It shall be the duty of the Animal
B.
§ 16-3 CHARTER § 16-4
C:43
§ 16-5. Animal Control Program. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
The Board of Selectmen shall establish fees and sufficient charges to
support the cost of the Animal Control Program.
Control Officer to enforce this section. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
§ 16-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 16-5
C:44
Chapter 25
BATHHOUSES
§ 25-1. License required.
No public bathhouse or bathhouses shall be maintained within the limits of
the Town without a license from the Selectmen.
Chapter 34
BOATING AND WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Seawalls — See Ch. 217.
Shellfish — See Ch. 226.
Marina and boating facilities — See Ch. 630.
§ 34-1. Purpose. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve, and promote the public's
rights to safe and pleasurable use of the navigable waterways and aid and
assist the commercial fleet located within the Town of Marshfield.
§ 34-2. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CAPTAIN OF THE PORT — The Chief of Police of the Town of Marshfield.
COMMERCIAL VESSEL — Any vessel which is used to harvest fish or
shellfish for purposes of sale, to carry passengers for hire or for mooring or
scuba related business.
FAIRWAY — A defined area, as shown on official navigational charts, used
continually for unobstructed vessel access to and from moorings, launching
and shoreside facilities for the safety and convenience of the boating public.
GROUND TACKLE — The mooring block, float, buoys, chain, swivel and
pennant which are the property of the vessel owner.
HARBORMASTER — The Harbormaster and all Assistant Harbormasters
as defined in MGL c. 102 duly appointed by the Board of Selectmen,
Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts. The recommendation of the Captain
of the Port shall be considered by the Board of Selectmen in making such
appointments.
HOUSEBOAT — Any boat/vessel designed primarily for human habitation,
dwelling or entertaining and which is not motorized. Some houseboats may
also be known as a shanty boat.[Added 11-4-2013 STM by Art. 6]
§ 16-5 CHARTER § 34-2
C:45
MARINA — A location of safe refuge, moorage, slippage, storage or
anchorage for five or more vessels, which may supply provisions, marine
supplies or chandlery, or at which these may be obtained, and at which a
fee may be charged for the use of these facilities and/or services, to include
any and all wharfs, piers, pilings, dolphins, floats (fixed or portable), or any
boat facilities either private or public used for the keeping of any vessels
over five in number. This definition shall include municipal boating facilities,
piers and moorings.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
MARSHFIELD WATERWAYS COMMITTEE — A seven-member with two
associate members advisory board appointed by the Board of Selectmen
to protect and preserve the public's rights of the use and enjoyment of
the Town's waterways, to protect the natural resources along and in the
waterways and to promote safe navigation within the Town's
waterways.[Amended 10-16-2017 STM by Art. 20]
MOORING — Space where ground tackle is located, or place where a
buoyant vessel, lobster car, raft, float or dock is secured with mooring
tackle.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
SKIN DIVER — Swimmers using fins and/or masks or snorkel tubes or selfcontained
underwater breathing devices.
VESSEL — All boats, including every description of motorized watercraft,
other than a seaplane on the water, used or capable of being used as a
means of transportation.
WATERWAYS OF THE TOWN OF MARSHFIELD — The navigable waters
within the Town of Marshfield north from the line of boundaries of the
Town of Duxbury to the line of boundaries of the Town of Scituate, to the
geographical seaward boundaries of the Town of Marshfield. The waterways
of the Town of Marshfield shall include, without limitation:
GREEN HARBOR BASIN — The waters of the Town of Marshfield from
the seaward most limit of the southwest jetty continuing upstream of
the Green Harbor River to include all navigable rivers, creeks and
tributaries, including all waters subject to the ebb and flow of the tides
twice in 24 hours.
A.
NORTH RIVER — That portion of the river within the boundaries of
the Town of Marshfield to the geographical center of the river and all
navigable rivers, creeks and tributaries pertaining thereto, including all
waters subject to the ebb and flow of the tides twice in 24 hours.
B.
SOUTH RIVER — That portion of the river within the boundaries of
the Town of Marshfield to the geographical center of the river and all
navigable rivers, creeks and tributaries pertaining thereto, including all
waters subject to the ebb and flow of the tides twice in 24 hours.
C.
MASSACHUSETTS BAY — That portion of Massachusetts Bay
contiguous to the Town of Marshfield from the mean high-water line to
the seaward jurisdictional limits of the Town. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 10]
D.
§ 34-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 34-3
C:46
§ 34-3. Mooring block specifications.
§ 34-4. Care and maintenance of ground tackle.
§ 34-5. Mooring regulations.
Ground tackle specifications including mooring block specifications,
chain sizes, pennants and mooring float and buoy requirements shall be
established by the Harbormaster.
A.
Ground tackle not marked as called for by this regulation shall be
removed after notice by certified mail by the Harbormaster. The
mooring location may be forfeited and reassigned according to current
regulations.
B.
No ground tackle, after being set on bottom, shall be removed or in any
way changed or sold without advance approval of the Harbormaster.
A.
The care, maintenance and registration of all ground tackle is the
responsibility of the owner. All mooring inspections shall be performed
by a certified mooring service company on file with the Harbormaster's
office. Mooring inspections will be conducted every three years.
Mooring tackle and blocks shall be removed from Marshfield waterways
and disposed of if found to be in unserviceable condition. Moorings not
inspected within the assigned inspection year will be revoked.
B.
Inspection of all ground tackle shall be done at owner's expense and
logged at the Harbormaster's office. The Harbormaster is authorized to
remove any ground tackle at reasonable times for inspection. Mooring
tackle, docks, floats, and rafts shall not be placed in Marshfield
waterways without prior approval of the Harbormaster and should not
impede safe navigation. The Harbormaster shall establish regulations
and specifications for inspection of ground tackle. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
C.
All moorings shall be registered with the Harbormaster each year.
The due date for mooring fees shall be set at 30 days from date of
issuance. All applicable fees and taxes owed to the Town shall be
paid before registration is issued. Mooring fees are established by the
Harbormaster and approved by the Board of Selectmen. Failure to pay
the mooring fee may result in forfeiture of the mooring after notice by
certified mail.
A.
An annual mooring waiting list shall be compiled and kept at the
Harbormaster's office. It is available to the public for review on request.
Mooring permits will be granted by the Harbormaster in order of
application date as suitable locations become available. Persons
without a mooring shall have priority. Mooring waiting list fees are
established by the Harbormaster and approved by the Board of
Selectmen. Persons on the wait list shall reapply annually between April
15 and June 30 of each calendar year. Renewals must be in person
B.
§ 34-3 CHARTER § 34-5
C:47
or by mail or fax. If an applicant on the wait list refuses a mooring
location, the applicant will not lose his/her place on the mooring wait
list. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
A mooring permit owner may not exchange his/her mooring location
with another mooring permit owner without permission of the
Harbormaster. A mooring permit is not transferable except to the
permit holder's spouse or next of kin.
C.
Each mooring permit holder shall place his/her registered vessel on the
assigned mooring for a minimum of 30 days each twelve-month mooring
fee billing period. Otherwise, the mooring is deemed abandoned and
shall be forfeited. A mooring permit holder may apply for a one-year
grace period to retain his/her designated mooring if he/she has sold the
registered boat and is purchasing a replacement vessel, or if his/her
current vessel has suffered a mechanical failure sufficient to require
removal from the water for repairs, or for other extenuating
circumstances approved by the Harbormaster. Prior written notification
must be given to the Harbormaster.
D.
The payment of a mooring fee only gives the mooring permit holder the
use of a specific location. Permit holders are prohibited from increasing
the size of the vessel on the assigned mooring without advance
approval of the Harbormaster. Mooring locations are subject to change
at the discretion of the Harbormaster.
E.
Mooring servicing companies shall be registered and approved each
year with the Harbormaster's office. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
F.
All operators of vessels on moorings secured fore and aft will moor their
vessels fore and aft at all times to prevent the vessel from swinging
with the change of tides. Mooring locations may be designated fore
and aft by the Harbormaster only when deemed a hazard to navigation.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
G.
No vessel or other party may use a mooring other than the owner
and vessel originally assigned by registration and on file at the
Harbormaster's office except with the permission of the Harbormaster.
H.
No mooring pennants attached to a float will be longer than prescribed
by mooring regulations available at the Harbormaster's office or
without the express permission of the Harbormaster.
I.
The type of pennant may be changed by using a substitute of equal or
greater strength by permission of the Harbormaster.
J.
The mooring chain and pennant may be increased in diameter but may
not be increased in length except by permission of the Harbormaster.
K.
No ground tackle shall have more than one vessel attached. No
permanent rafting of vessels shall be allowed on one ground tackle
L.
§ 34-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 34-5
C:48
§ 34-6. General regulations for Town waterways.
other than the vessel's tender except with the permission of the
Harbormaster.
Any ground tackle owner in violation of the above regulations will have
his/her ground tackle removed at his/her expense per order of the
Harbormaster and lose his/her mooring.
M.
Mooring holders may elect to replace mooring buoys with winter logs
after September 15. Winter mooring gear shall be removed by June 1
and replaced with appropriate mooring tackle. Winter logs not removed
after June 1 will be considered a hazard to navigation and removed
by the Harbormaster or his designee. Winter logs removed will not be
replaced with a floating buoy. Mooring holders electing to use winter
logs shall have the log painted white with a two-inch blue stripe near
the top and also be identified by mooring number. Typically winter logs
are four feet in length.
N.
The number of commercial vessel moorings available shall not be any
less than exist as of June 30, 1991.
O.
No vessel except emergency vessels shall be operated within the limits
of the Green Harbor Basin and North and South Rivers at a speed in
excess of six knots or cause a disturbing wake.
A.
No person shall scuba dive or snorkel in Green Harbor or any Town
navigable fairway without permission of the Harbormaster's office. The
use of all public piers, floats and Town-owned boat launching ramps
by swimmers is hereby prohibited. Swimming in any fairway is also
prohibited. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
B.
Use of jet skis, water bikes or similar crafts on the North or South River
or within 300 feet of Marshfield beaches is prohibited.
C.
Tying up of skiffs to a Town pier or float is prohibited except by permit
and at a designated location provided for by the Harbormaster. All skiffs
without a permit will be removed at the owner's expense after due
notice by certified mail. Skiff fees and skiff regulations are established
by the Harbormaster and approved by the Board of Selectmen.
D.
Town floats or piers shall not be used for storage of fishing gear,
nets, lobster traps or any other materials except during actual loading
or unloading of vessels. Ramps and walkways shall be kept clear at
all times. After 24 hours and after an attempt to notify the owner,
equipment stored in violation of this section will be considered
abandoned. It shall be removed and stored at the owner's expense per
order of the Harbormaster.
E.
Vessels with moorings in waterways of the Town of Marshfield shall not
use Town floats for overnight tie-up. This regulation does not preclude
the use of floats for service work on vessels with the permission of
F.
§ 34-5 CHARTER § 34-6
C:49
the Harbormaster. Transient vessels may be given permission by the
Harbormaster to use Town floats or Town moorings for overnight tie-up.
Tie-up fees are established by the Harbormaster and approved by the
Board of Selectmen. The Town is not responsible for any loss or damage
to boats at Town piers, dock or floats. Owners will be held responsible
for damage to structures and pilings owned by the Town.
Fishing from Town piers, floats and Town-owned boat launching ramps
is prohibited from May 1 to October 1 except with permission from the
Harbormaster. No person shall set fishing gear or traps in navigable
fairways, channels, or basins upon the North and South Rivers and
Green Harbor. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
G.
The cleaning and gutting of fish on the Town piers, floats or Townowned
boat launching ramp is prohibited. If any fish are cleaned or
gutted aboard vessels tied up to the Town piers or floats, the waste shall
be stored in a suitable container for proper disposal.
H.
Minor children shall not be allowed the use of Town floats, piers or
launch ramps without adult supervision.
I.
Bicycles, roller skates, skateboards and motor-driven vehicles (mopeds,
motorcycles) shall not be driven on the Town piers, floats or Townowned
boat launch ramps.
J.
The Town floats from the south side of the Town launch ramp of the
Town pier may be used only for the pickup and discharge of passengers
and gear for the time limits set by the Harbormaster.
K.
The Town floats from the north side of the Town launch ramp of the
Town pier are reserved for commercial vessels only for the time limit
set by the Harbormaster.
L.
The Harbormaster shall have the responsibility for maintaining the
public safety on the piers, floats, launch and parking areas, walkways
and the waterways of the Town of Marshfield. This shall include the
safe placement of all floating structures or vessels. The Harbormaster
is authorized to remove all such structures or vessels that he deems
a hazard to navigation or otherwise in violation of any bylaws, rules,
or regulations in the waterways of the Town. The Harbormaster is
authorized to make regulations for the efficient operation of Marshfield
waterways with the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
M.
No vessel greater than 50 feet in length without a Marshfield mooring
shall tie up to the Town piers or floats at any time without the
permission of the Harbormaster. No vessel shall impair normal vessel
traffic while tied to a Town pier, float, rack, pile, mooring, camel or
dolphin in the waters of the Town.
N.
No trailered vessel shall be launched from any Town pier or launch
ramp without the person launching the vessel having obtained a launch
permit from the Harbormaster. Skiffs with a valid skiff permit are
O.
§ 34-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 34-6
C:50
§ 34-7. Special safety regulations.
considered to have a launch permit. Launch ramp fees are established
by the Harbormaster and approved by the Board of Selectmen. Any
person found launching a trailered vessel without a permit shall be
fined not more than $50 for each violation. [Amended 11-4-2013 STM
by Art. 6; 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Pollution of the waterways of Marshfield is prohibited. Prohibited
activities include discharging of untreated sewage, rubbish, refuse,
dead fish or fish carcasses/bait and hazardous waste (gas, oil,
antifreeze, etc.). Abandoned or derelict boats, floats, docks and motors
are prohibited on the piers, docks, and waterways of Marshfield.
P.
The Selectmen are instructed and authorized to control, regulate or
prohibit the taking of eels, shellfish, and sea worms within the Town
of Marshfield, in accordance with MGL c. 130, § 52. The Harbormaster
shall be designated Shellfish Warden and may appoint assistant
shellfish wardens and establish regulations and fees for taking of
shellfish. The Selectmen are instructed and authorized to control,
regulate or prohibit the taking of herring within the Town of Marshfield,
in accordance with MGL c. 130, § 95.
Q.
Houseboats are prohibited from mooring or anchoring within Town
waters, except at marinas which provide the following: [Added
11-4-2013 STM by Art. 6]
A permanent float, dock or slip from which the houseboat may be
directly accessed from land;
(1)
A sewer connection to a public sewage system or sewage pumpout,
i.e., tight tank system;
(2)
(3) All all-weather supply of electricity year round;
A connection to a public water supply by means of an individual
anti-backflow valve; and
(4)
Compliance with all applicable Town bylaws and safety
requirements.
(5)
R.
All vessels with a tuna pulpit that measures more than five feet in
length, measured from the bow stem forward, must be able to raise
it from a lowered position to an upright position when tying up to
the Town pier or floats. Any vessel moored in a specially designated
area must show a flashing yellow light on the pulpit when in the down
position from dusk to dawn. This safety regulation also applies to the
mooring areas. Failure to comply will be grounds to deny the vessel use
of the waters of the Town.
A.
No person shall operate a vessel in Green Harbor or North or South
River of the Town while towing water skiers, aquaplanes or other
B.
§ 34-6 CHARTER § 34-7
C:51
§ 34-8. Appeals.
Decisions of the Harbormaster that do not involve bylaw violations and/or
criminal matters may be appealed to the Captain of the Port within seven
days via certified receipt. The Captain of the Port will respond in writing
within 10 days of such appeal. The Waterways Committee shall be informed
of appeals and findings.
§ 34-9. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended 11-4-2013
STM by Art. 6; 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Except where otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of
this bylaw, the Harbormaster's regulations and/or any shellfish regulations
(set forth in Chapter 226 of the General Bylaws) shall be punished by a
fine of $150 for the first offense (with the exception of illegal taking of
shellfish which shall be a fine of not more than $300 per each offense), $250
for the second offense and $300 for a third or subsequent offense. Each
day or portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense; if more than one, each condition violated shall constitute
similar devices except in connection with water carnivals and
exhibitions authorized by the Captain of the Port in an area designated
by the Selectmen and with permission of the Harbormaster.
No person shall operate, or cause to allow to be operated, a vessel
powered by machinery within 300 feet of any swimmer.
C.
Motorboats shall not be operated within 300 feet of a public bathing
beach unless operating in an area designated by the Harbormaster.
D.
The designated boat lane on Green Harbor Beach shall be the place to
operate or anchor a vessel powered by machinery.
E.
Sailing vessels underway in Green Harbor with no other means of
propulsion shall not navigate through a mooring field unless heading to
dock, berth or sea.
F.
Barges, sectional barges, dump scows, dredges, crane barges, large
tugs shall not be moored, anchored in Marshfield waterways without
prior approval of the Captain of the Port or Harbormaster. A fee
schedule shall be established for marine equipment moored in
Marshfield waterways and approved by the Board of Selectmen.
[Added 10-26-2015 STM by Art. 7]
G.
Residents or contractors conducting private pier, dock, wharf, dredging
or marine work shall notify the Harbormaster two weeks prior to, or
sooner to arrange for proper mooring/dockage. All privately conducted
work shall accompany a work time, completion date and safety/
emergency plan. Idle equipment shall not be moored in Marshfield
waters and will be subject to removal at the owner's expense. [Added
10-26-2015 STM by Art. 7]
H.
§ 34-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 34-9
C:52
a separate offense. This bylaw may be enforced by the Harbormaster,
Shellfish Constables/Wardens and/or police officers.
§ 34-10. Severability.
In the event that any provision, section or clause of this bylaw is hereinafter
judicially found to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of the rules and regulations.
Chapter 40
BUILDINGS, MOVING OF
§ 40-1. Permit required.
A permit must be obtained from the Selectmen to move a building over any
way in the Town.
Chapter 43
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 43-1. Numbers to be affixed; inspection. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 10]
At the time of any required or requested inspection by any Town department
or board of any building in Town, numbers assigned to such building by
the Department of Public Works shall be affixed in such a manner that
they are clearly visible from the way furnishing access to such building.
No certificate of compliance or permit for such building shall be issued
until the inspector verifies that such numbers are affixed in a permanent,
weather-resistant way in accordance with the bylaw. Removal of numbers
after inspection shall be a violation of this bylaw.
Chapter 52
COMMITTEES, BOARDS AND OTHER AGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Capital Budget Commitee — See Ch. 95, Art.
VI.
Personnel Board — See Ch. 188.
§ 34-9 CHARTER § 43-1
C:53

ARTICLE I
Advisory Board
[Adopted as Art. 5 of the General Bylaws; amended 4-24-2017 ATM
by Art. 10]
§ 52-1. Membership; terms of office.
The Advisory Board shall consist of nine members who shall be voters of
the Town, holding no other Town office, and shall serve without pay. Three
members shall be appointed by the Selectmen annually to hold office for the
term of three years. Vacancies occurring during the term of office shall be
filled by the Selectmen.
§ 52-2. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Advisory Board to consider all municipal questions
for the purpose of making reports or recommendations to the Town, and it
may hold public meetings, which the Selectmen shall attend if so requested
by the Board.
§ 52-3. Organization; quorum.
The Advisory Board shall organize by the choice of a Chairperson and Clerk
who shall keep a record of all meetings of the Board, and five members shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
§ 52-1 CHARTER § 52-3
C:55

ARTICLE II
Council for the Aging
[Adopted March 1957 (Art. 24 of the General Bylaws); amended
1986 STM by Art. 1]
§ 52-4. Membership.
There is hereby established a Council for the Aging consisting of nine
members appointed by the Board of Selectmen from the voters and
residents of the Town.
§ 52-5. Terms of office.
Appointees shall hold office for a period of three years each so that three
appointments shall expire annually.
§ 52-6. Funds.
The Town may appropriate funds for the use of the Council which shall be
expended by the Council subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen.
§ 52-7. Duties. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
It shall be the duty of the Council to carry out programs designed to meet
problems of the aging in coordination with programs of the Department of
Elder Affairs.
§ 52-4 CHARTER § 52-7
C:57

ARTICLE III
Community Preservation Committee
[Adopted 2001 ATM by Art. 10 (Art. 78 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 52-8. Establishment; appointment; term of office.
§ 52-9. Duties.
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee
consisting of nine voting members pursuant to MGL c. 44B. The
composition of the Committee, the appointment authority and the term
of office for the Committee members shall be as follows:
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the
Commission for a term of three years.
(1)
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by the
Commission for a term of three years.
(2)
One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board for
a term of three years.
(3)
One member of the Recreation Commission as designated by the
Commission for a term of three years.
(4)
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by the
Authority for a term of three years.
(5)
Four members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen, two
members to be appointed for a term of one year and thereafter for
a term of three years and two members to be appointed for a term
of two years and thereafter for a term of three years.
(6)
A.
Should any of the commissions, boards, councils or committees which
have appointment authority under this section of the bylaw be no
longer in existence for whatever reason or for whatever reason fail
to appoint an individual to the Committee, the appointment authority
for that commission, board, council, or committee shall become the
responsibility of the Board of Selectmen.
B.
The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs,
possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community
preservation. The Committee shall consult with existing municipal
boards, including the Conservation Commission, the Historical
Commission, the Planning Board, the Recreation Commission and the
Housing Authority, or persons acting in those capacities or performing
like duties, in conducting such studies. As part of its study, the
Committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings on the
needs, possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community
preservation possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted
publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a
A.
§ 52-8 CHARTER § 52-9
C:59
§ 52-10. Legislative body actions on recommendations. [Added
4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 28]
Subject to the requirement of MGL c. 44B, no expenditures shall be made
from the Community Preservation Fund without first an appropriation from
Town Meeting. The Town Meeting may make appropriations from or
reservations of community preservation funds in the amount recommended
by the Committee or it may reduce or reject any recommended amount. It
may also vote to reserve all or part of the annual revenues recommended by
the Committee for appropriation for specific acquisitions or initiatives for
later appropriation by allocating the funds to the reserve for that category
of expenditures instead. The Town Meeting may not increase any
recommended appropriation or reservation, and it may not appropriate
or reserve any fund monies on its own initiative without a prior
recommendation by the Committee.
§ 52-11. Quorum requirement; cost estimates.
The Community Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct business
without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the
Community Preservation Committee shall constitute a quorum. The
Community Preservation Committee shall approve its actions by majority
vote. Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include their anticipated
costs.
newspaper of general circulation in the Town. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 10]
The Community Preservation Committee shall make recommendations
to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation and preservation of
open space, for the acquisition and preservation of historic resources,
for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational
use, for the creation, preservation and support of community housing
and for rehabilitation or restoration of such open space, historic
resources, land for recreational use and community housing that is
acquired or created as provided in this section. With respect to
community housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall
recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or
construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
B.
The Community Preservation Committee may include in its
recommendation to the Town Meeting a recommendation to set aside
for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with
community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then
available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that
specific purpose or to set aside for later spending funds for general
purposes that are consistent with community preservation.
C.
§ 52-9 MARSHFIELD CODE § 52-12
C:60
§ 52-12. Amendments. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
This bylaw may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the
Town Meeting, provided that the amendments would not cause a conflict to
occur with MGL c. 44B.
§ 52-13. Severability. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
In case any section, paragraph or part of this bylaw be for any reason
declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other
section, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 52-14. Initial appointments.
Each appointing authority shall have 10 days after approval by the Attorney
General to make its initial appointments. Should any appointing authority
fail to make its appointment within that allotted time, the Selectmen shall
make the appointment.
§ 52-12 CHARTER § 52-14
C:61
Chapter 64
DRAINAGE DITCHES
§ 64-1. Filling of open ditches; reopening by Town. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
No person shall fill an open drainage ditch in the Town unless such ditch
is piped in accordance with the requirements of the Department of Public
Works. In the event such ditch is filled in violation of the foregoing, the
Department of Public Works shall reopen same and shall bill the owner of
the lot, or the person filling the ditch, for the cost of such reopening, and
such cost shall be recoverable in a civil action by the Town.
Chapter 70
EARTH REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Excavations — See Ch. 86. Farming — See Ch. 89.
§ 70-1. Removal of topsoil and loam. [Amended 4-28-2008 STM by
Art. 9]
The removal of topsoil and loam from any land in the Town to any location
outside the Town is prohibited under all circumstances. Topsoil and loam
shall mean those earthen materials lying at the surface which are suitable
for the support of plant life.
§ 70-2. Removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel or other earth material.
[Amended April 2011 ATM]
The removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel or other earth material from land in
any district which falls within the superimposed Inland Wetlands or Coastal
Wetlands Districts is prohibited, except where such removal is in connection
with dredging being carried out by a governmental agency. The Board of
Selectman will not issue any earth removal permits for projects submitted
after June 30, 2011, for properties located in districts that are zoned as
residential (currently designated as RB, R-1, R-2 and R-3) although existing
permits may be renewed.
§ 70-3. Exceptions.
The removal of earth material in any of the following operations shall
be exempt from this bylaw:
A.
§ 52-14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 70-3
C:62
§ 70-4. Conditions.
For the removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel, quarry or other earth materials
other than that specifically exempt above, and for the processing and
treating of earth materials, the following conditions shall govern:
The removal of less than 100 cubic yards of material in the
aggregate from any one lot. [Amended 4-28-2008 STM by Art.
9]
(1)
The transfer of material from one part of a lot to another part of the
same lot.
(2)
The removal of material necessarily excavated in connection with
lawful construction of a building, structure, street, driveway,
sidewalk, path or appurtenance, provided the quantity of material
removed does not exceed that actually displaced by the portion of
such building, structure, street, driveway, sidewalk, path or other
appurtenances below finished grade.
(3)
The Board of Selectmen may, in its reasonable discretion, issue an
earth removal permit without requiring full compliance with the
requirements of this bylaw when it determines that such proposed
earth removal is the minimum quantity of material necessary to be
removed in order to construct a building, structure, street, driveway,
sidewalk, path or appurtenance in accordance with the approvals
therefor issued by the appropriate Town officials, boards or agencies;
provided, however, that this exception shall not apply where the Board
of Selectmen determines, after hearing, that the proposed construction
is a pretext for earth removal and sale, or that the proposed earth
removal shall cause damage to the public health, safety or the
environment. Whenever a Town official, board or agency issues a permit
or approval for a project involving the removal of in excess of 100
cubic yards of earthen material, the official, board or agency shall notify
the Board of Selectmen of such permit or approval and shall consider
making any necessary compliance with this bylaw a condition of such
permit or approval. [Amended 4-28-2008 STM by Art. 9]
B.
Removal operations shall not be conducted closer than 200 feet to a
public street.
A.
All equipment for sorting, washing, crushing, grading, drying,
processing and treating, or other operation machinery, shall not be
used closer than 100 feet to any public street or to any adjoining lot
line. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
B.
Off-street parking as required in the Table of Off-Street Parking
Regulations shall be provided.4
C.
4. Editor's Note: See the Zoning Bylaw, § 305-8.01, Minimum off-street parking
requirements.
§ 70-3 CHARTER § 70-4
C:63
Any access to excavated areas or areas in the process of excavation will
adequately be posted with "Keep Out – Danger" signs.
D.
Any work face or bank that slopes more than 30° downward adjacent to
a public street will be adequately fenced at the top.
E.
Adequate provision is to be made for drainage during and after the
completion of operations.
F.
G. Lateral support shall be maintained for all adjacent properties.
The use of explosives shall be done in accordance with the regulations
for storage or handling of explosives as published by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
H.
All operations shall be conducted in such a manner so as to comply
with the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts regulating water
pollution and air pollution.
I.
No permit shall be issued or renewed under this bylaw until the
applicant has submitted to the Board current and complete information
on the actual and proposed depth of excavation and the maximum
groundwater elevation throughout the entire area proposed to be
excavated. Maximum groundwater elevation shall be determined by
means of monitoring wells, test pits and soil borings during the month
of March, April or May. Such tests shall be conducted by a
Massachusetts registered professional engineer at the expense of the
applicant and shall be observed by a representative of the Board. Tests
results shall be submitted to the Board over the engineer's stamp.
[Amended 10-19-1987 STM by Art. 13]
The groundwater monitoring wells shall be left in place during the
period that the applicant holds a permit hereunder, and readings
therefrom shall be taken during March, April, or May of each year.
The results of such readings shall be submitted to the Board over
the engineer's stamp.
(1)
Excavation shall be restricted to those areas which are at
elevations 10 feet or more above the maximum groundwater
elevation as determined by the testing conducted under the
provisions of this subsection.
(2)
J.
Before granting approval, the Board of Selectmen shall find that the
proposed operation will not be injurious or dangerous to the public
health; will not produce noise, dust or other effects observable from
adjacent property in amounts seriously objectionable or detrimental to
the normal use of the property; and will not have a material adverse
effect on the water supply, health or safety of persons living in the
neighborhood or on the use of or amenities of adjacent land.
K.
§ 70-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 70-4
C:64
§ 70-5. Site plans.
Site plans shall be filed in triplicate with the Board of Selectmen for any
land which is used or intended to be used for the extraction of sand, gravel,
rock, and associated earth materials. Site plans of the removal areas shall
be prepared by a registered professional engineer or a registered land
surveyor at a scale of 40 feet to the inch and shall be in accordance with
and indicate the following:
No permit shall be issued for a period of more than one year, although
such a permit may be renewed for additional periods in the same
manner.
L.
In granting a permit hereunder, the Board shall impose reasonable
conditions specially designed to safeguard the neighborhood and the
Town, which may include conditions as to the overall operations set
forth above and as relating to the site plan and land reuse plan
requirements set forth in §§ 70-5 and 70-6 below. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
M.
The Board of Selectmen shall require the person holding a permit
hereunder to provide it with documentary evidence of the quantities of
material excavated, the date of removal of such material, and the owner
of the vehicle used to transport the material. [Amended 10-19-1987
STM by Art. 13]
N.
All auto and truck accessways to all active and inactive mining
operations for sand and gravel must have controlled access by lockable
gates. [Amended 1988 ATM by Art. 23]
O.
P. Night operations shall not be permitted.
A. Lot lines and ownership.
Existing topography and proposed elevations at two-foot contour
intervals.
B.
C. Names of abutters as found on the most recent tax list.
D. Adjacent public streets and private ways.
Proper provisions for safe and adequate water supply and sanitary
sewerage and for temporary and permanent drainage of the site.
E.
F. A locations plan at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet.
Plan for regrading of all or parts of the slopes resulting from such
excavation or fill.
G.
Plan for replacement of at least four inches of topsoil over all excavated,
filled, or otherwise disturbed surfaces and seeding with a perennial
cover crop, reseeded as necessary to assure uniform growth and soil
surface stabilization.
H.
§ 70-4 CHARTER § 70-5
C:65
§ 70-6. Land restoration plans.
Land restoration plan(s) must be submitted to and approved by the Board of
Selectmen subject to the regulations set forth in the following subsections:
§ 70-7. Bond.
The Board of Selectmen shall require a bond or other security to insure
compliance with its conditions of authorization, unless in a particular case
I. Proposed lateral support to all adjacent property.
Proper provision for vehicular traffic, service roads, and control of
entrances and exits to highways. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
J.
The relation of future buildings, temporary buildings, and operations
machinery to the removal areas.
K.
L. Delineation of removal areas and depths.
Provision for a substantial fence enclosing the excavation or quarry
where any excavation or quarry will extend under original ground level
or will have a depth of 10 feet or more and create a slope of more than
one foot in two feet. Such fence shall be located 10 feet or more from
the edge of the excavation or quarry and shall be at least six feet in
height.
M.
N. Method of removal.
O. Distance of excavation to street and lot lines.
P. Disposition of boulders and tree stumps.
Cleaning, repair and/or resurfacing of streets used in the removal
activities which have been adversely affected by the removal activity.
Q.
The Board of Selectmen may require up to three approved alternative
future land restoration plans to be submitted for such land as is used for
the extraction of sand, gravel, rock, and associated earth materials. It
is recognized that land restoration of the removal areas is in the public
interest.
A.
Said land restoration plan and its implementation applies to the
conversion of the abandoned site and its planned restoration. It is,
therefore, required that any land restoration plan correspond to a
situation which could reasonably occur in the immediate future (zero
to five years), and be revised as necessary as the existing physical
character of the removal area changes.
B.
The land restoration plan or any part thereof which reasonably applies
to an area which has been abandoned from removal use shall be put
into effect within one year of the abandonment of said operation.
C.
§ 70-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 70-7
C:66
it specifically finds that such security is not warranted and so states its
decision giving the reasons for its findings.
§ 70-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1987 STM by Art.
13; 4-28-2008 STM by Art. 9]
§ 70-9. Permit procedures.
The penalty for the violation of this bylaw, or the removal of any
soil, loam, sand or gravel within the Town of Marshfield without a
permit hereunder, except as hereinbefore provided, shall be as follows:
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
(1) For the first offense: $50.
(2) For the second offense: $100.
(3) For each subsequent offense: $200.
A.
In addition to the penalties provided for in Subsection A above, the
violation of any provision of this bylaw or any condition of a permit
issued hereunder may, at the discretion of the Board, be punishable
by the immediate revocation of the permit. No permit shall be revoked
until the holder thereof has been given notice and an opportunity to be
heard by the Board.
B.
Each unit of removal, used to remove soil, loam, sand or gravel, such
as a truckload of any size, from the original site constitutes a separate
offense under this bylaw.
C.
Such penalties shall be in addition to the existing rights of the Town to
enforce its bylaws.
D.
No such permit shall be issued except upon written application therefor
to the Board of Selectmen with a copy thereof to the Planning Board.
A.
Such application shall be accompanied by such filing and publication
fee as the Board of Selectmen may reasonably determine.
B.
Within 10 days after receipt of such application, the Board of Selectmen
shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing upon such application and
shall cause the notice of the time and place of such hearing thereof
and of the subject matter, sufficient for identification, to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of
two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than 14 days
before the day of the hearing, and shall also send notice by mail,
postage prepaid, to the petitioner and to the owners of all property
deemed by the Board to be affected hereby, as they appear on the
most recent local tax list, and to the Board of Health, the Board of
Public Works and Planning Board of the Town. At the hearing, any party
whether entitled to notice thereof or not may appear in person or by
agent or by attorney. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
C.
§ 70-7 CHARTER § 70-9
C:67
§ 70-10. Existing operations.
Chapter 76
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS
§ 76-1. Notice to Wire Inspector. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
No person shall install wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures, or other
appliances for carrying or using electricity for lights, heat or power within
or connected to any building without first notifying the Wire Inspector in
writing of the proposed installation.
§ 76-2. Standards and inspections.
All electrical installations or alterations must conform to the National
Electric Code and be inspected and approved by the Wire Inspector.
Chapter 80
EMINENT DOMAIN
§ 80-1. Limitation on Town authority. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
In consideration of the protection of private property rights and of the
Town's character and natural environment and the preservation and
enhancement of the quality of life of the Town's current and future
generations, the authority of the Town of Marshfield and its agencies of
The Planning Board may, in its discretion, investigate the case and
report in writing its recommendations to the Board of Selectmen. The
Board of Selectmen shall not take final action on such application until
it has received a report thereon from the Planning Board, or until said
Planning Board has allowed 30 days to elapse after receipt of such plan
without submission of a report.
D.
Any existing sand or gravel removal activity operating under a permit
issued by the Board of Selectmen may continue until the expiration of
the permit thereof, provided that no such permit shall issue:
If such removal shall adversely affect the water table or the natural
or engineered drainage in the Town; or
(1)
If such removal shall create unreasonable noise, dust, fumes, or
other effects which are detrimental to the public health or public
welfare.
(2)
A.
Discontinuance for more than 12 consecutive months shall be deemed
to constitute abandonment.
B.
§ 70-9 MARSHFIELD CODE § 80-1
C:68
local government, as reserved to localities under MGL c. 79, to seize
privately owned parcels against the expressed will of the owner through the
use of eminent domain procedures shall, in light of Kelo vs. New London, be
specifically further limited as follows:
§ 80-2. Seizure of property endangering heath and safety.
Nothing in the bylaw shall limit the authority of the Town of Marshfield
or its authorized agencies of local government to seize property that is
endangering the health and safety of its residents which could otherwise
be seized or foreclosed upon for tax delinquency in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 60.
Chapter 86
EXCAVATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 70.
Farming — See Ch. 89.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 250.
§ 86-1. Barriers; protection of public safety.
Any person excavating land or any person in charge of such excavation
and any owner of land which has been excavated shall erect barriers or
take other suitable measures to fence the excavation within two days after
such person has been notified in writing by the Board of Selectmen or the
Building Commissioner that in its or his opinion such excavation constitutes
a hazard to public safety.
§ 86-2. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates this bylaw shall be punished by a fine of $200 per day for
every day such person is in violation of such notice commencing with the
fourth day thereof. The Superior Court has jurisdiction in equity to compel
compliance with this bylaw. See MGL c. 40, § 21, cl. (19), as amended.
To only those proposed taking actions incorporating the transfer of
private parcel(s) to the Town of Marshfield or any of its authorized
agencies of local government and under no circumstances to another
private party; and
A.
To only those proposed taking actions whose purpose is the creation of
a facility for actual public use and ownership, to include public open
spaces, parks, and watershed protection districts, and never for the
purposes of economic development or the enhancement of the local tax
base.
B.
§ 80-1 CHARTER § 86-2
C:69
Chapter 89
FARMING
§ 86-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 86-2
C:70
ARTICLE I
Right to Farm
[Adopted 4-23-2007 ATM by Art. 28 (Art. 85 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 89-1. Legislative purpose and intent.
§ 89-2. Definitions.
The purpose and intent of this bylaw is to state with emphasis the right
to farm accorded to all citizens of the commonwealth under Article 97
of the Constitution and all state statutes and regulations thereunder,
including but not limited to MGL c. 40A, § 3, Paragraph 1; MGL c. 90,
§ 9; MGL c. 111, § 125A; and MGL c. 128, § 1A. We the citizens of
Marshfield restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town's
authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution ("Home Rule Amendment").
A.
This general bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes
agriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmlands
within the Town of Marshfield by allowing agricultural uses and related
activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and Town
agencies. This bylaw shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the
Town.
B.
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of
land or water bodies used for the primary purpose of commercial
agriculture, or accessory thereto.
Farming and all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the
soil.
(1)
(2) Dairying.
Production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any
agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural, viticulture, or horticultural
commodities.
(3)
Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and
any other forestry or lumbering operations.
(4)
(5) Raising of livestock including horses.
Keeping, training, and boarding of horses as a commercial or
private enterprise.
(6)
Keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus,
ostriches, and rheas) and camelids (such as llamas and alpacas)
and other domesticated animals for food and other agricultural
purposes, including bees and fur-bearing animals.
(7)
A.
"Farming" shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the
following:
B.
§ 89-1 CHARTER § 89-2
C:71
§ 89-3. Right to farm declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of
Marshfield. The above-described agricultural activities may occur on
holidays, weekdays, and weekends, by night or day, and shall include the
incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally accepted
agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may
be caused to others through the normal practice of agriculture is more
than offset by the benefits of farming to the neighborhood, community, and
society in general. The benefits and protections of this bylaw are intended to
apply to those agricultural and farming operations and activities conducted
in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover,
nothing in this Right to Farm Bylaw shall be deemed as acquiring any
interest in land, or as imposing any land use regulation, which is properly
the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning law.
§ 89-4. Disclosure notification.
The operation and transportation of slow moving farm equipment
over roads within the Town.
(1)
Control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds,
predators, and disease organisms of plants and animals.
(2)
(3) Application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides.
Conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, including agritourism, provided that the
activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or
services of the farm.
(4)
Processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm
and the operation of a farmer's market or farm stand including
signage thereto.
(5)
Maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment or
apparatus owned or leased by the farm or manager used expressly
for the purpose of propagation, processing, management, or sale of
the agricultural products.
(6)
On-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming
operations.
(7)
Construction, operation or maintenance of ditches, canals,
reservoirs, or waterways used exclusively for farming purposes.
(8)
The operation, management, conservation, improvement or
maintenance of a farm and its buildings, tools, and equipment, or
salvaging timber or cleared land of brush or other debris left by a
storm, as an incident to such farming operations.
(9)
§ 89-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 89-4
C:72
§ 89-5. Resolution of disputes.
§ 89-6. Severability.
If any part of this bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this bylaw. The Town
of Marshfield hereby declares the provisions of this bylaw to be severable.
Within 30 days after this bylaw becomes effective, the Board of
Selectmen shall prominently post in the Town Hall and make available
for distribution the following disclosure: [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM
by Art. 10]
"It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect, and encourage
the maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the
production of food, and other agricultural uses, and also for its natural
and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or
occupants that the property they are about to acquire or occupy lies
within a Town where farming activities occur. Such farming activities
may include, but are not limited to, activities that cause noise, dust,
and odors. Buyers or occupants are also informed that the location of
property within the Town may be impacted by commercial agricultural
operations including the ability to access water services for such
property under certain circumstances."
A.
In addition to the above, copies of this disclosure notification shall be
available in a public area at the Town Hall.
B.
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,
notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance
with the Board of Selectmen, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the
Board of Health, depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing
of the grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue
any other available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Board of Selectmen may forward a copy of the
grievance to the Agricultural Commission (or Committee) or its agent,
which shall review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance and
report its recommendations to the referring Town authority within an
agreed upon time frame. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
A.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public
health risk, may forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission (or Committee) or its agent, which shall review and
facilitate the resolution of the grievance and report its
recommendations to the Board of Health within an agreed upon time
frame.
B.
§ 89-4 CHARTER § 89-6
C:73
Chapter 95
FINANCE AND BUDGET
§ 89-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 89-6
C:74
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted as Art. 4 of the General Bylaws]
§ 95-1. Appropriations.
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk immediately after every Town Meeting
to furnish the Treasurer/Collector with a statement of all moneys
appropriated by the Town at such meetings, and of the purposes for which
monies were respectively appropriated.
§ 95-2. Expenditures.
No money shall be paid from the treasury without a warrant or order from
the Selectmen, or a majority thereof. Every order for the payment of money
shall designate the appropriation against which the same is drawn, and it
shall be the duty of the Treasurer/Collector and Selectmen to keep a correct
account of all appropriations made by the Town and all sums that are drawn
from such appropriations, and it shall also be the duty of the Treasurer/
Collector and Selectmen to see that the expenditures are not in excess of
the appropriation against which orders are drawn.5
§ 95-3. Bills to be itemized.
All bills presented against the Town for payment shall be itemized, properly
approved by the officers or persons authorized to contract the same, and
delivered or sent to the Selectmen.
5. Editor's Note: A quotation from MGL c. 44, § 5, which appeared in this section has been
removed, as that section was repealed by St. 1969, c. 849.
§ 95-1 CHARTER § 95-3
C:75

ARTICLE II
Balance Accounts
[Adopted 1937 ATM by Art. 32 (Art. 14 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 95-4. Duties of Treasurer/Collector and Accountant.
The Town Treasurer/Collector and the Town Accountant shall balance their
accounts, one with the other, each month, including the bank statements,
and the Treasurer/Collector and the Accountant shall report in writing to
the Selectmen monthly the amount of the cash balance supplemented with
a statement that the bank account has been reconciled.
§ 95-4 CHARTER § 95-4
C:77

ARTICLE III
Annual Audit
[Adopted 1938 ATM by Art. 49 (Art. 15 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 95-5. Supervision of audit. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
There shall be an annual audit of the Town's accounts under the supervision
of the Director of Accounts of the Department of Revenue in accordance
with the provisions of MGL c. 44, § 35.
§ 95-5 CHARTER § 95-5
C:79

ARTICLE IV
Town Collector
[Adopted March 1954 (Art. 25 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 95-6. Collection of accounts.
The Treasurer/Collector shall collect, under the title of "Town Collector," all
accounts due the Town, in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 41,
§ 38A, as amended.
§ 95-6 CHARTER § 95-6
C:81

ARTICLE V
Risk Management and Insurance Program
[Adopted 1979 ATM by Art. 35 (Art. 53 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 95-7. Program to be established.
The Board of Selectmen shall establish a Risk Management and Insurance
Program for the Town of Marshfield and shall require that such a program
include all Town departments, officials, committees and boards and shall be
under the supervision and control of the Town Administrator who further
shall be charged with the responsibility and management of the program.
§ 95-7 CHARTER § 95-7
C:83

ARTICLE VI
Municipal Charges and Bills
[Adopted 1992 ATM by Art. 30 (Art. 67 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 95-8. Due dates. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Due dates for the payment of municipal charges and bills are as follows:
Bill or Charge Due Date
Water bill 30 days after bill date
Sewer use bill 30 days after bill date
Sewer capital bill 30 days after bill date
Trash bill 30 days after bill date
§ 95-9. Interest. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The rate at which interest shall accrue if such bills or charges remain
unpaid after such due date is fixed as that rate at which interest may be
charged on overdue tax bills under the provisions of MGL c. 59, § 57.
§ 95-10. Applicability.
The provisions of the bylaw shall apply to all users wherever situated.
§ 95-8 CHARTER § 95-10
C:85

ARTICLE VII
Capital Budget
[Adopted 11-15-1993 STM by Art. 12 (Art. 56 of the General
Bylaws)]
§ 95-11. Capital Budget Committee.
§ 95-12. Capital project defined; effect of bylaw.
As used in the bylaw, the term "capital project" means the acquisition of
tangible property or construction or alteration of a public building or public
work that has a projected useful life of five years or more and is estimated
to cost, exclusive of interest, $25,000 or more. This bylaw shall not limit the
rights conferred by federal or state statute on any Town department, board,
commission, or committee regarding expenditures of funds, including but
not limited to the rights of the School Committee as stated in MGL c. 71,
§ 34.
§ 95-13. Requests for capital projects.
Town officers, boards and committees shall, by the third Friday in
November of each year, give to the Committee, on forms prepared by
it, all requests for capital projects and all information concerning such
projects proposed to be undertaken in the next fiscal year. The information
submitted shall include the proposed method of financing (e.g. borrowing
or operating funds). The Committee may further require a statement of
the projected total cost of the project, including, if the project is to be
funded through borrowing, a statement of the number of years to pay off
the project and annual principal and interest payments. The Committee
may further require a breakdown of the total principal cost of each project
into the following categories: materials, labor, administrative cost, planning
and design, or any other categories as the Committee deems necessary for
proper evaluation.
The Town shall establish a Capital Budget Committee (the Committee)
to assist and advise the Town, its boards, committees and departments
on annual capital project appropriations and in preparing and
reviewing a five-year capital budget program. The Committee shall
consist of five citizens of the Town appointed by the Board of Selectmen
to serve three-year overlapping terms. The Town Administrator shall be
an ex officio member of the Committee without the right to vote. The
Committee shall choose its own officers.
A.
The Committee shall review and make recommendations on borrowing
under MGL c. 44, §§ 7 and 8, and on all capital projects as defined
within this bylaw.
B.
The Committee shall consider the relative need, impact, timing and
cost of the expenditures and the effect each will have on the financial
position of the Town.
A.
§ 95-11 CHARTER § 95-13
C:87
§ 95-14. Capital Project Fund. [Added 4-22-2013 STM by Art. 6]
No requests received after the submission deadline will be included
in the capital budget article at the Annual Town Meeting, unless a
majority of the Committee voted to include said article as a result of a
compelling or unforeseen event or emergency.
B.
A Capital Project Fund shall be established by Town Meeting vote. The
Town Accountant is hereby authorized to close all completed general
revenue, free cash and retained earnings financed capital appropriation
balances in the General and Enterprise Funds to this fund. No
expenditures shall be made from the Capital Project Fund. The fund
shall serve solely as a source for financing future capital needs.
A.
Unobligated balances in bonded capital project accounts shall be
transferred to the Capital Project Fund at the completion of each
such capital project. These balances shall be reserved for future
appropriation in accordance with the municipal finance laws. To the
extent that Town Meeting has not voted to designate capital project
funds for a specific future project, the unreserved fund balance in the
Capital Project Fund shall be available for appropriation for additional
capital needs.
B.
As capital projects are completed during the course of a fiscal year,
the responsible department head shall notify the Town Accountant
and/or Treasurer/Collector, who shall close unobligated appropriation
balances to the Capital Project Fund. All year-end encumbered capital
appropriation balances shall be brought forward from one year to the
next, without any action of the responsible department head.
C.
Not later than July 15 of each fiscal year, each department head having
a capital appropriation in either an Enterprise Fund or the General
Fund, for which there is an unexpended and unencumbered balance at
June 30, shall provide the Town Accountant and/or Treasurer/Collector
with a detailed request to carry the balance forward into the new
fiscal year. This request shall contain a detailed description of the work
to be performed, including any variations from the original plan, and
a projected schedule for completion of the project. Prior to closing
any appropriation for a capital project which has not been completed,
the Town Accountant shall obtain the concurrence of the Board of
Selectmen.
D.
To the extent that undesignated and unreserved funds are available in
the Capital Project Fund at the time that the capital budget is submitted
to Town Meeting, this fund shall be used as the priority source for
capital appropriations. Free cash shall not be used as a financing
source for a capital appropriation while equal funding is available in the
Capital Project Fund.
E.
The Town Accountant and/or Treasurer/Collector shall provide the
Capital Budget Committee and the Board of Selectmen with an annual
F.
§ 95-13 MARSHFIELD CODE § 95-14
C:88
§ 95-15. Capital budget article.
The Committee shall draft a capital budget article or articles for inclusion in
the Annual Town Meeting warrant, with the Committee's recommendations
on each capital project request. The Committee's recommendation shall
include project financing and statutory reference if funds are to be
borrowed. In the case of Annual Town Meeting the Committee shall submit
a draft of the article or articles to the Advisory Board and Selectmen no
later than March 1 of each year or 60 days before the Annual Town Meeting,
whichever date is latest, and no later than 30 days prior to the date of Town
Meeting in the case of articles submitted for Special Town Meeting. The
article or articles shall be reviewed by the Advisory Board and Board of
Selectmen, and they may make recommendations on each capital project to
the Committee. All capital requests submitted in a manner consistent with
this bylaw will be included in the capital budget article or articles and each
request shall have the Committee's recommendation.
§ 95-16. Funding requests to be included in capital budget article.
No request for funding of a capital project shall appear on the Town Meeting
warrant except in a capital budget article that has been developed in
accordance with §§ 95-11B through 95-15 above; provided, however, that
nothing herein shall interfere with the right of any citizen, department,
board or committee to seek to modify any capital budget article at Town
Meeting or place petition articles on the warrant consistent with the rules of
Town Meeting and consistent with the requirements of the Massachusetts
General Laws.
§ 95-17. Bonded project accounting.
detailed report on the status of all capital appropriations, including a
summary of all activity into and out of the Capital Project Fund.
By October 1 of each year, the Town Administrator and the Town
Accountant will submit to the Committee a bonded project accounting,
which shall state as of the previous June 30:
(1) The amount authorized;
(2) The amount borrowed (either temporarily or permanently);
(3) The amount authorized and unissued;
(4) The amount expended; and
(5) The unexpended balance, for each bonded project.
A.
By December 31, all departments, boards and committees, with the
assistance of the Town Administrator, shall submit a written report to
the Committee of each bonded project and shall state, among other
things, whether each project is complete and ready for closeout or, if
B.
§ 95-14 CHARTER § 95-17
C:89
§ 95-18. Capital budget plans.
No later than the third Friday in November of each year, all Town boards,
departments or committees shall submit to the Committee a capital budget
plan listing all capital projects then in effect and anticipated in the next
five years, along with the projected costs of these projects and projected
methods of financing. The Committee will incorporate all capital budget
plans into an overall Town capital budget program.
§ 95-19. Capital projects considered at Special Town Meeting.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Capital projects for consideration at a Special Town Meeting should be of
an emergency nature only and shall be submitted to the Capital Budget
Committee as promptly as the emergency circumstances allow prior to the
date of a Special Town Meeting. In all other respects, the provisions of
§§ 95-11A and 95-16 above shall apply to a Special Town Meeting as they do
to Annual Town Meetings.
not complete, when the project will be complete and how much of the
remaining authorization will be used.
§ 95-17 MARSHFIELD CODE § 95-19
C:90
ARTICLE VIII
Revolving Funds
[Adopted 4-23-2018 ATM by Art. No. 8]
§ 95-20. Revolving fund bylaw.
Purpose. This bylaw establishes and authorizes revolving funds for
use by Town departments, boards, committees, agencies or officers in
connection with the operation of programs or activities that generate
fees, charges or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses
of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established
under and governed by MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
A.
Expenditure limitations. A department or agency head, board,
committee or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies
from a revolving fund established and authorized by this bylaw without
appropriation subject to the following limitations:
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are
paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
(1)
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of
the fund.
(2)
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the
amount authorized by Town Meeting on or before July 1 of that
fiscal year, or any increased amount of that authorization that
is later approved during that fiscal year by the Selectmen and
Advisory Board.
(3)
B.
Interest. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund
established by this bylaw shall be credited to the general fund.
C.
Procedures and reports. Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2,
and this bylaw, the laws, charter provisions, bylaws, rules, regulations,
policies or procedures that govern the receipt and custody of Town
monies and the expenditure and payment of Town funds shall apply to
the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by this bylaw.
The Town Accountant shall include a statement on the collections
credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to
the fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular report
the Town Accountant provides the department, board, committee,
agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
D.
Authorized revolving funds.
Beach Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the Beach
Revolving Fund for the use of the Beach Supervisor under the
general supervision of the Marshfield Police Department.
(a)
(1)
E.
§ 95-20 CHARTER § 95-20
C:91
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Beach
Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund
all of the revenue generated from all fees and other monies
charged or received by the Town from beach stickers, parking
at public beach lots, and snack bar and concession operations
of all public beaches of the Town of Marshfield.
(b)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the Beach
Supervisor under the general supervision of the Marshfield
Police Department may incur liabilities against and spend
monies from the Beach Revolving Fund for the purpose of
paying for part-time salaries, supplies, and other beach-related
expenses.
(c)
Fiscal years. The Beach Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal
years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(d)
Recreation Department Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the
Recreation Department Revolving Fund for the use of the
Recreation Commission and the Recreation Director.
(a)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Recreation
Department Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit
to the fund all of the revenue received by the Recreation
Department from recreation programs and activities.
(b)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the
Recreation Department may incur liabilities against and spend
monies from the Recreation Department Revolving Fund to
cover the costs associated with the operation of recreation
programs and activities, including purchasing equipment,
supplies, and services.
(c)
Fiscal years. The Recreation Department Revolving Fund shall
operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(d)
(2)
Senior Citizen Transportation Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the Senior
Citizen Transportation Revolving Fund for the use of the
Council on Aging and the Director of the Council on Aging.
(a)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Senior
Citizen Transportation Revolving Fund as a separate account
and credit to the fund all fares, fees and other monies charged
or received by the Council on Aging from the conduct of
outings and provision of transportation services to and from
the Senior Center.
(b)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the
Council on Aging may incur liabilities against and spend
(c)
(3)
§ 95-20 MARSHFIELD CODE § 95-20
C:92
monies from the Senior Citizen Transportation Revolving Fund
for salaries or wages, expenses, lease payments and
contractual services to operate transportation services.
Fiscal years. The Senior Citizen Transportation Revolving
Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1,
2018.
(d)
Playing Field Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the Playing
Field Revolving Fund for the use of the Department of Public
Works and the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works.
(a)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Playing
Field Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the
fund all fees and other monies charged or received by the
Town and the Department of Public Works from the rental of
certain town playing fields not under the care and custody of
the Recreation Department.
(b)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the
Department of Public Works may incur liabilities against and
spend monies from the Playing Field Revolving Fund to defray
the cost of part-time salaries, supplies, and other expenses,
including maintenance, of the playing fields operations.
(c)
Fiscal years. The Playing Field Revolving Fund shall operate
for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(d)
(4)
Integrated Preschool Program Revolving Fund.
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the
Integrated Preschool Program Revolving Fund use of the
School Committee and the School Superintendent of Schools.
(a)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Integrated
Preschool Program Revolving Fund as a separate account and
credit to the fund all fees and other monies charged or
received from the integrated preschool program and activities.
(b)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the School
Committee and Superintendent may incur liabilities against
and spend monies from the Integrated Preschool Program
Revolving Fund to pay for part-time staff, supplies and
equipment related to the program.
(c)
Fiscal years. The Integrated Preschool Program Revolving
Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1,
2018.
(d)
(5)
(6) Turf Field Revolving Fund.
§ 95-20 CHARTER § 95-20
C:93
Fund name. There shall be a separate fund called the Turf
Field Revolving Fund for the use of the School Committee and
Superintendent of Schools.
(a)
Revenues. The Town Accountant shall establish the Turf Field
Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund
all fees and other monies charged or received by the Town
and the Department of Public Works from the rental of the
synthetic turf playing fields adjoining Marshfield High School
and Martinson Elementary School.
(b)
Purposes and expenditures. During each fiscal year, the School
Committee and Superintendent of Schools may incur liabilities
against and spend monies from the Turf Field Revolving Fund
to defray the cost of maintenance of the synthetic turf fields.
(c)
Fiscal years. The Turf Field Revolving Fund shall operate for
fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
(d)
§ 95-20 MARSHFIELD CODE § 95-20
C:94
Chapter 98
FIREARMS AND HUNTING
§ 95-20 CHARTER § 95-20
C:95

ARTICLE I
Discharging Rifles
[Adopted 1929 ATM by Art. 8 (Art. 12 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 98-1. Discharge by minors.
It shall be unlawful for any minor less than 18 years of age to discharge any
rifle within the Town of Marshfield, except that such minor may discharge
a rifle or air rifle on any properly safeguarded public or private rifle range
that has been approved by the Selectmen.
§ 98-1 CHARTER § 98-1
C:97

ARTICLE II
Restricted Areas
[Adopted 1959 ATM by Art. 64 (Art. 28 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 98-2. Areas to be designated by Selectmen.
There shall be no hunting or use of firearms in any areas in the Town
designated and posted by the Selectmen. Such areas may be so designated
and posted upon the recommendation of a Safety Committee appointed
annually by the Selectmen, comprising three members, including one
member of the Rod and Gun Club.
§ 98-2 CHARTER § 98-2
C:99
Chapter 101
FIRES AND FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electrical installations — See Ch. 76.
Gas permits — See Ch. 195, Art. I.
Smoking — See Ch. 232.
§ 98-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 98-2
C:100
ARTICLE I
Hydrants
[Adopted 1948 ATM by Art. 45 (Art. 19 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 101-1. Maintenance; use permits. [Amended 4-23-2018 ATM by
Art. 28]
The maintenance and care of the hydrants of the Town water system,
exclusive of hydrants on private property or located within subdivisions
whose streets and ways have not been accepted and to which there is
no deeded public access, shall be the responsibility of the Department of
Public Works. The use, control, inspection, and reporting to the Department
of Public Works of any inefficiency in connection with said hydrants shall
be the responsibility of the Fire Department, which shall issue permits
for their use, when used by anyone other than the Department of Public
Works or the Fire Department, said permit to be carried on the person
to whom issued, and shall not be transferable. The enforcement of this
bylaw and prosecution of violations, in connection therewith, shall be the
responsibility of the Police Department.
§ 101-2. Enforcement.
The enforcement of this bylaw and prosecution of violations in connection
therewith shall be the responsibility of the Police Department.
§ 101-1 CHARTER § 101-2
C:101

ARTICLE II
Fires on Beach Areas
[Adopted 1970 ATM by Art. 55 (Art. 38 of the General Bylaws);
amended 1975 ATM by Art. 22]
§ 101-3. Permit required.
No fires shall be built on any beach area including the dunes in the Town of
Marshfield without a written permit from the Fire Department. Said permits
shall be restricted to cookouts using charcoal or bottled gas as a fuel. All
permit holders shall be responsible for the cleaning and restoration of the
fire area. No person shall stockpile wood or any combustible material on the
beach areas and dunes.
§ 101-3 CHARTER § 101-3
C:103

ARTICLE III
Smoke Detectors
[Adopted 1981 ATM by Art. 33 (Art. 47 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 101-4. When required.
The installation of smoke detectors in accordance with regulations issued
by the office of the State Fire Marshal shall be required after January 1,
1982, in all apartment buildings and in each apartment and residential
dwelling before such building is sold or otherwise changes hands and in all
commercial and industrial buildings.
§ 101-4 CHARTER § 101-4
C:105

ARTICLE IV
Fuel Storage Tanks
[Adopted 1986 STM by Art. 2 (Art. 57 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 101-5. Reinforced concrete tank. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
Any person or business requesting a license and/or permit for the
underground storage of fuel oil, gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene or hazardous
materials defined by MGL c. 21D, § 2, shall be required to build a reinforced
concrete tank lined with fiberglass or an approved epoxy paint and
approved waterproofing on the outside of the tank. Within this tank shall
be placed a standard gasoline storage tank as specified in 527 CMR 9.00,
Tanks and Containers, adopted by the the Board of Fire Prevention
Regulations pursuant to MGL c. 148, § 9, as most recently amended. The
residual space shall be filled with sand and provisions made for an
observation pipe for inspection purposes, with two observation wells
outside the tank.
§ 101-6. Dual containment tank.
In the alternative, and with the approval of the Fire Chief, such person
or business may substitute for the tanks described in § 101-5 hereof a
dual containment tank with proper monitoring devices for observing the
containment area between the walls of such tank. Only steel or fiberglass
piping will be allowed in tanks subject to this section.
§ 101-7. Replacement tanks; installation plans.
This bylaw shall also apply to replacement tanks. A plan of said installations,
designed by a registered engineer, shall be furnished to the Fire Chief
and approved by the Fire Chief before any license is granted by the local
licensing authority (Board of Selectmen) for a license for storage pursuant
to MGL c. 148, § 13, as amended.
§ 101-5 CHARTER § 101-7
C:107

ARTICLE V
Underground Storage Tanks
[Adopted 1987 STM by Arts. 14 and 15 (Arts. 61 and 62 of the
General Bylaws)]
§ 101-8. Registration required; testing.
§ 101-9. Prohibited tanks. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Notwithstanding any other provisions of these General Bylaws, the
installation of any underground tank or other container described under
State Fire Prevention Regulations 527 CMR 9.01 et seq., except septic
tanks or containers designed and intended solely for the storage of water, is
prohibited within the Town of Marshfield.
On or before December 1, 1988, any person who owns, leases, or
otherwise controls any parcel of land within the Town of Marshfield
wherein an underground storage tank or container has been installed,
except septic tanks or containers designed and intended solely for
the storage of water, shall register such tank or container with the
Marshfield Fire Chief.
A.
As part of the registration process, such person shall furnish to the
Marshfield Fire Chief evidence, deemed sufficient by him, to establish
the date of installation of said tank or container. If such evidence is
not furnished, the tank or container shall be conclusively presumed to
have been installed 20 years prior to the effective date of this bylaw.
Tanks which are not registered as provided therein shall be tested
immediately upon discovery at the owner's expense. Testing will consist
of any appropriate test approved in advance by the Fire Chief.
B.
The Marshfield Fire Chief may vary the application of this bylaw in any
case where, in the opinion of the Marshfield Fire Chief, the applicant
has demonstrated a clear and convincing hardship and has presented
a plan for installing such tank which complies with the provisions of
Article IV of this chapter relating to the construction of underground
storage tanks.
A.
Before acting upon an application for a variance hereunder, the
Marshfield Fire Chief shall hold a public hearing within 30 days of his
receipt of a written request for a variance, said hearing to be advertised
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Marshfield at least seven days before the date of the hearing. The
approval or denial of an application for a variance shall be in writing to
be issued within 60 days from the conclusion of the hearing which shall
contain a brief statement of the reasons therefor.
B.
§ 101-8 CHARTER § 101-9
C:109

ARTICLE VI
Lock Boxes
[Adopted 1988 ATM by Art. 32 (Art. 63 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 101-10. Keys and information to be provided. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Any building, excluding single-family residential structures, that either has
a fire alarm or is in excess of 5,000 square feet shall provide a secure area
at its location for storage of the building key(s), numbers for contact people,
building layout plan and alarm instructions. This may be accomplished
by installing an approved lock box or a master box compatible with the
Fire Department's present system. One year from the effective date of this
bylaw, all keys in the possession of the Marshfield Fire Department will be
returned.
§ 101-10 CHARTER § 101-10
C:111

ARTICLE VII
Carbon Monoxide Detectors
[Adopted 1997 ATM by Art. 60 (Art. 76 of the General Bylaws);
amended 4-25-2005 STM by Art. 5]
§ 101-11. Detectors required.
Every building or structure erected or substantially altered to be occupied
in whole or in part for residential purposes shall be protected with an
approved carbon monoxide detector/detectors, which sounds an audible
alarm.
§ 101-12. Certification; heating plants and fuel-burning appliances.
Certification of required carbon monoxide detector/detectors will be
provided during the sale or transfer of said building or structure. Any
installation/modification of a heating plant, regardless of the type of fuel,
that utilizes a power vent for exhausting purposes shall be protected with
a minimum of one Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) approved carbon
monoxide detector for every 1,200 square feet of living space to protect all
sleeping areas. Any dwelling that adds a new fuel-burning appliance such
as a wood or coal stove or gas-fired clothes dryer shall be protected with UL
approved carbon monoxide detector(s) as described above.
§ 101-13. Enforcement. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The head of the Fire Department and the office of the Building
Commissioner shall enforce the provisions of this bylaw.
§ 101-11 CHARTER § 101-13
C:113

ARTICLE VIII
Removal of Combustible Materials
[Adopted April 2009 ATM by Art. 18 (Art. 88 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 101-14. Inspections and orders. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
The head of the Fire Department, or any member to whom the head of
the Fire Department may delegate, upon complaint of a person having an
interest in any building or premises or property adjacent thereto, shall, at
any reasonable hour, enter into buildings and upon premises, which term
for the purposes of the remainder of this article shall include alleys adjacent
thereto, within his jurisdiction and make an investigation as to the existence
of conditions likely to cause fire. He shall, in writing, order such conditions
to be remedied, and whenever such officers or persons find in any building
or upon any premises any accumulation of combustible rubbish, including
but not limited to wastepaper, rags, cardboard, string, packing material,
sawdust, shavings, sticks, waste leather or rubber, broken boxes or barrels
or any other refuse or usable materials that are or may become dangerous
as a fire menace or as an obstacle to easy ingress into or egress from such
buildings or premises, they shall, in writing, order the same to be removed
or such conditions to be remedied. Notice of such order shall be served
upon the owner, occupant or his authorized agent by a member of the Fire
or Police Department.
§ 101-15. Failure to comply with order; violations and penalties.
§ 101-16. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw, the violation of which is
subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by the noncriminal method
of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, and Chapter 161, Article I,
of the Marshfield General Bylaws.
If said order is not complied with within 24 hours, the person making
such order, or any person designated by him, may enter into such
building or upon such premises and remove such refuse or any usable
materials or abate such conditions at the expense of such owner or
occupant. Any expense so incurred by or on behalf of the Town shall
be a debt due the Town, as the case may be, upon completion of such
removal or abatement and the rendering of an account therefor to the
owner. The provisions of the second paragraph of MGL c. 139, § 3A,
relative to liens for such debt and the collection of the claims for such
debt, shall apply to any debt referred to in this section, except that the
head of the Fire Department shall act hereunder in place of the Board
of Selectmen.
A.
Any such owner or occupant who fails or refuses to comply with said
order shall be punished by a fine of $100 for the first offense, $200 for
the second offense and $300 for the third and subsequent offenses.
B.
§ 101-14 CHARTER § 101-16
C:115

ARTICLE IX
Open Burning
[Adopted April 2009 ATM by Art. 19 (Art. 89 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 101-17. Permit required; exception; violations and penalties.
No person shall set, maintain or increase a fire in the open air at any
time except by permission granted by the Forest Warden/Chief of the Fire
Department or his designee. A written record of the granting thereof,
setting forth the date upon which permission was granted, the dates
covered by such permission, the name and address of the person to whom,
and the manner in which, such permission was granted, and any other
necessary information relative thereto shall be made and kept by the Forest
Warden/Chief and be at the location where the burning will occur. Persons
18 years of age or older may, without a permit, set, maintain or increase
a reasonable fire for the purpose of cooking on privately owned land if
the fire is enclosed within rocks, metal or other nonflammable material.
The Forest Warden/Chief shall make it a condition for granting a permit
that any burning shall be in compliance with MGL c. 48, § 13, and may
make it a condition for granting such permit that sufficient Fire Department
personnel, to be assigned at the expense of the person seeking such permit,
shall be present at such burning to control the fire until it is entirely
extinguished. Any permit granted under this section may be revoked at any
time. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be punished by a
fine of $100 for the first offense, $200 for the second offense and $300 for
the third and subsequent offenses.
§ 101-18. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw, the violation of which is
subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by the noncriminal method
of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, and Chapter 161, Article I,
of the Marshfield General Bylaws.
§ 101-17 CHARTER § 101-18
C:117

ARTICLE X
Piling Snow on Hydrants or Fire Protection Devices
[Adopted April 2009 ATM by Art. 20 (Art. 90 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 101-19. Prohibited acts.
No person other than an employee in the service of the commonwealth
or the Town or in the service of an independent contractor acting for the
commonwealth or the Town shall pile, push or plow snow or ice on or
against any fire hydrant or fire protection device used for fire protection
which is located in any public or private way so as to conceal such hydrant
or device or cover any outlet thereof. Whoever violates this section shall be
punished by a fine of $300.
§ 101-20. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw, the violation of which is
subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by the noncriminal method
of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, and Chapter 161, Article I,
of the Marshfield General Bylaws.
§ 101-19 CHARTER § 101-20
C:119

ARTICLE XI
Fire Protection Devices
[Adopted April 2009 ATM by Art. 21 (Art. 91 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 101-21. Permit required to shut off, disconnect, obstruct or
remove.
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall shut off, disconnect,
obstruct, remove or destroy, or cause or permit to be shut off, disconnected,
obstructed, removed or destroyed, any part of any sprinkler system, water
main, hydrant or other device used for fire protection/detection or carbon
monoxide detection and alarm in any building owned, leased or occupied
by such person or under his control or supervision, without first procuring
a written permit so to do from the head of the Fire Department, which
permit such head is hereby authorized to issue subject to such terms and
conditions as, in his judgment, protection against fire and the preservation
of the public safety may require. This section shall not prevent the
temporary shutting off or disconnection or partial removal of such a system,
main, hydrant or other device for the purpose of making necessary repairs
or preventing freezing or other property damage; provided, however, that
the head of the Fire Department is notified immediately of such emergency
action. The head of the Fire Department shall also be notified when the
system, main, hydrant or other device is placed back in service. Violation of
this section shall be punished by a fine of $150 for the first offense and $300
for the second offense.
§ 101-22. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this bylaw, the violation of which is
subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by the noncriminal method
of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, and Chapter 161, Article I,
of the Marshfield General Bylaws.
§ 101-21 CHARTER § 101-22
C:121
Chapter 118
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 101-22 MARSHFIELD CODE § 101-22
C:122
ARTICLE I
Demolition of Historically Significant Buildings or Structures
[Adopted 4-27-2008 ATM by Art. 31 (Art. 87 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 118-1. Intent and purpose.
This bylaw is adopted for the intent and purpose of identifying and
protecting the historic and aesthetic qualities of the Town by preserving,
rehabilitating or restoring, whenever possible, buildings, structures or
properties which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the
architectural, aesthetic or historic resources of the Town, thereby
promoting the public welfare and preserving the cultural heritage of the
Town.
§ 118-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this bylaw, the following words and phrases have the
following meanings:
COMMISSION — The Marshfield Historical Commission.
DEMOLITION PERMIT — The permit issued by the Inspector as required by
the State Building Code for the demolition, partial demolition or removal of
a building or structure.
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR PROPERTY —
Any building, structure or property which is in whole or in part 50 years or
more old and has been determined by the Commission to be significant by
virtue of being:
INSPECTOR — The Marshfield Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer or any other person authorized to issue demolition
permits.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
§ 118-3. Regulated buildings, structures and properties.
Importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or
with the architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of
the Town, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the United States of
America; or
A.
Historically or architecturally important by reason of period, style,
method of building construction or association with a particular
architect or builder, either by itself or in the context of a group of
buildings or structures; or
B.
A vista, bridge, stone wall, tree, road marker or sign, or any other
property identified as of aesthetic, architectural, cultural, political or
historical significance by the Commission.
C.
The provisions of this bylaw shall apply only to the following buildings,
structures or properties:
A.
§ 118-1 CHARTER § 118-3
C:123
§ 118-4. Procedure for issuance of demolition permit.
A building, structure or property listed on the National Register
of Historic Places, or the State Register of Historic Places, or
the subject of a pending application for listing on either of said
Registers; or
(1)
A building, structure or property located within 200 feet of the
boundary line of any federal, state or local historic district; or
(2)
A building, structure or property included in the Inventory of the
Historic and Prehistoric Assets of the Commonwealth, or
designated by the Commission for inclusion in said Inventory; or
(3)
Any building, structure or property defined as an historically
significant building, structure or property in § 118-2 above.
(4)
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the provisions of this bylaw
shall not apply to any building, structure or property located in a local
historical district and subject to regulation under the provisions of MGL
c. 40C. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
B.
The Inspector shall forward a copy of each demolition permit
application for a building, structure or property to the Commission
within seven days after the filing of such application.
A.
Within 30 days after its receipt of such application, the Commission
shall determine whether the building, structure or property is
historically significant. The applicant for the permit shall be entitled
to make a presentation to the Commission if he or she makes a timely
request to the Commission.
B.
If the Commission determines that the building, structure or property
is not historically significant, it shall so notify the Inspector and the
applicant in writing and the Inspector may issue a demolition permit.
C.
Within 60 days after the applicant is notified that the Commission
has determined that a building, structure or property is historically
significant, the applicant for the permit shall submit to the Commission
10 copies of a demolition plan which shall include the following
information:
A plot plan or Assessor's map showing the location of the building,
structure or property to be demolished with reference to lot lines
and neighboring building and structures;
(1)
(2) Photographs of all street facade elevations;
A description of the building, structure or property, or part thereof,
to be demolished;
(3)
D.
§ 118-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 118-4
C:124
The reason for the proposed demolition and data supporting said
reason, including, where applicable, data sufficient to establish any
economic justification for demolition; and
(4)
A brief description of the proposed reuse of the parcel on which the
building, structure or property to be demolished is located.
(5)
The Commission shall hold a public hearing with respect to the
application for a demolition permit and shall give public notice of the
time, place and purpose thereof at least 14 days before said hearing in
such a manner as it may determine, and by mailing, postage prepaid,
a copy of said notice to the applicant, to the owners of all adjoining
property and other property deemed by the Commission to be
materially affected thereby as they appear on the most recent real
estate tax list of the Board of Assessors, to the Planning Board, to
any person filing written request for notice of hearings, such request
to be renewed yearly in December, and to such other persons as the
Commission shall deem entitled to notice.
Within 60 days after its receipt of the demolition plan the
Commission shall file a written report with the Inspector on the
demolition plan that shall include the following:
A description of the age, structural style, historic association
and importance of the building, structure or property to be
demolished.
(a)
A determination as to whether or not the building, structure or
property should preferably be preserved.
(b)
(1)
The Commission shall determine that a building, structure, or
property should preferably be preserved only if it finds that the
building, structure or property is a historically significant building,
structure or property which, because of the important contribution
made by the building, structure or property to the Town's historical
and/or architectural resources, it is in the public interest to
preserve, rehabilitate or restore.
(2)
E.
If, following the demolition plan review, the Commission does not
determine that the building, structure or property should preferably be
preserved, or if the Commission fails to file a report with the Inspector
within the time limit set out in Subsection E above, the Inspector may
issue a demolition permit.
F.
If, following the demolition plan review, the Commission determines
that the building, structure or property should preferably be preserved,
then the Inspector shall not issue a demolition permit for a period
of 12 months from the date of the filing of the Commission's report
unless the Commission informs the Inspector prior to the expiration of
such twelve-month period that it is satisfied that the applicant for the
demolition permit has made a bona fide, reasonable and unsuccessful
effort to locate a purchaser for the building, structure or property who
G.
§ 118-4 CHARTER § 118-4
C:125
§ 118-5. Emergency demolition. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
If the condition of the building, structure or property poses a serious
and imminent threat to public health or safety due to its deteriorated
condition, the owner of such building, structure or property may request the
issuance of an emergency demolition permit from the Inspector. As soon as
practicable after the receipt of such a request, the Inspector shall arrange
to have the property inspected by a board consisting of the Inspector, the
Chairpersons of the Commission and the Board of Health and the Chief
of the Fire Department, or their respective designees. After inspection of
the building, structure or property and consultation with this board, the
Inspector shall determine whether the condition of the building, structure
or property represents a serious and imminent threat to public health or
safety. If the Inspector finds that the condition of the building, structure
or property poses a serious and imminent threat to public health or safety,
and that there is no reasonable alternative to the immediate issuance of a
demolition permit under the provisions of this section, the Inspector shall
file a written report describing the condition of the building, structure or
property and the basis for the decision to issue an emergency demolition
permit with the Commission. Nothing in this section shall be inconsistent
with the procedures for the demolition and/or securing of the buildings
and structures established by MGL c. 143, §§ 6 to 10. In the event that
a Board of Survey is convened under the provisions of MGL c. 143, § 8,
with regard to any building, structure or property identified in § 118-3 of
this bylaw, the Inspector shall request the Chairperson of the Commission
or the Chairperson's designee to accompany the Board of Survey during
its inspection. A copy of the written report prepared as a result of such
inspection shall be filed with the Commission.
§ 118-6. Responsibility of owners.
is willing to preserve, rehabilitate or restore the building, structure
or property, or has agreed to accept a demolition permit on specified
conditions approved by the Commission.
Upon determination that the building, structure or property is
considered a significant building, structure or property the owner shall
agree to preserve the building, structure or property; make a
reasonable bona fide effort to locate a purchaser who is willing to
preserve the building, structure or property; or accept a demolition
permit on specified conditions approved by the Commission.
A.
Upon determination that the building, structure or property is
considered a significant building, structure or property, the owner shall
be responsible for properly securing the building, structure or property,
if vacant, to the satisfaction of the Inspector. If the Commission
determines that the owner failed to so properly secure the building,
structure or property, and if said failure is found to have caused or
allowed a subsequent destruction of the building, structure or property
B.
§ 118-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 118-6
C:126
§ 118-7. Noncompliance.
§ 118-8. Severability.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this bylaw is declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, every other section,
paragraph and part of this bylaw shall continue in full force and effect.
any time during the twelve-month demolition delay period, and that
said damage could have been prevented by the required security
measures, said destruction shall be considered a demolition and a
violation of this bylaw. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
those significant buildings, structures or property that were demolished
due to fire, collapse, storm or other natural disaster, provided that fire
damage was not the result of arson or other intentional destruction
by the owner or its agents, as determined by the Chief of the Fire
Department or his designee. The owner must notify the Inspector if an
occupied property becomes vacant during the twelve-month period.
In the instance of eventual demolition of the property the owner shall
allow the Commission access to the building, structure or property to
take photographs, secure samples of wallpaper and paint or generate
any documentation deemed desirable for historical record purposes.
C.
Except as provided below, whenever a significant building, structure
or property or any portion thereof has been voluntarily demolished
in violation of this bylaw, and for a period of three years after the
completion of such demolition, no building permit shall be issued with
respect to any premises upon which such demolition has occurred.
As used herein, "premises" includes the parcel of land on which the
demolished significant building, structure or property was located.
A.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the Commission shall, on its
own initiative or on application of the owner, determine that earlier
reconstruction, restoration or other remediation of any demolition in
violation of the bylaw better serves the intent and purpose of this bylaw,
it may, prior to the expiration of said period of three years, but no
sooner than six months from the date of completion of any demolition
in violation of this bylaw, authorize issuance of a building permit, upon
such conditions as the Commission deems necessary or appropriate to
fulfill the purposes of this bylaw, and may so notify the Inspector.
B.
§ 118-6 CHARTER § 118-8
C:127
Chapter 134
JUNK
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 184. Solid waste — See Ch. 238.
§ 118-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 118-8
C:128
ARTICLE I
Junk Dealers and Collectors
[Adopted 5-10-1976 (Art. 8 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 134-1. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, by purchase or
otherwise, junk, old metals and secondhand articles from place to place
unless having a license issued by the Selectmen, and all persons to whom
a license is issued shall display the license number on any vehicle used to
transport such junk. Any shop and all articles or merchandise therein, and
any place, vehicle or receptacle used for the collection or keeping of the
articles aforesaid, may be examined at all times by the Selectmen, or by any
person by them respectively authorized thereto. Any license may be revoked
at pleasure by the Board of Selectmen or a majority thereof.
§ 134-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
Whoever, not being so licensed, keeps such shop or is such dealer or junk
collector in the Town, or being licensed, keeps such shop or is such dealer
or junk collector in any other place or manner than that designated in
his license, or after notice to him that his license has been revoked, shall
forfeit $20 or the maximum fine authorized by MGL c. 140, § 55, whichever
is greater, for each offense, and whoever violates any rule, regulation, or
restriction contained in his license shall forfeit $20 or the maximum fine
authorized by MGL c. 140, § 55, for each offense.
§ 134-1 CHARTER § 134-2
C:129

ARTICLE II
Storage of Junk and Junk Automobiles
[Adopted 1976 ATM by Art. 61 (Art. 31 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 134-3. Open storage prohibited without license. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
No person or entity, corporate or otherwise, as owner(s) or one(s) in control
of premises, shall keep in the open in any area of the Town of Marshfield
any substantial amount of junk, or more than two junk automobiles, as those
terms are hereinafter defined, for more than 30 consecutive calendar days
without being licensed to do so under this bylaw.
§ 134-4. License procedure.
§ 134-5. Exceptions.
"Substantial amount of junk" shall be defined as old scrap copper, brass,
rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, waste and other old
or scrap ferrous and nonferrous material whose total weight exceed 75
pounds.
A.
"Junk automobile" shall be defined as an automobile that is worn out,
cast off, or discarded and which is ready for dismantling or destruction,
or which has been collected or stored for salvage or for stripping in
order to make use of parts thereof. Any disassembled parts from such a
vehicle shall be considered junk under this bylaw.
B.
A license to keep any substantial amount of junk or more than two junk
automobiles must be requested by filing an application in writing for
such a license with the Selectmen's office of the Town of Marshfield.
The Selectmen shall hold a public hearing upon such a request, notice
of which shall be published in a newspaper issued in Marshfield at least
three days prior to the hearing. The cost of the publishing shall be paid
by the Town of Marshfield.
A.
The Selectmen may grant a one-year license upon such condition as the
Selectmen deem proper to keep such junk or junk automobiles in the
open after a public hearing has been held and the Selectmen determine
that the keeping of the same will not depreciate property values in the
area, will not create a hazard to the public safety, or will not become a
public nuisance. Renewals of said licenses shall be granted only after
the procedure set forth above is followed.
B.
Notwithstanding the aforesaid sections, no person shall be in violation
of this bylaw if, prior to a determination of guilt by any judicial body,
that person or entity acquires a determination by the Marshfield
Planning Board, through the procedures hereinafter prescribed, that
those articles or pieces of property which the Town of Marshfield claims
to be junk or junk automobiles are not junk or junk automobiles as
defined in the bylaw. Any person or entity requesting a determination
A.
§ 134-3 CHARTER § 134-5
C:131
§ 134-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
Any person or entity who or which violates this bylaw shall be liable for a
fine of $20 or the maximum fine authorized by MGL c. 140, § 55, whichever
is greater, for each day of violation.
§ 134-7. Severability. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Any clause, section, or part of this bylaw determined to be invalid by the
judiciary for any reason shall be severable from any other clause, section,
or part, without affecting the validity of that which remains.
that articles or property are not within the scope of this bylaw must
do so by written application to the Planning Board of the Town of
Marshfield. Said Planning Board shall hold a public hearing upon such
a request, notice of which shall be published at least three days before
the date of the hearing. The cost of the publishing shall be paid by the
applicant. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Notwithstanding the aforesaid sections, no junk or junk automobile
shall be deemed to be "in the open" as that phrase is used in § 134-3 if
it is totally screened from view of any public road or public way.
B.
§ 134-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 134-7
C:132
Chapter 145
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 134-7 CHARTER § 134-7
C:133

ARTICLE I
Outstanding Taxes and Charges
[Adopted 1986 ATM by Art. 27 (Art. 60 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 145-1. List of delinquent parties.
The Treasurer/Collector shall annually furnish to each department, board,
commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the "licensing authority,"
that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, a list
of any person, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to
as the "party," that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees,
assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a
twelve-month period, and that such party has not filed in good faith a
pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition
before the Appellate Tax Board.
§ 145-2. Denial, revocation or suspension of license or permit.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name appears on
said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Treasurer/Collector
or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject
of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out
or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate
owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the
licensing authority from the Treasurer/Collector; provided, however, that
written notice is given to the party and the Treasurer/Collector, as required
by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be
held not earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima
facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit
to any party. The Treasurer/Collector shall have the right to intervene in
any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or
suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to
such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the
purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced
in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license
denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended
or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the
license authority receives a certificate issued by the Treasurer/Collector
that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes,
fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the
municipality as the date of issuance of said certificates.
§ 145-3. Payment agreement.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
§ 145-1 CHARTER § 145-3
C:135
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however that the holder
be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 145-4. Waiver. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation
if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property
owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate
family, as defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or activity conducted
in or on said property. This bylaw shall not apply to the following licenses
and permits: open burning, MGL c. 48, § 13; sale of articles for charitable
purposes, MGL c. 101, § 33; children work permits, MGL c. 149, § 69; clubs,
associations dispensing food or beverage licenses, MGL c. 140, § 21E; dog
licenses, MGL c. 140, § 137; fishing, hunting, trapping license, MGL c. 131,
§ 12; marriage licenses, MGL c. 207, § 28; and theatrical events, public
exhibition permits, MGL c. 140, § 181.
§ 145-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 145-4
C:136
Chapter 161
NONCRIMINAL DISPOSITION
§ 145-4 CHARTER § 145-4
C:137

ARTICLE I
General Bylaws
[Adopted as Art. 2 of the General Bylaws; amended 10-18-2004 STM
by Art. 6]
§ 161-1. Authorization.
Pursuant to the civil infraction procedures set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, the
noncriminal disposition of the following violations is hereby authorized: any
violation of any Town bylaw.
§ 161-2. Civil assessment.
The civil assessment for any violation shall be the amount(s) set forth in the
law, bylaw, order or regulation being enforced, or, if no amount is set forth,
the assessment shall be $300.
§ 161-3. Governing law.
This bylaw is intended to comply fully with the provisions of MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, and to authorize the noncriminal disposition of the infraction set
forth above pursuant to the civil infraction procedure set forth therein, the
provisions of which shall be controlling in all instances in any case in which
the enforcement officer elects to proceed with the noncriminal disposition
of an alleged violation of any bylaw.
§ 161-4. Enforcement.
In addition to police officers, who shall in all cases be considered enforcing
persons for the purpose of this provision, the municipal personnel charged
with enforcing a particular bylaw or regulation, if any, shall also be
enforcing persons for such bylaw or regulation. Each day during which a
violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 161-1 CHARTER § 161-4
C:139

ARTICLE II
Board of Health Regulations
[Adopted 1996 ATM by Art. 25 (Art. 72, § 1, of the General Bylaws)]
§ 161-5. Noncriminal disposition authorized.
Whoever violates any provisions of the rules and regulations of the
Board of Health may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as
provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. The noncriminal method of disposition
may be used for violations of any rule or regulation of the Board of
Health which is subject to a specific penalty. Without intending to limit
the foregoing, it is the intention of this section that the following rules
and regulations be included within the scope of this subsection, that the
specific penalties, as listed here, shall apply in such cases and that the
municipal personnel listed for each section, if any, shall be enforcing
persons for such section. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
A.
A violation of the following listed regulatory provisions may be dealt
with in a noncriminal manner as provided by Subsection A of this
section. Each day on which any violations exist shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.
Board of Health regulations regarding the sale and distribution of
tobacco in the Town of Marshfield:6
(a) Fine allowed: $150.
Enforcement agent: Board of Health, Director of Public Health,
or authorized Board of Health representative.
(b)
Fine schedule: first offense: $50; second offense: $100; third
and subsequent offense: $150.
(c)
(1)
B.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 670, Tobacco Control.
§ 161-5 CHARTER § 161-5
C:141
Chapter 170
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Committees, boards and other agencies — See
Ch. 52.
Personnel — See Ch. 188.
§ 161-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 161-5
C:142
ARTICLE I
Selectmen and Assessors
[Adopted 1970 ATM by Art. 26 (Art. 43 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 170-1. Offices not to be held by same person.
No person shall hold at one time the office of Selectman and Assessor in the
Town of Marshfield.
§ 170-2. When effective.
Said amendment to the bylaw to take effect with the Town election of 1971,
and as to the Town incumbents holding both offices, as their respective
terms expire.
§ 170-1 CHARTER § 170-2
C:143

ARTICLE II
Town Engineer
[Adopted 1971 STM by Art. 7 (Art. 42 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 170-3. Appointment. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The office of Town Engineer shall be under the jurisdiction of the Board of
Public Works. He shall be appointed annually by the Board of Public Works.
§ 170-3 CHARTER § 170-3
C:145

ARTICLE III
Use of Town-Owned Vehicles
[Adopted 4-23-1979 STM by Art. 15 (Art. 69 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 170-4. Personal use prohibited.
All personal use of Town-owned vehicles is expressly prohibited except
where specifically authorized in writing by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 170-4 CHARTER § 170-4
C:147

ARTICLE IV
Indemnification of Retired Police Officers and Firefighters
[Adopted 2000 STM by Art. 2 (Art. 77 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 170-5. Medical expenses and charges.
§ 170-6. Construal of provisions.
The above article should read he/she, his/hers, widow/widower, where it
states "he, his and widow."
The Town shall, upon written application by any of its police officers or
firefighters retired either before or after the passage of this bylaw or,
in the event of the death of any such police officer or firefighter, upon
written application by his widow or, if he leaves no widow, by his next
of kin, indemnify, out of any funds appropriated for the purposes of this
bylaw, such police officer or firefighter or, in the event of his death,
his widow, or if he leaves no widow, his next of kin, for all reasonable
hospital, medical and surgical, chiropractic, nursing, pharmaceutical,
prosthetic and related expenses and reasonable charges for podiatry
incurred by such police officer or firefighter after his retirement;
provided, however, that no person shall be indemnified under this bylaw
unless the Board of Selectmen shall, upon receipt from the applicant of
due proof, certify:
That the expenses for which indemnification is sought were the
natural and proximate result of the disability for which the police
officer or firefighter was retired;
(1)
That such expenses were incurred after the Town Meeting approval
of this bylaw;
(2)
That the hospital, medical and surgical, chiropractic, nursing,
pharmaceutical, prosthetic and related expenses and reasonable
charges for podiatry to which such expenses relate were rendered
within six months before the filing of the application;
(3)
That such expenses were in no ways attributable to the use by the
police officer or firefighter of any intoxicating liquor or drug or to
his being gainfully employed after retirement or to any other willful
act or conduct on his part; and
(4)
(5) That such expenses are reasonable under all the circumstances.
A.
Provided further, that indemnification hereunder shall be limited to
those expenses and charges not covered under any applicable
insurance policy, medical service plan or health maintenance contract.
B.
§ 170-5 CHARTER § 170-6
C:149

ARTICLE V
Drug Testing
[Adopted April 2004 ATM by Art. 17 (Art. 80 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 170-7. Applicants for Town employment.
All persons seeking employment with the Town of Marshfield, with the
exception of persons to be employed by the School Department, shall be
subject to the following requirements:
The applicant shall participate in the Town-approved pre-employment
screening for illegal narcotics.
A.
The applicant must complete any and all documents mandated by the
Payroll and/or Human Resources Department, including the designated
employment application.
B.
§ 170-7 CHARTER § 170-7
C:151
Chapter 180
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 16.
Firearms and hunting — See Ch. 98.
Junk — See Ch. 134.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 184.
Smoking — See Ch. 232.
§ 170-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 170-7
C:152
ARTICLE I
Police Regulations
[Adopted as Art. 7 of the General Bylaws]
§ 180-1. Hawking in public streets.
No person shall stand in any public street for the purpose of hawking or
selling any article or for the exercise of any business or calling, after being
requested to desist therefrom by any police officer of the Town.
§ 180-2. Obstruction of public ways. [Amended 1980 ATM by Art.
37; 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
No person or persons shall stand in a group or near each other on any way,
sidewalk, or seawall, or park any vehicle on any sidewalk, way or other
place to which the public has a right of access in such a manner as to
obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles, and any such person or
persons shall at once move on an order of a police officer or special police
officer, and any such person or persons after refusing or neglecting to move
on such order may be arrested without a warrant by any police officer or
special police officer. Any person who violates this bylaw shall be fined $100
for each offense.
§ 180-3. Disorderly conduct. [Amended 7-14-1966 STM by Art. 5]
No person shall behave in a rude, indecent or disorderly manner or use any
indecent, profane, insolent or insulting language, make threats or use other
language tending to create a breach of the peace in any public place, any
street or sidewalk or place to which the public has a right of access in the
Town or upon any doorstep, portico or other projection from any house or
building or in any other place within audible distance of any dwelling, house
or other building thereon.
§ 180-4. Leaving materials on public ways overnight.
No persons shall leave any wagon, cart, or other vehicle, wood, coal, or
other articles in any street, way or sidewalk, and suffer the same to remain
overnight without maintaining a sufficient light over or near the same,
through the night to protect travelers from danger.
§ 180-5. Horses and livestock on sidewalks. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 10]
No person shall drive any horse, cattle or swine, or permit the same while
under his care to go upon any sidewalk, or suffer any horse to remain
hitched across any sidewalk so as to cause injury to person or property, or
to obstruct the safe and convenient passing of persons lawfully using the
same.
§ 180-1 CHARTER § 180-6
C:153
§ 180-6. Deposit of garbage and refuse. [Amended 10-18-2004 STM
by Art. 5; 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
No person shall throw or deposit in the street, or on any sidewalk in any
public area, or any public way, or any park or other recreation area, or any
other Town land or property any ashes, dirt, rubbish or filth of any kind,
appliances, tires, television sets, computers, or any animal or vegetable
matter, except such material as may be used to prevent slipping. Any person
who violates this bylaw shall be fined $300 for each offense. Each day of a
continuing violation shall count as a separate offense.
§ 180-7. Indecent figures, obscene words and nuisances.
No person shall make any indecent figure or write any indecent or obscene
words upon any fence, building or structure in any public place, or commit
any nuisance upon any sidewalk, or against any tree, building, or structure
adjoining the same.
§ 180-8. Contents of cesspools and privies. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 10]
The contents of any sink, cesspool, or privy shall not be emptied on any
beach or into the sea adjacent to any beach in the Town but shall be
disposed of in the earth or otherwise as the Board of Health may by rules
provide, but apart from any dwelling house.
§ 180-9. Vehicles on beaches.
§ 180-10. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended 1980 ATM by Art. 36;
1992 ATM by Art. 54; 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages as defined in MGL c. 138, § 1,
whether in or upon a vehicle or on foot, while in or upon any public way or
any place to which the public has a right of access, or any place to which
the public has access as invitees or licensees, or any park or playground, or
beach, or seawall (nor carry or cause to be carried any alcoholic beverages
onto any park or playground, or beach, or seawall); nor shall any person
drink any alcoholic beverages while in or upon private land or private
building, or private structure, or private place without the consent of the
owners or person in lawful control thereof. Any police officer or special
No motor vehicle shall be operated on any beach in the Town of
Marshfield except emergency and agricultural or farm vehicles and
those vehicles authorized by special permission of the Police
Department. [Added 7-14-1966 STM by Art. 18; amended 1984
ATM by Art. 88]
A.
No vehicle shall be driven over the sand dunes, and vehicular access to
the Town beach shall be solely by routes established by the Selectmen,
marked by the Department of Public Works and enforced by the Police
Department. [Amended 1973 ATM by Art. 72]
B.
§ 180-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 180-10
C:154
police officer may arrest without a warrant any person found violating this
bylaw or who the police officer or special police officer has probable cause
to believe has violated this bylaw. Any person violating this bylaw shall be
fined $100 for each offense.
§ 180-11. Diving or swimming in boat channel prohibited.
No person shall dive or swim from any bridge or part thereof into a
navigable boat channel in the Town of Marshfield.
§ 180-10 CHARTER § 180-11
C:155

ARTICLE II
Peeping Toms
[Adopted 1957 ATM (Art. 6 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 180-12. Prohibited acts.
No person except an officer of the law in the lawful performance of his
duties shall enter upon the premises of another or upon any public property
with the intent of looking or peeping into the windows of a house or other
building, or of spying in any manner upon any person or persons therein.
§ 180-12 CHARTER § 180-12
C:157

ARTICLE III
Coasting
[Adopted March 1957 (Art. 23 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 180-13. Coasting in public streets or places.
There shall be no coasting in any public street or public place in the
Town except in such street or place as may be designated by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 180-13 CHARTER § 180-13
C:159

ARTICLE IV
Noise
[Adopted 1989 ATM by Art. 50 (Art. 65 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 180-14. Prohibited acts. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons occupying or having
charge of any building or premises or any part thereof in the Town,
other than that section of any establishment licensed under MGL c. 138
and c. 140, § 181, to cause or suffer or allow any unnecessary, loud,
excessive or unusual noises in the operation of any radio, phonograph
or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument, or in the
playing of any band, orchestra, musician or group of musicians, or in
the use of any device to amplify the aforesaid, or the making of loud
outcries, exclamations or other loud or boisterous noises or loud and
boisterous singing by any person or group of persons or in the use of
any device to amplify the aforesaid noise, where the noise is plainly
audible at a distance of 400 feet from the building, structure, vehicle
or premises in which or from which it is produced. The fact that the
noise is plainly audible at a distance of 400 feet from the vehicle or
premises from which it originates shall constitute prima facie evidence
of a violation of this bylaw.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons being present in or
about any building, dwelling, premises, shelter, boat or conveyance or
any part thereof, other than that section of any establishment licensed
under MGL c. 138 and c. 140, § 181, to cause or allow any loud,
unnecessary, excessive or unusual noises, including any loud,
unnecessary, excessive or unusual noises in the operation of any radio,
phonograph, or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument,
or reproducing device or instrument, or in the playing of any band,
orchestra, musician or group of musicians, or the making of loud
outcries, exclamation or other loud or boisterous noises or loud and
boisterous singing by any person or group of persons, or in the use of
any device to amplify the aforesaid noise, where the aforesaid noise is
plainly audible at a distance of 400 feet from the building, dwelling,
premises, shelter, boat, or conveyance in which it is produced. The
fact that the noise is plainly audible at a distance of 400 feet from the
premises from which it originates shall constitute prima facie evidence
of a violation of this bylaw. Any person shall be deemed in violation
of this bylaw who shall make or aid, or cause, or suffer, or allow, or
assist in the making of the aforesaid and described improper noises,
disturbance, or breach of the peace, and the presence of any person
or persons in or about the building, dwelling, premises, shelter, boat,
or conveyance or any part thereof during a violation of this bylaw shall
constitute prima facie evidence that they are a part of such violation.
B.
§ 180-14 CHARTER § 180-15
C:161
§ 180-15. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this bylaw shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $200 for each offense and may be arrested by a police officer
if violation is in his/her presence.
§ 180-15 MARSHFIELD CODE § 180-15
C:162
ARTICLE V
Public Consumption of Marijuana or Tetrahydrocannabinol
[Adopted 4-28-2014 ATM by Art. 10 (Art. 93 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 180-16. Restriction against public consumption.
No person shall ingest or otherwise use or consume marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in MGL c. 94C, § 1, as amended) other
than a qualifying patient with a valid medical certification of a debilitating
condition all as defined under state law while in or upon any street,
sidewalk, public way, footway or pathway, passageway, stairs, bridge, park,
playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing, public building,
schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any area owned by
or under the control of the Town; or in or upon any bus or other passenger
conveyance operated by a common carrier; or in any Town-owned vehicle;
or in any place accessible to the public. No person, including a qualifying
patient with a valid medical certification of a debilitating condition, as
defined under state law, shall smoke marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol in
any public place set forth herein.
§ 180-17. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
This bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity
including, but not limited to, enforcement by criminal indictment or
complaint pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21, or by noncriminal disposition
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, by the Board of Selectmen, the Town
Administrator, or their duly authorized agents, or any police officer. The
fine for violation of this bylaw shall be $300 for each offense. Any penalty
imposed under this bylaw shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed
under MGL c. 94C, § 32L.
§ 180-16 CHARTER § 180-17
C:163
Chapter 184
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 180-17 MARSHFIELD CODE § 180-17
C:164
ARTICLE I
Door-to-Door Solicitation
[Adopted 1-21-1957 (Art. 22 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 184-1. Intent.
This bylaw establishes registration requirements and specific operation
requirements for persons intending to engage in door-to-door solicitation
in the Town of Marshfield. The Bylaw is intended to protect citizens from
the perpetration of fraud or other crimes and to allow for reasonable
access to residents in their homes by persons or organizations who wish to
communicate either commercial or noncommercial messages.
§ 184-2. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PERMIT — The photo identification card issued to a permittee.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company,
associations, organizations, committee or other such entity.
REGISTRATION — The document given to the organization, corporation,
company, association or committee for solicitation.
SOLICIT or SOLICITATION —
§ 184-3. Registration and permit requirements.
There shall be two types of filings required, an organization solicitation
registration and an individual solicitation permit.
§ 184-4. Organization solicitation registration.
Includes any one or more of the following activities:
Seeking to sell or to obtain orders for the purchase of goods,
wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, or services of any kind, character
or description.
(1)
Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type of publication.
(2)
A.
This bylaw shall not apply to persons soliciting solely for religious,
charitable or political purposes.
B.
Every organization intending to engage in door-to-door solicitation in
the Town of Marshfield must register with the Police Chief using the
organization solicitation registration form available at the Town Clerk's
office. The Police Chief shall have 20 days to approve the registration
for such solicitation or notify the applicant that the registration is
denied.
A.
§ 184-1 CHARTER § 184-4
C:165
§ 184-5. Individual solicitation permit.
§ 184-6. Basis for denial of registration.
§ 184-7. Basis for denial of permit.
The organization registrant is obligated to inform the Chief of Police
as to the areas of Town in which its agents will be soliciting each day
solicitation is to take place. Where solicitation will occur after 6:00
p.m., the registrant will inform the Chief of Police of the specific streets
on which the intended solicitation or canvassing is to occur.
B.
Each individual who seeks to solicit must complete an individual
solicitation permit application form and provide a passport-sized
photograph to be used for the permit badge.
A.
Upon approval, the Chief shall cause an individual permit, with picture
identification, to issue within five business days. The permit issued is
nontransferable and must be displayed at all times while the permittee
is conducting business.
B.
Upon request, the permittee shall show his/her permit to a police
officer. The permit shall be valid for no more than six months from the
date of issue. The organization registrant shall pay a processing fee of
$5 per badge issued. The Police Chief, for good cause shown, may waive
this fee.
C.
The Chief of Police may refuse to register an organization which has
been charged with fraud or deceptive or misleading advertising or
is under investigation by the Attorney General's Consumer Fraud
Prevention Division, until such charge or investigation is disposed of
and the organization found not culpable.
A.
No registration shall issue to any organization that the Police Chief
determines has violated this bylaw; no registration shall issue to any
organization if the Police Chief determines that the registration form
is incomplete; no registration shall issue if the Police Chief determines
that the application contains any fraudulent or untruthful statements.
B.
No permit shall issue if the applicant for the permit has ever been
convicted of a felony, or any one or more of the following
misdemeanors:
(1) Assault and battery;
Breaking and entering a building or ship with intent to commit a
misdemeanor;
(2)
(3) Larceny;
(4) Shoplifting, cheating by check;
(5) Unlawful or fraudulent use of credit cards;
A.
§ 184-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 184-7
C:166
§ 184-8. Posted property.
No person may enter any residential property for the purpose of solicitation
which is posted "No Solicitation." Such signage must be located near the
main entrance of the property to be entered and have letters at least one
inch in size. Entering such posted property shall be cause for permit and/or
registration revocation.
§ 184-9. Misrepresentation of endorsement by Town.
No person having received a registration or a permit shall represent to the
public that the same constitutes an endorsement or approval by the Town
or its officials.
§ 184-10. Suspension of permit.
Should a permittee be arrested and charged with a crime that is alleged to
have occurred in the course of conducting business under the permit, the
permit shall be automatically suspended. Such suspension shall last until
the resolution of the criminal proceedings. Should the permittee be found
guilty of the offense, the permit shall be revoked and no subsequent permit
shall be issued.
§ 184-11. Revocation of permit or registration.
Upon determination by the Chief of Police that a permittee has been
convicted of a felony or an above-named misdemeanor the permit shall be
revoked and returned to the Police Chief within three business days. Upon
a determination that a registration form contains untruthful or misleading
information, or that the registrant has been convicted of fraud or found
(6) Unlawful taking of money;
(7) Stealing or poisoning of a dog;
(8) Buying, receiving or concealing stolen goods;
(9) Deceptive advertising;
(10)Making or publishing false statements;
(11)Destruction or injury of a building;
(12)Trespass on property after prohibition;
Trespass with internal combustion engine or source of mechanical
power.
(13)
No permit shall issue to any person who has violated any provision
of this bylaw; no permit shall issue if the Chief determines that the
individual permit application form is incomplete; no permit shall issue
if the Chief determines that the individual permit application form
contains any untruthful or fraudulent statement.
B.
§ 184-7 CHARTER § 184-11
C:167
by the Attorney General's office to have violated any consumer protection
law or regulation, the registration and any permits issued under that
registration shall be revoked. All revoked permits must be turned in to the
Police Department within three days of notice by the Chief to the registrant
or permittee. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this bylaw and
each day the permit is not turned in shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 184-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who commits an unlawful act as described in this bylaw shall
be punished by a fine of $100 per outstanding permit, per day. The Board
of Selectmen may also seek civil injunctive relief in any court of competent
jurisdiction against an organization registrant and/or individual solicitation
permittee to restrain violations of the provisions of this bylaw.
§ 184-13. Appeals.
Any person or organization that is denied registration or permit or whose
registration or permit has been revoked may appeal by filing a written
notice of appeal with the Board of Selectmen. Such appeal must be filed
within five days after receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The Board
of Selectmen shall hear the appeal at its next scheduled meeting after the
filing of the written notice of appeal. The Board of Selectmen must issue a
decision within 21 days of the filing of the appeal.
§ 184-11 MARSHFIELD CODE § 184-13
C:168
ARTICLE II
Peddler's License
[Adopted 3-7-1960 (Art. 30 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 184-14. License from Board of Selectmen required.
There shall be no peddling of commercial goods in the Town of Marshfield
unless a peddler's license shall have first been obtained from the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 184-14 CHARTER § 184-14
C:169
Chapter 188
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 170.
§ 188-1. Authorization and application.
Pursuant to the authority contained in MGL c. 41, §§ 108A and 108C,
there shall be established plans which may be amended from time to
time by vote of the Town at a Town Meeting:
Classifying positions in the service of the Town, other than those
filled by popular election, those under the direction and control
of the School Committee, those employees covered by a collective
bargaining agreement, and certain positions for which the
compensation is on a fee basis or the incumbents of which render
intermittent or casual service, into groups and classes doing
substantially similar work or having substantially equal
responsibilities; [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
(1)
Authorizing a compensation plan for positions in the classification
plan; and
(2)
Providing for the administration of said classification and
compensation plans.
(3)
A.
Nothing in any of the Town of Marshfield's personnel rules, policies,
procedures or other documents relating to employment with the Town
of Marshfield ("the Town") creates any express or implied contract
or guarantee of continued employment for a specific term. No past
practices or procedures, whether oral or written, form any express
or implied agreement or contract to continue such practices or
procedures. No promises or assurances, whether written or oral, which
are contrary to or inconsistent with the limitations set forth in this
subsection create any contract of employment unless:
(1) The terms are put in writing;
(2) The document is labeled "contract";
(3) The document states the duration of employment; and
(4) The document is signed by the Board of Selectmen.
B.
The Town, acting exclusively through the Town Administrator, reserves
the right to add, change or discontinue any aspect of its personnel
policies and benefit programs and to revise or modify provisions of this
C.
§ 184-14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-1
C:170
§ 188-2. Personnel Board.
bylaw with proper notice provided to the Town's collective bargaining
groups.
Conflicting provisions contained in collective bargaining agreements,
to the extent required by law, shall supersede these policies. Where
collective bargaining agreements are silent, these policies and
regulations may be applied. If there is a conflict between language
in the Employee Personnel Bylaw and language in an official plan
document (such as the group health insurance policy) the official plan
document governs.
D.
Subject to the Town Administrator's review and approval, departmental
regulations that establish standards of performance, employee conduct,
or action shall continue to be applicable. Employees of the Town that
are not otherwise covered by a collective bargaining agreement,
employment agreement, or state civil service statutes are at-will
employees. Either party may terminate the employment relationship at
any time with good cause, with or without notice. The term "cause"
shall include but not be limited to the following: incapacity other than
temporary illness, inefficiency, insubordination and conduct
unbecoming the office.
E.
This bylaw is intended to be in accordance with all applicable state and
federal laws. In the event that these policies are inconsistent with the
applicable state or federal law, the applicable law shall apply.
F.
The membership of the Personnel Board (hereafter "the Board") shall
be appointed by the Board of Selectmen per the Town Charter and
subject to MGL c. 268A as follows: one member to be appointed to serve
for one year, two members to be appointed to serve for two years, and
two members to serve three years. At the expiration of each term of
office, appointments or reappointments thereafter shall be made in the
same manner for terms of three years. Each term of office shall expire
on June 30. In the event of a vacancy occurring in the membership
of the Personnel Board, the position shall be filled within 30 days in
the same manner and by the same authority as in the original method
of selection and for the remainder of such unexpired term of office.
The members of the Personnel Board shall not be employees or elected
officials of the Town. It is preferred that members of the Personnel
Board have a background in human resources, public administration
or a related field. The Board shall elect a Chairperson from its
membership who shall have the power to call meetings and who shall
preside over such meetings. Any three members shall constitute a
quorum for transaction of business. A majority vote of such a Board
shall prevail unless there is a bare quorum, in which event there must
be a unanimous vote. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
A.
The Board is responsible for the review and recommendations of
changes to the Town's Personnel Bylaw and the establishment of polices
B.
§ 188-1 CHARTER § 188-2
C:171
§ 188-3. Administration of classification and compensation plan.
pertaining to the provision of human resource services to employees
covered by the provisions of this bylaw subject to the approval of Town
Meeting.
General scope. This section shall apply to all employees in the service
of the Town of Marshfield, unless covered by individually negotiated
employment agreements or collectively bargained contracts in
accordance with MGL c. 41, § 108N, between the Town and certain
employees. It is the policy of the Town to develop and maintain a
compensation plan that is competitive with the marketplace enabling
the Town to recruit and retain a quality workforce. External salary data
is collected by the Town Administrator or designee on a regular basis
at least every three years from comparable communities as determined
from the geographical recruitment area as well as operational and
demographic criteria on a position-by-position basis. The Town may
make changes to the salary ranges for each grade level as it deems
necessary in order to maintain competitiveness with the marketplace.
A.
Administration. The Town Administrator or his/her qualified designee
shall be responsible for the administration of the classification and
compensation plan.
B.
Job descriptions. The Town Administrator shall maintain written
descriptions of the jobs or positions in the plan describing the essential
characteristics, requirements and general duties. The descriptions shall
not be interpreted as either complete or restrictive and employees shall
continue to perform any duties assigned by an employee's superior(s).
C.
Salary and wage review. The Town Administrator shall, from time to
time not to exceed three years, review the wage and salary schedules
of all positions subject to the plan in order to keep informed as to pay
rates and policies outside the service of the Town, and be in a position
to recommend to the Town any action deemed desirable to maintain a
fair and equitable (competitive) pay level.
D.
Job description review. The Town Administrator shall review the duties
of all employees subject to the classification plan on a regular basis.
The Town Administrator upon receipt of substantiating data may add
a new position tentatively to the classification schedule, or reclassify
an existing position to a different group, subject to the subsequent
ratification of this action by formal amendment of this bylaw by
approval of Town Meeting.
E.
New classifications. The Town Administrator shall establish the
classification schedule for all newly created positions in accordance
with the classification and compensation plan, as approved at a Special
or Annual Town Meeting.
F.
§ 188-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-3
C:172
§ 188-4. Titles of positions.
§ 188-5. Personnel records.
Reports. The Town Administrator shall, when deemed necessary, in
advance of each Annual Town Meeting at which recommendations of
the Board will be considered, prepare a printed report for the
information of Town Meeting and Town employees. The Town
Administrator shall make an annual report in writing to the Board of
Selectmen on or before January 15 of each year.
G.
The title of each position in the classification plan shall be the official
title for all positions and shall be used to designate the position in all
Town payrolls, budget estimates and official records and reports, and
in every connection involving personnel and fiscal processes, but any
abbreviation or code symbol approved by the Town Administrator may
be used in lieu of the title to designate the classification in any such
connection.
A.
Position titles shall be interpreted to be descriptive only and not
restrictive. They shall be construed solely as a means of distinguishing
one position from another and not as prescribing what the duties or
responsibilities of any position shall be, or as modifying, or in any
way affecting, the power of any administrative authority, as otherwise
existing, to appoint, to assign duties to, or to direct and control the
work of any employee under the jurisdiction of such authority.
B.
The Town Administrator shall keep such employment records of all
employees of the Town, including the name, age, date of employment,
classification, department in which employed, and other information as
the Town shall deem necessary. Department heads shall furnish such
information as shall be requested for this purpose.
A.
The official employee personnel files are kept in the office of the Board
of Selectmen and shall be the official employee personnel files of the
Town of Marshfield and shall include all original documentation
pertaining to each employee in accordance with applicable state and/
or federal regulations. Department heads may maintain files supporting
departmental actions. In accordance with the state's Public Records
Law,7 official employee personnel files are confidential records that are
accessible by the Town Administrator, and are not available for public
inspection or copying. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
B.
Current and/or former Town employees have the right to examine
their own personnel files and may, upon written request submitted to
the office of the Town Administrator, receive a copy of any records
contained in their personnel file. No personnel files may be taken out
of the Town Administrator's office without the approval of the Town
Administrator.
C.
7. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 66.
§ 188-3 CHARTER § 188-5
C:173
§ 188-6. Compensation plan funding. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
Compensation adjustments provided for in this bylaw shall be subject to the
availability of funds as appropriated by Town Meeting.
§ 188-7. Civil service. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
No provisions that are contained in this Personnel Bylaw shall be construed
to be in conflict with MGL c. 31.
§ 188-8. When effective.
These bylaws shall take effect upon adoption by the Town at the Annual
Town Meeting.
§ 188-9. Classification and compensation plan.
The personnel records include all original information pertinent to
an employee's employment with the Town including the employment
application, payroll deductions, performance appraisals, leave records,
special commendations, disciplinary actions, education and training
certificates and employee personnel action form. Employee medical
records will be kept separate from all other personnel file information.
It is the responsibility of employees to inform their department head
of changes in name, address, telephone number, marital status and
person(s) to be notified in the event of an emergency and to notify
the Town Administrator's office and the Treasurer/Collector's office of
changes to an employee's personal status to ensure proper insurance
coverage.
D.
In accordance with MGL c. 149, § 52C, as amended, the Town will notify
an employee within 10 days of placing information in an employee's
personnel record that is, has been or may be used to negatively affect
an employee's qualification for employment, promotion, transfer, or
additional compensation or subject (the employee) to disciplinary
action. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
E.
Development of the classification plan. It is the policy of the Town to
classify positions based on the application of a position rating system
that consists of a set of universal position rating criteria. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
A.
Annual salary plan adjustments. Annual salary plan guidelines are used
to administer individual salaries throughout the fiscal year. Based upon
external market data, budget parameters, and the Town's ability to pay,
funds are provided for employee compensation purposes throughout
the year. It is the general policy of the Town of Marshfield to make
salary adjustments at the beginning of each fiscal year as well as during
the fiscal year based on an employee's years of service in a position as
B.
§ 188-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-9
C:174
well as merit. An employee's movement or growth within a salary range
is not and should not be considered an automatic natural progression.
Maintenance of the compensation plan. The Town Administrator is
responsible for overseeing the administration of the Town's wage and
compensation plan(s) after adoption by the Annual Town Meeting. The
Town Administrator may correct individual discrepancies in salaries in
compliance with the classification and compensation plan.
C.
Salary adjustments.
Starting salary; salary ranges. [Amended 10-27-2014 STM by
Art. 3]
Starting salary. It is the policy of the Town of Marshfield to hire
new employees between the minimum and mid-point "hiring
range" of a salary range in each classification level as
described in § 188-11, Schedule A of the Personnel Bylaw. All
employees are to be paid within the salary range in each
classification level.
It is understood that the Town reserves the right to hire
a new employee above the "hiring range" based on the
qualifications of an employee as well as the market
conditions.
[1]
Employees are eligible for annual step increases within
the hiring range within each grade level subject to the
appropriation of funds. An employee's progression above
the fourth step in each grade level is not automatic, but
is based on both an employee's performance and years of
service in a position.
[2]
(a)
Salary ranges. It is the policy of the Town of Marshfield to
establish and maintain salary ranges that are competitive
within the marketplace on a position-by-position basis. Each
salary range is developed in a defined, consistent manner as
follows:
Salary range mid-point: the average mid-point of survey
data collected for all positions within each grade level.
[1]
Salary range minimum: a fixed percentage of the salary
range mid-point.
[2]
Salary range maximum: a fixed differential greater than
the salary range minimum.
[3]
(b)
(1)
Promotion.
(a) An employee may be promoted in two ways:
(2)
D.
§ 188-9 CHARTER § 188-9
C:175
Organizational promotion. An employee may be appointed
to a different position that is classified in a higher pay
band than the position is currently assigned; or
[1]
Job revaluation/reclassification. Duties and responsibilities
of an employee's job may be expanded and, as a result,
the position requires an employee to have additional
knowledge, skill, and/or ability, etc. Based on the
application of the Town's position rating system, the
position is assigned a new classification level. An employee
whose position has been assigned to a higher salary range
should be treated as having received a promotion at the
next common review date.
[2]
A promotional increase for a regular, full-time employee should
advance an employee to a pay rate in the new salary range
that exceeds an employee's current rate of pay by at least 3%.
Factors such as length of service and budget considerations
may affect the amount of compensation.
(b)
Step increase. If an employee is eligible for a step increase, he
or she shall be paid annually and on the anniversary date of
appointment to a position. It is understood that step increases are
not automatic but are subject to merit, years of service in a position
and the appropriation of funds by Town Meeting.
(3)
Temporary promotion. Employees filling in for a senior person for
a period of time greater than two weeks may receive special pay
consideration during or after the completion of the assignment. In
such instances, consideration should be given to the length of the
assignment, level of performance, and job level of the more senior
person.
(4)
Demotion. A demotion takes place when a position is permanently
reclassified or an employee is assigned to a position in a lower
pay band. This action may be either voluntary or involuntary. An
individual's salary may or may not be reduced upon demotion or
reduction in job classification at the discretion of the Town. An
employee's position in the new salary range will affect future salary
increases.
(5)
Merit compensation.
It is the responsibility of the Town Administrator to develop
and implement an employee performance management system
for department heads that is uniformly applied to those
employees covered by this bylaw throughout the organization.
(a)
Consideration for merit salary increases will be given at least
once each year subject to the availability of funds. To be
eligible for a merit increase, an employee must have been
actively working for the Town (in an active pay status) for at
(b)
(6)
§ 188-9 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-9
C:176
least 30 of the 52 weeks of the relevant performance review
cycle. Merit increases are calculated using the annual
employee's salary in effect immediately preceding the effective
date of the merit increase. Merit increases are directly linked
to the employee's overall performance, provided that the
employee's current salary does not exceed the maximum of the
position's salary range.
Merit performance reviews ensure that eligible employees are
considered for merit pay increases but does not guarantee
that an individual employee will receive an increase. A merit
increase is a salary increase earned by an employee whose
performance has met or exceeded the requirements of the
position. An employee who receives an overall performance
rating of unsatisfactory is not eligible for a salary increase until
the level of performance is improved.
(c)
Notwithstanding anything contained herein, employees at Step
4 at their respective grades shall be eligible for additional
compensation subject to appropriation with 50% of increase
based on merit and 50% based on years of service. [Added
10-27-2014 STM by Art. 3]
(d)
Managing performance. It is the policy of the Town of Marshfield to
compensate employees based on an employee's years of service in
a position and performance. It is the principal responsibility of the
Town Administrator to manage the performance evaluation process
in accordance with the performance management guidelines and
performance management cycle as approved by the Board of
Selectmen.
(7)
Payment at a listed grade. All employees shall be paid at a wage
within the minimum-maximum salary range for the grade level
established for each position in accordance with the classification
schedule in § 188-11 of this bylaw.
(8)
Pay period/paydays. Normally employees are paid weekly (or
biweekly), with the payroll period ending on Saturday and checks
available on Friday. In the event that a payday occurs on a holiday,
payroll checks will be distributed on the nearest preceding
workday. Existing employees may elect to have paychecks
deposited by the Town through the ACH system directly to their
personal account(s). All new employees hired by the Town shall
be required to participate in the Town's payroll direct deposit
program. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
(9)
Introductory hiring period. All new employees must serve an
introductory hiring period of nine months' duration. An employee
may be terminated by the Town during the introductory hiring
period or at any time with or without cause, with or without notice.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
(10)
§ 188-9 CHARTER § 188-9
C:177
§ 188-10. Amendments.
Payroll deductions. Mandatory payroll deductions are made
depending upon the number of exemptions claimed for federal and
state income taxes and retirement contributions. Optional payroll
deductions are made based on employee authorization for health
insurance, life insurance, dental insurance, deferred compensation,
and for other contributions consistent with the law and as approved
by Town Meeting. Pursuant to the applicable federal or state law
or court-ordered wage assignments, the Town may be obliged to
retain and pay over to a third party a portion of an employee's
earnings.
(11)
Section 125 plan. The Town offers a pre-tax program for employees
who work 20 hours or more which excludes from federal income
tax purposes expenses for medical, child care or dependent care.
(12)
Unemployment compensation. Commonwealth of Massachusetts
law requires the Town to reimburse the State of Massachusetts
for unemployment benefits paid to former employees of the Town.
It is the responsibility of individuals to file claims with the State
Division of Employment and Training. The Town reserves the right
to contest claims for unemployment compensation.
(13)
Workers' compensation. To preserve rights under the law, an
employee must notify his or her department head immediately or
as soon as possible if involved in an on-the-job accident that results
in personal injury. Employees injured on the job are protected
against loss of income and medical expenses by provisions of the
Massachusetts Workers' Compensation Act.8 Employees receiving
workers' compensation benefits may, upon request, receive
vacation, sick or personal leave accrued at the time of injury to
supplement workers' compensation benefits up to the amount of
base wages the employee received each week before the injury
occurred.
(14)
Retirement system. As a condition of employment, all permanent
employees who are regularly scheduled to work and earn more
than $5,000 annually are required to join the Plymouth County
Retirement System. Retirement applications must be made by an
employee in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Plymouth County Retirement System.
(15)
Death benefit. Upon the death of a Town employee who is on
the Town's payroll, his or her estate or designated beneficiary
is eligible to receive accrued vacation and/or sick leave, in
accordance with the provisions of this bylaw.
(16)
8. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 152.
§ 188-9 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-10
C:178
§ 188-11. Position classes and compensation schedules.
The following schedules constitute the classification and compensation
plans of the Town.
Schedule A
General Government Positions
Administrative Assistant 11
Assistant Veterans Agent 11
COA Van Driver 11
Office Manager [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 10]
10
Payroll/Benefits Manager 10
Project Coordinator for Volunteers
[Amended 4-25-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
8
COA Social Services Coordinator 11
Beach Administrator 8
Project Engineer 14
Assessor/Appraiser 15
Council on Aging Director [Amended
4-25-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
14
Library Director 15
Town Planner 14
Town Engineer 14
Executive Secretary 8
Senior Secretary 8
Finance Director [Added 11-4-2013
STM by Art. 10]
Assistant Facilities Manager [Added
10-27-2014 STM by Art. 3]
12
Energy Manager [Added 10-27-2014
STM by Art. 3]
10
It shall be Town policy to amend the provisions of the Personnel Bylaw
and classification plan at either a Special or Annual Town Meeting.
A.
The Board of Selectmen may, from time to time of its own motion, hold
a hearing to consider any proposed amendment to this bylaw. In the
event said proposed amendment is supported by an affirmative vote of
a majority of the members, the Board shall proceed according to the
preceding subsection to insert an article in the warrant and to report
its recommendations to the Advisory Board.
B.
§ 188-10 CHARTER § 188-11
C:179
Schedule A
General Government Positions
Deputy DPW Superintendent [Added
4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 9]
15
Schedule A
Compensation Plan
FY2016 - 2% - 52.2 weeks
26.1 Biweekly [Amended 10-27-2014 STM by Art. 3; 4-25-2016 STM
by Art. 15]
Annual
Grade Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4
4 $28,958 $30,115 $31,317 $32,568
5 $31,944 $33,219 $34,549 $35,921
6 $35,237 $36,645 $38,114 $39,639
7 $38,869 $40,417 $42,041 $43,718
8 $42,864 $44,586 $46,365 $48,218
9 $48,218 $49,175 $51,139 $53,193
10 $52,168 $54,247 $56,422 $58,672
11 $57,541 $59,841 $62,224 $64,716
12 $63,473 $66,005 $68,640 $71,395
13 $69,823 $72,601 $75,506 $78,536
14 $76,516 $79,575 $82,751 $86,057
15 $84,163 $87,529 $91,026 $94,664
Schedule B
Part-Time and Seasonal Positions
Animal Inspector [Amended
4-25-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
$2,500 per year
Assistant Animal Control Officer
[Amended 4-25-2016 ATM by Art.
9]
$11 to $18 per hour
Senior/First Assistant Harbormaster
[Amended 4-25-2016 ATM by Art.
9]
$15 to $20 per hour
Assistant Harbormaster [Amended
4-25-2016 ATM by Art. 9]
$10 to $18 per hour
Assistant Shellfish Officer $6 to $7 per hour
§ 188-11 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-11
C:180
Schedule B
Part-Time and Seasonal Positions
Lifeguard $9.50 to $12 per hour; $0.25
increase per year returning
Beach Attendant $8.50 to $11.50 per hour; $0.25
increase per year returning
Beach Supervisor $11 to $16 per hour; $0.25
increase per year returning
Call Firefighter $1,000 per year
Clerical Assistant (COA) $12 to $19 per hour
Custodian (COA) $16 to $19 per hour
Intern [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM
by Art. 10]
$10 to $15 per hour
Kitchen/Activities Assistant (COA) $9 to $12 per hour
Police Patrolman (intermittent)
[Amended 4-25-2016 ATM by Art.
9]
$15 to $20 per hour
Police Matron [Amended 4-25-2016
ATM by Art. 9]
$12.50 to $15 per hour (3 hour
minimum)
Program/Activities Coordinator (COA) $13 to $19 per hour
Recreation Site Coordinator $14 to $24 per hour
Recreation Group Leader $8 to $14 per hour
Recreation Assistant Leader $8 to $9.50 per hour
Recreation Nurse $25 to $26 per hour
Recreation Lead Teacher $17 to $22 per hour
Recreation Sports and Playground
Instructor
$8 to $11.50 per hour
Recreation After School Sports
Instructor
$26 per hour
Sealer of Weights and Measures $5,000 per year
Wiring Inspector Grade 8
Plumbing Inspector Grade 8
§ 188-12. Overtime compensation.
It is the policy of the Town of Marshfield that all work be accomplished
within the normal workday. On occasion, the Town may determine that
overtime is necessary to complete the assigned work beyond the normal
workday. Each position authorized as listed in § 188-11 of this bylaw
shall be designated as exempt or non-exempt from the payment of
overtime in accordance with the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards
A.
§ 188-11 CHARTER § 188-12
C:181
§ 188-13. Longevity pay.
Years of Service Completed Earned Longevity Pay
Employed upon completion of 5
years
$100
Employed 5 years up to 19 years $20 for each additional year
Employed 20 years $500
Employed more than 20 years $100 for each additional year
This sum is to be paid annually within one month of the employee's date of
hire. Full-time employees are eligible for longevity. Part-time employees
that work the full year (52 weeks) are eligible for longevity on a pro rata
basis.
§ 188-14. Paid holidays.
Act (FLSA). Vacation days, sick days, and holidays are counted as time
worked in the computation of overtime. For further details, please see
the FLSA Guidelines in the Addendum Section of this bylaw.9
All overtime work must be authorized by the Town Administrator in
advance of said employee being required to work beyond the normal
workday. A non-exempt employee shall receive a rate of pay for hours
worked beyond 40 hours per work week that is equal to 1 1/2 times an
employee's normal rate of pay. Documentation of overtime work shall
be submitted by the employee's department head to the Treasurer/
Collector. Exempt employees may receive compensation in the form of
compensatory time off for work required beyond 40 hours in a work
week. An employee is required to take compensatory time off by the end
of the fiscal year in which time is earned. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM
by Art. 10]
B.
Exempt positions under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) are not
eligible for overtime compensation. These positions are expected to
work the hours necessary to complete their respective duties.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
C.
Non-exempt positions shall be paid overtime for work in excess of 40
hours in a work week in accordance with the provisions of the Fair
Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
D.
The following 12.5 days or dates, as proclaimed by the Governor or
the General Court of the commonwealth, shall be recognized as legal
holidays within the meaning of this bylaw on which days employees
shall be excused from all duty not required to maintain essential Town
services:
A.
9. Editor's Note: The addendum is on file at the office of the Town Administrator.
§ 188-12 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-14
C:182
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King's Birthday
Presidents' Day [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Patriots Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans' Day
Thanksgiving Day
Friday after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day
Half day before Christmas (taken on the working day prior to
Christmas holiday)
Every employee in full-time or continuous part-time employment shall
be entitled to these designated holidays on the following terms:
If paid on an hourly basis, an employee shall receive one day's pay
at his or her regular rate based on the number of hours regularly
worked on the day on which the designated holiday occurs.
(1)
If paid on a weekly, semi-monthly or annual basis, he or she shall
be granted each designated holiday without loss in pay which he or
she would have received if worked.
(2)
B.
Payment under the provisions of this section shall be made provided
the eligible employee shall have worked on the last regularly scheduled
working day prior to and the next regularly scheduled working day
following such holiday, or was in full pay status on such preceding and
following days in accordance with other provisions of this bylaw.
C.
An employee in continuous employment, occupying a position in other
than supervisory or administrative position, that performs work on one
of the days designated in Subsection A shall be paid at his or her
regular rate in addition to the amount to which he or she is entitled
under Subsection B.
D.
An employee may be granted compensatory time off at the discretion of
the department head in lieu of payment for holidays.
E.
Whenever one of the holidays as set forth in Subsection A falls on
a Sunday, the following day shall be the legal holiday. Whenever one
of the holidays as set forth in Subsection A falls on a Saturday, the
previous day shall be the legal holiday.
F.
§ 188-14 CHARTER § 188-14
C:183
§ 188-15. Vacation leave.
Should any holiday fall on an employee's normal day off, Monday
through Friday, he or she shall be given holiday pay in accordance with
Subsection B(1).
G.
A regular full-time employee in continuous service shall be granted
vacation days with pay on the following basis. Part-time employees who
work the full year (52 weeks) are eligible for vacation leave on a pro
rata basis. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
Years of Service Completed Earned Vacation Time
Employed 6 months through 1
year
5 days
Employed 1 year through 4 years 10 days
Employed 5 years 15 days
Employed 10 years 20 days
Employed 20 years 25 days
A.
Vacations provided under Subsection A shall be requested by
employees in advance and scheduled at the discretion of the
department head at such a time that will cause the least interference
with the performance of the regular work.
B.
On an employee's fifth, 10th, and 20th anniversary he/she will be
entitled to a third, fourth, or fifth week (whichever is applicable) of
vacation, but only if said anniversary is between July 1 and December
31; otherwise, not until the following July 1 will the employee be
entitled to the third, fourth, or fifth week.
C.
Employees may bank up to two weeks of their earned vacation and
use it the following fiscal year with prior written approval of the Town
Administrator.
D.
Employees who are eligible for vacation under these rules who resign,
retire voluntarily or enter into the armed forces who give two weeks'
notice of their intention to resign/retire or enter the armed forces shall
be paid an amount equal to the vacation allowance as earned as of
the date of resignation/retirement and not granted in the vacation year
prior to such dismissal, resignation with notice, retirement or entrance
into the armed forces. In addition, payment shall be made for that
portion of vacation allowance earned in the vacation year during which
such dismissal, resignation with notice, retirement, or entrance into
the armed forces occurred up to the time of an employee's separation
from the payroll, said allowance to be one day for each full month of
continuous service completed subsequent to July 1.
E.
Absences on account of sickness in excess of that authorized under the
rules therefor or for personal reasons as provided for elsewhere may, at
the discretion of the department head, be charged to vacation leave.
F.
§ 188-14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-15
C:184
§ 188-16. Sick leave.
An employee shall be granted an additional day of vacation if, while on
vacation leave, a designated holiday occurs which falls on or is legally
observed in accordance with his or her regularly scheduled work week.
G.
Vacation allowances provided under the terms of this section will be
calculated on a twelve-month period commencing on July 1 and ending
on June 30 and these allowances must be taken in the twelve-month
period that immediately follows. In unusual circumstances, exceptions
may be granted by a department head. Such vacation shall attempt
to be granted by the department head that will cause the least
interference with the performance of the regular work of the Town.
H.
An employee shall not be allowed to work during his or her vacation
leave and be compensated with extra pay without the written approval
of the Town Administrator.
I.
The Town Administrator may approve up to 15 days of vacation leave
for persons hired in positions listed under Schedule A, General
Government. The determination for this vacation benefit shall be made
at the time the person is hired. The appointing authority shall send
a written notice of such determination to the Town Accountant and
to the Personnel Board. The future accrual of vacation time shall be
in accordance with the schedule as described in Subsection A of this
section.
J.
An employee in continuous employment who has completed at least 30
weeks of service following his or her date of hire shall be allowed 12
days' leave with pay each calendar year or one day for each month
thereof, if in any fiscal year an employee's employment is less than
30 weeks, provided such leave is caused by sickness or injury or by
exposure to contagious disease.
A.
An employee in continuous employment shall be credited with the
unused portion of leave granted under Subsection A up to 150 days.
B.
An employee with five years of continuous service may, if absent due to
a prolonged illness or injury, borrow additional sick leave in an amount
equal to that which had been accrued at the outset of the calendar year
up to an aggregate total of 120 days. If the amount of sick leave credit
provided by the foregoing is about to be exhausted, an employee may
make application to the Town Administrator for borrowing additional
sick leave time. Such application shall be made to the Town
Administrator who is authorized to grant such additional allowance
as he or she may determine to be equitable after reviewing all
circumstances, including the employee's attendance and performance
record prior to conditions supporting a request for the additional
allowance. Borrowed leave shall be repaid to the Town at a minimum of
1/2 the rate of accrual outlined in Subsection A.
C.
§ 188-15 CHARTER § 188-16
C:185
§ 188-17. Bereavement leave.
Leave up to three days with pay may be allowed in the event of death
in an employee's immediate family (wife, husband, mother, father, child,
brother, sister, mother-in-law, father-in-law, and grandparents, grandchild,
aunt, uncle, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law, stepparent, stepsister or
stepbrother).
§ 188-18. Military leave. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The Town of Marshfield recognizes the patriotic service rendered by many
employees who belong to military reserve units. Therefore, military leave
Sick leave shall be granted to all non-exempt employees following
original hire date accrued at the rate of one day for each month.
Sick leave shall accumulate to a maximum of 150 days of sick leave
eligibility.
All full-time employees with five years full-time continuous service
and 50 accumulative sick days will be eligible for the following:
0 sick days used $300
1 sick day used $250
2 sick days used $200
3 sick days used $150
(1)
Sick leave will be determined from July 1 to June 30 and paid the
following fiscal year.
(2)
D.
Sick leave must be authorized by the department head and must be
reported on the Town's payroll forms.
E.
The Town may require a physician's certificate of illness to be submitted
by the employee at any time to his or her department head before leave
is granted under the provisions of this section. The certificate shall be
forwarded to the Town Administrator forthwith upon request.
F.
The Town Administrator may require a medical examination of any
employee who reports his or her inability to report for duty because
of illness. This examination shall be at the expense of the Town by a
physician appointed by the Town.
G.
Any employee hired by the Town prior to January 1, 1983, shall be
compensated in cash for all unused sick leave up to a maximum of
150 days when he or she is permanently separated from employment
as a result of retirement under the terms of the Plymouth County
Retirement Plan, or death. In the event of death, payment is made to
the estate of the employee. Payment shall be made for 100% of the
accumulated unused sick leave in the employee's account as of June 30,
1984, and for 50% of the accumulated unused sick leave after that up
to the maximum 150 days.
H.
§ 188-16 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-18
C:186
will be granted to employees in accordance with the provisions of state and/
or federal law. Employees are required to provide the Town Administrator
with written notice of any leave upon learning of any leave assignment.
Upon being released from service with the armed forces, such employee
shall be reemployed by the Town in the capacity in which formerly employed
at the time of departure, provided that such employee is physically and
mentally suited to perform the required duties and if such employee makes
an application to the Town Administrator's office for reemployment. Such
application must be made within 30 days following termination of armed
forces service, and if approved the employee must report for work as
instructed by the Town Administrator.
§ 188-19. Jury duty.
§ 188-20. Personal or emergency leaves of absence.
Personal or emergency leaves of absence with pay for up to three days per
year may be granted to full-time permanent employees with more than six
months' consecutive employment by an employee's department head. The
Town Administrator shall be notified in writing within seven days of such
leave. Extended leaves of absence without pay may be granted by the Town
Administrator.
§ 188-21. Small necessity leave. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
In accordance with MGL c. 149, § 52D, employees who are eligible
employees can take up to 24 hours of unpaid leave during a twelve-month
period to participate in school activities directly related to the educational
advancement of a son or daughter (such as parent-teacher conferences),
accompany a son or daughter of the employee to routine medical or dental
appointments, and accompany an elderly relative of the employee to routine
medical or dental appointments or appointments for other professional
services related to the elder's care. The 24 hours of leave provided by
this bylaw is in addition to the time provided by the FMLA. As with the
FMLA, the leave can be without pay or with use of paid leave if the
employee so elects. Unlike the FMLA, the small necessities leave may be
taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule. If the necessity for
leave under this section is foreseeable, the employee shall provide the
Employees required to serve on a jury shall promptly notify their
immediate supervisor. An employee called for jury duty shall be paid
by the Town for an amount equal to the difference between the
compensation paid for a normal working period and the amount paid by
the court, excluding allowance for travel. This request will be certified
by the Town Accountant upon presentation of a check or proper
evidence for monies received for jury duty.
A.
Any compensation received by an employee that is greater than $75
shall be returned to the Town.
B.
§ 188-18 CHARTER § 188-21
C:187
Town with not less than seven days' written notice before the date of
the leave is to begin. If the leave is not foreseeable, the employee shall
provide the department head or immediate supervisor with such notice as
is practicable.
§ 188-22. Education reimbursement; mileage reimbursement.
§ 188-23. Conflicts of interest.
Educational reimbursement. Educational assistance to defray the cost
of tuition, up to $500 per calendar year, may be granted to full-time
permanent Town employees with a minimum of one year's service
who are under the jurisdiction of the Personnel Classification and
Compensation Plan Bylaws. Such grants will be approved for joboriented,
college-level credit (undergraduate/graduate) educational
courses or for the maintenance of certifications that are required by
the Town. Requests for approval shall be made through the department
head prior to enrollment. Reimbursement will be made upon receipt of
proof of successful completion of the course or with an academic grade
of "B" or higher and presentation of receipted tuition bill. In instances
where a "letter" grade is not given, it is acceptable to provide proof of
completion of the course or not.
A.
Mileage reimbursement. In accordance with Internal Revenue Service
(IRS) regulations, employees will be reimbursed for use of personal
vehicles for Town-related business for those employees covered by this
bylaw. Reimbursement must be approved by an employee's department
head.
B.
In accordance with MGL c. 268A, the Town requires its employees to
avoid conflicts of interest between their obligations to the Town and an
employee's personal affairs. In accordance with state law, an employee
is required to successfully complete a conflict of interest test every two
years that is administered by the commonwealth, acknowledge receipt
of an annual summary and file the appropriate certifications with the
Town Clerk's office. No employee of the Town should have an economic
interest, position or relationship with any person, firm, or corporation
with which the Town does business, as would influence the actions
of such employee on behalf of the Town. The holding of an interest
in a supplier does not necessarily indicate a conflict of interest. The
disclosure of such holding in most instances may be enough to make
clear that such conflict exists. The determination of a conflict of interest
is the sole responsibility of the Town.
A.
The Town regards good supplier relations and the demonstrated
integrity of its employees as indispensable sources of Town goodwill. It
is the obligation of the Town and its employees to preserve and protect
these values.
B.
§ 188-21 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-23
C:188
§ 188-24. Anti-discrimination.
§ 188-25. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ANNIVERSARY DATE — The date of initial employment as an employee of
the Town.
BREAK IN SERVICE — Any separation from the classified service of one
scheduled workday, or more, whether by resignation, layoff, dismissal,
disability, or retirement, or any absence without leave of one work week,
or more, when the employee is subsequently reemployed. An authorized
leave without pay shall not be considered as constituting a break in
service.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The acceptance of tangible or intangible items of value from an
organization which seeks or participates in supplying Town
requirements is prohibited.
C.
Any violation of these standards of conduct may result in disciplinary
action up to and including immediate discharge from employment with
the Town.
D.
Nondiscrimination and equal opportunity are the policy of the Town
of Marshfield in all its decisions, programs and activities. All Town
employees shall rigorously take affirmative steps to ensure equality
of opportunity in the internal affairs of all departments, as well as
in an employee's relations with the public, including those persons,
departments and boards having business with any government agency.
Each department or board, in discharging its statutory responsibilities,
shall consider the likely effects which its decisions, programs and
activities shall have in meeting the goal of equality of opportunity.
A.
Affirmative action requires more than vigilance in the elimination of
discriminatory barriers in accordance with established protected
classes including race, color, religious creed, national origin, ancestry,
age 40 or over, criminal record (applications only), handicap,
retaliation, sexual harassment, sexual orientation, genetics, military
personnel, transgender and sex. It must also entail positive and
aggressive measures to ensure equal opportunity in internal personnel
practices and in those programs which can affect persons and activities
outside the Town government. Affirmative action shall include efforts
necessary to remedy the effects of present and past discriminatory
patterns and practices and shall invoke any action necessary to
guarantee equal opportunity for all people.
B.
Town of Marshfield officials and supervisory employees shall hire,
appoint, assign, train, evaluate, compensate and promote personnel on
the basis of merit and ability, without regard to race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, language, age, mental handicap, sex, or sexual
preference.
C.
§ 188-23 CHARTER § 188-25
C:189
CLASSIFICATION AND COMPENSATION PLAN — The official or approved
system of grouping and compensating positions into appropriate classes
consisting of:
CONTINUOUS SERVICE — Length of employment with the Town of a fulltime
or regular part-time employee, uninterrupted except for military leave,
vacation leave, sick leave, jury duty leave, disability, maternal/paternal
leave, or any other authorized leave of absence covered in this bylaw.
Service should not be considered continuous if there is a break in service
resulting in the employee being in a non-pay status for a period of time
exceeding 30 days excepting authorized leave of absence.[Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
EMPLOYEE — An employee of the Town occupying a position in the
classification plan.
EXEMPT POSITION — In accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act
(FLSA), an exempt employee is required to perform management or
administrative responsibilities or requires specialized, professional
qualifications. Exempt employees are paid a salary for all hours worked and
are not eligible for overtime compensation.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee scheduled to work no less than
37.5 hours per week and 52 weeks per year, minus legal holidays and
authorized vacation leave, sick leave, bereavement leave and other leave of
absence. This definition is not intended to include employees classified as
part time in the Personnel Classification and Compensation Plan Bylaws.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Defined as spouse, mother, father, child including
stepchild, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, mother-in-law, fatherin-
law, grandparents, grandchild, aunt, uncle, stepparent, stepsister,
stepbrother or partner.
INTRODUCTORY HIRING PERIOD — All new employees must serve a
working test period of nine months' duration or as specified in a collective
bargaining agreement or state civil service statute during which an
employee is required to demonstrate his or her fitness to perform duties for
the position to which assigned. An employee may be terminated by the Town
during the introductory hiring period or at any time with or without cause,
with or without notice.
MARKET RATE OF PAY — The competitiveness of a salary range or an
employee's salary in comparison to the marketplace based on operational
and demographic criteria.[Added 10-27-2014 STM by Art. 3]
A salary range (minimum/maximum) consistent with each classification
level;
A.
B. An index to the class specifications;
C. The class specifications; and
D. Rules for administering the classification and compensation plan.
§ 188-25 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-25
C:190
NON-EXEMPT POSITION — In accordance with the Fair Labor Standards
Act (FLSA), non-exempt employees will be paid overtime for all hours
required to work over 40 in one work week. Police, fire or employees
covered by a collective bargaining agreement are paid overtime pursuant
to the provisions of an employment agreement or collective bargaining
agreement.
PART-TIME INTERMITTENT — A person doing occasional hourly, daily or
weekly work 52 weeks per year and less than 20 hours per week; such an
employee is not eligible for benefits as described in this Personnel Bylaw.
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION — The evaluation of an employee's
performance based on:[Added 10-27-2014 STM by Art. 3]
PERMANENT EMPLOYEE —
PERMANENT PART-TIME — A person required to work at least 1,040
hours of time in a calendar year; such employee is eligible for benefits as
described in this Personnel Bylaw on a prorated basis as determined by
the number of regularly scheduled hours compared to the normal work
week.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
PERMANENT POSITION — Any position in the Town service which has
required or which is likely to require the services of an incumbent without
interruption for a period of more than six calendar months, either on a fulltime
or part-time employment basis.
POSITION RATING SYSTEM — A system enabling the Town to compare
positions to one another consisting of a set of universal rating criteria
in order to establish the minimum qualifications required to carry out a
position's job duties and to assign positions to a classification level in a
consistent manner.
SEASONAL EMPLOYEES — Employees serving in a position for a specified
period of time, such as a summer season, are considered seasonal. Seasonal
employees are not entitled to Town benefits regardless of the number of
hours worked during the specified season.
A. Job duties: essential functions that are ongoing.
Objectives: job duties that are specific, measurable, agreeable, realistic
and time bound.
B.
C. Competencies: skills required to accomplish job duties and objectives.
Development plan: specific, measurable and time bound actions to
improve performance.
D.
Any employee retained on a continuing basis in a permanent position,
as defined below.
A.
Any employee holding a permanent appointment under Civil Service
Law to a position deemed permanent within the meaning of said law.
B.
§ 188-25 CHARTER § 188-25
C:191
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE — An employee retained in a temporary or
seasonal position as defined below; any employee holding a temporary
appointment under Civil Service Law who does not also have permanent
status thereunder. Such employee is not eligible for benefits as described in
this Personnel Bylaw.
TEMPORARY POSITION or SEASONAL POSITION — Any position in the
Town service which requires or is likely to require the services of one
incumbent for a period not to exceed six calendar months; a seasonal
position requiring less than the work week of its occupational group shall
be considered as part time.
WORK WEEK — A work week is defined as a period consisting of seven
consecutive twenty-four-hour days; Sunday to Saturday, 12:01 a.m. to 12:00
p.m.
§ 188-26. Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act
(COBRA).
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) requires
employer-sponsored group medical and dental plans to allow covered
employees and their dependents to elect to have the current medical
coverage continued, at the employee's and dependent's expense, at group
rates for up to 36 months following a qualifying loss of coverage.
§ 188-27. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPPA).
Permanent employees regularly required to annually work 20 or more
hours per week are covered under the Federal Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPPA). HIPPA provides
employees with certain rights that create a "portability" of health
insurance coverage from one employer to the next. This does not mean
that an employee can transfer his or her current health plan into a
new employment situation. It means that an employee can receive
"credit" for prior coverage when joining a new plan provided by the
Town that may have waiting periods for preexisting conditions. This
requires a transfer of prior coverage information from the old employer
to the new employer. The Town will provide to each employee who
loses health insurance coverage a full certificate of coverage. The
certificate of coverage provides: the date of certification, identifying
information including the name of the employee, the employee's health
insurance plan identification number, names of dependents to whom
the certificate applies, name of group health plan, name of employer,
name, address, and phone number of the plan administrator and the
first and last day of coverage. A certificate will be issued whenever
an individual loses health insurance coverage or would lose coverage
except for an election under COBRA.
A.
Group health and dental benefits and premium rates for individuals
electing continuation are the same as for active employees and their
B.
§ 188-25 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-27
C:192
§ 188-28. Town insurance plans. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
The Town of Marshfield makes available to all regular full- or permanent
part-time employees group life, accidental death, long-term disability,
sickness, group hospitalization and dental insurance programs. Family
coverage is also available. Please see the Addendum Section of this bylaw
for a list of current premiums and insurance carriers.10 The level of
coverage and respective premium costs are subject to possible change by
the Town. The Town will provide proper notice in advance of any proposed
changes to an insurance plan(s) in accordance with statutory notification
requirements. For information regarding employee insurance, employees
should contact the office of the Town Treasurer/Collector.
§ 188-29. Grievance policy and procedure.
dependents plus an administrative charge. Individuals electing
continuation must pay the entire monthly premium in advance.
Employees will be notified of their COBRA rights upon employment
and at the time of a qualifying event as explained above. It is the
employee's responsibility to keep the Town informed of any address
changes or other pertinent information regarding himself/herself and/
or an employee's dependents.
A grievance is defined as any complaint by an employee that he/she has
been treated unfairly, unlawfully, or in violation of his/her rights under
Town polices with regard to any matter pertaining to employment with
the Town. This definition includes, but is not limited to, discharge,
suspension, involuntary transfer and demotion. Also, if an employee
believes that he/she has not received or been credited with or has
otherwise lost wages or benefits to which he/she feels entitled, he/she
must present a grievance in accordance with the employee grievance
procedure that is contained in this bylaw or such wages or benefits may
be forfeited.
A.
An employee who feels that he/she has a grievance must follow the
following procedure:
Step 1. Any employee who feels that he/she has received
inequitable treatment because of some condition of employment
may discuss the grievance orally with his/her department head for
relief from that condition within 10 working days of the occurrence
or knowledge of the event. The immediate supervisor or
department head shall meet with the aggrieved employee and
respond in writing to the employee within 10 working days of the
date of the meeting.
(1)
Step 2. If the grievance is not resolved by the decision of the
department head, the employee may file an appeal in writing with
(2)
B.
10.Editor's Note: The addendum is on file at the office of the Town Administrator.
§ 188-27 CHARTER § 188-29
C:193
§ 188-30. Engaging in work stoppage, slowdown or strike
prohibited.
Since municipal employees provide a service to the public whose
interruption in many instances may be detrimental to public safety, no
municipal employees shall engage in any work stoppage, slowdown, or
strike. Any employee engaging in such work stoppage, slowdown, or strike
shall be subject to immediate dismissal without any rights to any of the
benefits provided by the Town.
§ 188-31. Workplace violence.
the Town Administrator within 10 working days of receipt of the
department head's decision in Step 1. The Town Administrator
shall, upon request, meet with the employee within a reasonable
time after receipt of the employee's appeal. The Town
Administrator shall reply in writing to the employee's grievance
within 10 working days after a meeting with the employee is held.
The Town Administrator will send one copy of the reply to the
employee, one copy to the department head and place one copy in
the employee's personnel file.
Step 3. If the grievance is still not settled at Step 2, or within
10 working days of the deadline for the response of the Town
Administrator, the employee may submit the grievance in writing
to the Board of Selectmen. The Board shall meet with the Town
Administrator, department head and the employee at its next
regularly scheduled meeting following the date of the receipt of the
grievance in the office of the Board of Selectmen. The Board shall
render a final decision in writing within 10 working days of the date
of the meeting with the Board.
(3)
A grievance shall be considered settled at the completion of any step
unless it is appealed within the time limits as set forth in this section.
The time limits of the grievance procedure may be extended by
management due to illness, vacations, business trips or emergency. The
employee will be notified in writing by the Town if an extension is
required. If the response time limit falls on an employee's scheduled
day off, the reply by management will be given to the employee on the
employee's scheduled workday immediately following an employee's
return to work.
C.
The Town of Marshfield maintains a zero tolerance policy toward
workplace violence, or the threat of violence, by any of its employees,
customers, the public, or anyone who conducts business with the Town.
It is the intent of the Town to provide a workplace that is free from
intimidation, threats or violent acts. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
A.
Workplace violence includes but is not limited to harassment, threats,
physical attack or property damage. A threat is the explicit or implicit
B.
§ 188-29 MARSHFIELD CODE § 188-31
C:194
Chapter 191
PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION
§ 191-1. Findings and intent.
§ 191-2. Definitions.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any business selling food, good, articles, or personal
services to the public.
PLASTIC CARRY-OUT BAG — A thin film plastic bag with handles provided
to a customer by an establishment and used to transport merchandise from
expression of intent to cause physical or mental harm regardless of
whether the person communicating the threat has the present ability to
carry out the threat and regardless of whether the threat is contingent,
conditional or future. Physical attack is intentional hostile physical
contact with another person such as hitting, fighting, shoving, or
throwing objects. Property damage is intentional damage to property
that includes property owned by the Town, employees or others.
Findings.
Thin plastic bags are harmful to the environment and waterways
and therefore contribute to the potential death of marine and other
wildlife.
(1)
Thin plastic bags clog storm drains and litter public places,
beaches, and local waterways, including the North and South
Rivers and the Green Harbor River, and contribute to the overall
volume of solid waste.
(2)
Thin plastic bags are made from fossil fuels, a nonrenewable
resource.
(3)
Thin plastic bags are not biodegradable or compostable, are not
acceptable in Marshfield's curbside recycling bins, and only a small
percentage are returned to stores for recycling.
(4)
Thin plastic bags break down into microplastics which enter our
waters, soil and air and pollute our food chain and endanger our
health.
(5)
Currently 60 Massachusetts cities and towns, including Plymouth,
Duxbury, Bridgewater, and much of Cape Cod, have passed plastic
bag bans, and more have bylaws pending.
(6)
A.
Intent. The Town of Marshfield hereby enacts this bylaw to help reduce
the deterioration of the environment and the ensuing potential health
risks by eliminating the use of thin plastic carry-out bags at the point of
sale and promoting the use of reusable bags.
B.
§ 188-31 CHARTER § 191-2
C:195
the establishment. Plastic carry-out bags do not include those plastic bags
typically without handles used to contain dry cleaning, newspapers, or small
bags used to contain fish, meat, produce or other products provided to the
consumer, free of charge, to deliver items to the point of sale.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag that is 100% recyclable and
contains at least 40% post-consumer recycled paper content and is provided
free of charge to the customer.
REUSABLE CARRY-OUT BAG — A bag with stitched-on handles that is made
solely of or in a combination of natural cloths, synthetic fibers, or other
washable material and is specifically designed for multiple reuse. These
bags are generally sold to the customer for a reasonable cost.
§ 191-3. Plastic carryout bag prohibition.
No establishment in the Town of Marshfield, as defined in § 191-2 shall
provide thin plastic carry-out bags, as defined in § 191-2. Establishments in
the Town of Marshfield, as defined in § 191-2, shall only provide reusable
carry-out bags that comply with the definition in § 191-2 or recyclable paper
bags, as defined in § 191-2, at the point of sale.
§ 191-4. When effective; enforcement; violations and penalties.
All of the requirements set forth in this bylaw shall take effect within six
months of the approval of the bylaw by the Office of the Massachusetts
State's Attorney General and satisfaction of the posting/publication
requirements of MGL c. 40 § 32. However, if a retail establishment
cannot comply with the effective date of this bylaw due to economic
hardship, the establishment may petition the Board of Health for an
extension of six months.
A.
This bylaw may be enforced by any agent of the Board of Health by:
(1) Inspection and investigation.
(2) The issuance of violation notices and administrative orders.
(3) Civil court actions.
B.
Whoever, himself or by his servant or agent or as the servant or agent
of any other person or firm or corporation, violates any of the provisions
of these regulations may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition
process as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day of violation after
written notice is a separate violation.
C.
The following penalties shall apply:
(1) First offense: written warning.
(2) Second offense: fine of $50.
(3) Third offense: fine of $100.
D.
§ 191-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 191-4
C:196
§ 191-5. Severability.
If any provision of this bylaw shall be held to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately
and apart from the remaining provisions of this bylaw, which shall remain
in full force and effect.
Chapter 195
PLUMBING AND GAS FITTING
(4) Subsequent offenses: fine of $200.
§ 191-4 CHARTER § 191-5
C:197

ARTICLE I
Gas Permits
[Adopted as Art. 33 of the General Bylaws]
§ 195-1. Permit required.
Whoever desires in the Town of Marshfield to install or alter any gasfitting
system shall first make application to the Gas Inspector, pay a fee
established by the Board of Selectmen, and obtain a permit.
§ 195-1 CHARTER § 195-1
C:199
Chapter 201
PROPERTY, SALE OF
§ 195-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § 195-1
C:200
ARTICLE I
Sale of Wood and Timber
[Adopted 1931 ATM by Art. 11 (Art. 13 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 201-1. Authority of Selectmen.
The Selectmen shall have authority to cut and sell wood and timber from
Town property.
§ 201-1 CHARTER § 201-1
C:201

ARTICLE II
Sale of Surplus or Abandoned Property
[Adopted as Art. 16 of the General Bylaws]
§ 201-2. Authority of Selectmen. [Amended 10-27-2014 STM by Art.
6]
The Selectmen are hereby authorized to sell surplus and/or abandoned
property belonging to the Town valued at less than $10,000 or less in
accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21(11).
§ 201-2 CHARTER § 201-2
C:203

ARTICLE III
Sale of Beach and Meadow Lots
[Adopted 1944 ATM by Art. 49 (Art. 17 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 201-3. Authority of Selectmen.
The Selectmen shall have authority to sell Town-owned beach and meadow
lots.
§ 201-3 CHARTER § 201-3
C:205

ARTICLE IV
Buying or Selling Real Property
[Adopted 10-18-2004 STM by Art. 17 (Art. 81 of the General
Bylaws)]
§ 201-4. Notice of proposal.
Any Town board, committee or officer that receives a written proposal or
solicitation to buy or sell real property, including all notices under MGL
c. 61A or 61B, shall forward copies of said proposal or solicitation to all
Town boards, committees and departments within seven days of receipt. All
parties receiving said notice shall respond with an opinion regarding the
proposal within 21 days.
§ 201-4 CHARTER § 201-4
C:207
Chapter 217
SEAWALLS
§ 217-1. Obstructions prohibited.
No fences, gates or other structure or obstructions may be constructed, or
maintained, on or over seawalls located in the Town without the express
written approval of the Board of Selectmen. Those seawalls that are
privately owned and maintained will be exempted from the provisions of
this bylaw. The Board of Selectmen may, in its sole discretion, rescind said
permission if it determines it is in the Town's best interest to do so.
§ 217-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
Any person who erects, maintains or suffers to be maintained any such
structure without permission to do so shall be punished by a fine of $50 per
day. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. Such fine may be recovered on complaint in
the District Court which sum shall enure to the general use of the Town.
This bylaw may also be enforced pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, by a Town
police officer or other officer having police powers.
Chapter 223
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sanitary sewage disposal — See Ch. 645.
§ 223-1. Purpose.
These rules and regulations regulate the use of public sewer drains, the
installation and connection of building sewers and the discharge of waters
and wastes into the public sewer system in the Town of Marshfield, County
of Plymouth, State of Massachusetts.
§ 223-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated; "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter in five days at 20° C.,
expressed in milligrams per liter, under standard laboratory procedure
as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
§ 201-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 223-2
C:208
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
beginning 10 linear feet (3.0 meters) along the center line of the pipe,
measured from the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal; also called "house connection."
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intended to receive both wastewater and
storm or surface water.
DPW — The Department of Public Works of the Town of Marshfield, State of
Massachusetts.
EASEMENT — An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
FEDERAL — The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
FLOATABLE OIL — Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it
will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free from floatable
fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with
the collection system.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater from industrial processes, trade,
or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined
sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of
surface or ground water.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation
or group.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter
of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of seven and a
hydrogen ion concentration of 10-7.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting property have
equal rights, and is controlled by the Town of Marshfield, Department of
Public Works.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
§ 223-2 CHARTER § 223-2
C:209
together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are
not admitted intentionally.
SEWAGE — The spent water of a community. The preferred term is
"wastewater" (see definition of "wastewater").
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SLUG — Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration
of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of
duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average twentyfour-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall
adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the
wastewater treatment works.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A drain or sewer for
conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from
any source.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Total suspended matter that either floats on the
surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other liquids and that
is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for
the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as that fraction
of sewage that is not soluble in water.
TOWN — The Town of Marshfield, County of Plymouth, State of
Massachusetts and/or any duly authorized deputy, agent or representative
of the Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — The water of quality equal to or better than
the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
effluent limitations standards and would not be benefited by discharge to
the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
UNSANITARY — Potentially injurious to public health, as determined by the
appropriate Town, commonwealth or federal agency.
WASTEWATER — The spent water of a community. From the standpoint
of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions
together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be
present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — The structures, equipment and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes
and dispose of effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY — An arrangement of devices and
structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge.
Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or
"wastewater treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment works" or "water
pollution control facility."
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water
either continuously or intermittently.
§ 223-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 223-3
C:210
§ 223-3. Unlawful deposits or discharges.
§ 223-4. Connection to public sewer required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to
be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property
within the Town of Marshfield or in any area under the jurisdiction of
said Town any human or animal excrement, garbage, or objectionable
waste.
A.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the Town
of Marshfield, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said Town, any
wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided to the satisfaction of the Town.
B.
Where use of public sewer is available, it shall be unlawful to construct,
reconstruct, or extend any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or
other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater, except as
otherwise allowed in this regulation.
A.
The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within
the Town and abutting on any street, alley, common driveway, or rightof-
way in which there is located a public sanitary sewer of the Town,
is required at the owner's expense to connect to the public sewer. Said
sewer connection shall be in accordance with the provisions of this
bylaw, the State Plumbing Code and DPW construction specifications
most recently adopted or amended by the Board of Public Works and
shall be connected within one year after the sewer is complete and
ready to use. [Amended 1985 ATM by Art. 28]
B.
Individual requests for extension of the one-year period of time may
be granted by the DPW for exceptional circumstances only. Exceptional
circumstances can be defined as follows: [Amended 7-17-1980 STM
by Art. 3]
(1) High property owner costs to connect to the public sewer.
(2) A financial need under the circumstances.
(3) Any other extraordinary circumstances.
C.
The determination of the DPW regarding the sufficiency of such
exceptional circumstances may be appealed to and reviewed by the
Board of Appeals.
D.
Penalties in accordance with § 223-12 of the Sewer Rules and
Regulations relating solely to the failure to connect to the public sewer
shall not be imposed from the date written application is submitted
to the DPW until 30 days after the administrative appellate process is
complete. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
E.
§ 223-3 CHARTER § 223-5
C:211
§ 223-5. Building sewers and connections.
No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the DPW. Any
person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being
discharged into the system shall notify the DPW at least 45 days prior
to the proposed change or connection.
A.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential
and commercial service and for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes. In either case, the owner(s) or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the DPW. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the DPW. A permit
and inspection fee of $50 for a residential or commercial building sewer
permit shall be paid to the Town at the time the application is filed.
The permit and inspection fee for industrial service shall be set by the
Board of Public Works and based on the actual cost to the Town but in
no event shall said fee be less than $50. The Board of Public Works shall
review and, if it deems appropriate, adjust the fees every three years.
[Amended 4-26-2010 ATM by Art. 19]
B.
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation, connection and
maintenance of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s).
The owner(s) shall hold the Town harmless from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer.
C.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway. In
such a case, the building sewer from the front building may be extended
to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
However, the Town does not and will not assume any obligation or
responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single
connection aforementioned.
D.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings
only when they are found, on examination and test by the DPW or its
authorized representative, to meet all requirements of this bylaw. All
costs of such testing and inspections shall be borne by the owner(s).
E.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe,
jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, and making a gas- and
water-tight connection of the building sewer into the public sewer, shall
all conform to the standards the DPW set forth in the specifications for
F.
§ 223-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 223-5
C:212
sewerage improvements. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures
and materials must be approved by the DPW without installation.
Whenever possible, the building sewer should be brought to the
building at elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which
any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow from the sanitary
facilities to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building
drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the
building sewer.
G.
No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, sump pump,
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff
of groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
H.
Permits shall only be issued to licensed drain layers or licensed master
plumbers or journeymen plumbers for the installation of building sewer
connections and they shall notify the DPW when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The drain layer
shall be liable for any expense to the Town on account of any imperfect
work performed by him or his employees for a period of 12 months.
The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Town or its representative. No backfilling shall take place prior to the
inspection and approval. [Amended 1985 ATM by Art. 28]
I.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the DPW.
J.
No sewer or drain shall be laid within the layout of any street or sewer
easement except by an experienced drain layer licensed and approved
by the DPW. Persons may request permission from the DPW to lay
building sewers in the layout of any street or sewer easement.
K.
The DPW may issue licenses to drain layers who apply for a permit
for making excavation within the limits of any street of the Town for
the purpose of laying sewers. Parties so licensed shall execute a bond
to the Town in a sum as determined by the Town but in any case not
less than the sum of $1,000 with a surety to be approved by the Town,
conditional that he shall comply to the satisfaction of the Town and with
the bylaws of the Town and the rules of the Planning Board; that he
will cause the excavation to be properly guarded at all times for the
protection of the public; that he will properly make all connections and
joints in every sewer; and that he will indemnify and hold harmless the
Town of Marshfield from any damage or cost for which it may be liable
or injuries resulting from neglect, carelessness, or incompetence in
constructing, repairing or connecting any sewer, or properly fencing or
lighting any excavation or obstruction, or in performing any other work
connected herewith. Said license(s) shall be good for 12 months unless
L.
§ 223-5 CHARTER § 223-5
C:213
§ 223-6. Use of public sewer; prohibited discharges.
sooner revoked for failure to perform in an expeditious or workmanlike
manner. The fee for such license shall be established from time to time
by the DPW and published at the Town Hall DPW offices. The drain
layer shall be held liable for any expense to the Town on account of any
imperfect work within the layout of any street or sewer easement done
by him or his employees.
For all new houses or buildings being constructed on lots where the
public sewer is available and no "y" branch has been installed, the
owner shall bear the expense of the installation of a "y" branch and tap
in the public sewer at the location specified by the DPW.
M.
Any installation pertaining to sanitary sewers (building sewers, sewer,
public sewer) shall conform to the DPW construction specifications
most recently adopted or amended by the Board of Public Works.
[Added 1985 ATM by Art. 28]
N.
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted
waters such as stormwater, groundwater, sump pump discharge, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, unpolluted industrial process water, or
cooling water to any sanitary sewer.
A.
Stormwater shall be discharged to storm sewers or to a natural outlet
approved by the Town or other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted
industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on
approval of the Town or other regulatory agencies, to a storm sewer, or
natural outlet.
B.
No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(1)
Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in
sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create
any hazard in the receiving water of the wastewater treatment
plant.
(2)
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to
structures, equipment or personnel of the wastewater works.
(3)
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in the sewers or other interference
with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities, such as, but
not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, unground garbage,
(4)
C.
§ 223-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 223-6
C:214
whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
Strong acid pickling waste and concentrated plating solutions
whether neutralized or not.
(5)
The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall
be limited in discharge to the municipal sewerage system to
concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers,
wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse
effect on any body of water or ocean or will not otherwise endanger
life, limb, or public property, or constitute a nuisance. The Town may
set more restrictive limitations than those established herein to meet
the above objectives. In forming an opinion as to acceptability, the
Town will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject
waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process
employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of
treatability of the waste by the wastewater treatment plant, and other
pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or
characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary
sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the Town include
but are not limited to the following: [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
(1) Wastewater having temperature higher than 103° F.
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
and 150° F. (0° to 65° C.).
(2)
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with
other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment
process or constitute a hazard in the receiving waters of the
sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides,
heavy metals, strong acids and basic wastes, etc.
(3)
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see the
definition of "properly shredded garbage" in § 223-2). Garbage
grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels,
institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or
similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of
food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises
or when served by caterers. The installation and operation of any
garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 hp (0.76 hp metric)
or greater shall be subject to review and approval of the Town.
(4)
D.
§ 223-6 CHARTER § 223-6
C:215
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
arsenic, cadmium, cyanide, lead, mercury, nickel, silver, or similar
objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excess
chlorine requirement to such degree that such material received
in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works
exceeds any limits established by the Town or federal effluent
limitations.
(5)
Any water or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the Town as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of
the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such
discharge.
(6)
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Town in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
(7)
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or
of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate.
(a)
(b) Excessive discoloration.
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works.
(c)
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
"slugs" as defined herein.
(d)
(8)
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes
employed or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree
that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the
requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge
to the receiving waters.
(9)
Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other water or
wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form
suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or
create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment
processes.
(10)
(11)Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
Any water or waste having a five-day biochemical oxygen demand
greater than 300 milligrams per liter.
(12)
§ 223-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 223-6
C:216
Any water or wastes containing more than 350 milligrams per liter
of suspended solids.
(13)
Action by Town.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain
the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
Subsection D of this section, and which in the judgment of the
Town may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Town
may:
(a) Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers;
(b)
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
(c)
Require payment to cover added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
(d)
(1)
If the DPW and federal effluent limitations permit pretreatment
of waste flows, the design and installation of such facilities shall
be subject to the review and approval of the DPW and the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Division of Water Pollution
Control.
(2)
E.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the DPW, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing floatable grease in excessive amount as specified in
Subsection D(2) or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful
ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the DPW and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and
oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious material capable of
withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall
be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily
removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gas-tight and
water-tight. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner(s) shall
be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate
means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the
dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the DPW.
Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by
the owner's personnel must be performed by properly licensed waste
disposal firms.
F.
§ 223-6 CHARTER § 223-6
C:217
§ 223-7. Powers and authority of inspectors.
Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or
required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained
continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner(s) at
his expense.
G.
The DPW shall determine the quantity and quality of all industrial
wastes which can be properly taken into the sewerage system and
treated at the sewage treatment works, in addition to the sanitary
sewage from the Town, and the Town may regulate by separate
industrial user agreement(s) approved by the DPW the flow of industrial
wastes into the sewerage system.
H.
When required by the DPW, the owner(s) of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
structure together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling,
and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall
be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the DPW. The structure shall be installed by the
owner(s) at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe
and accessible at all times to authorized persons.
I.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this bylaw shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the
American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.)
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs
are determined from periodic grab samples. All industries discharging
into a public sewer shall perform such monitoring of their discharge
as the DPW may reasonably require, including installation, use, and
maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping records and reporting
the results of such monitoring to the DPW. Such records shall be made
available upon request by the DPW to other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharges to the receiving waters. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM
by Art. 10]
J.
§ 223-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 223-7
C:218
§ 223-8. Charges for sewer service.
The Superintendent of Public Works and other duly authorized
employees shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this bylaw. The duly authorized
employees shall have no authority to inquire into any process, including
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other
industries, beyond the point of having a direct bearing on the kind and
source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste
treatment. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
A.
Duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information
concerning industrial processes which has a direct bearing on the
kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system.
An industry may withhold information considered confidential. The
industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the
information in question might result in an advantage to competitors.
B.
Duly authorized employees shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement
for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the
wastewater facilities lying within said easement. All entry and
subsequent work, if any, on said easement shall be done in full
accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining
to the private property involved.
C.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred
to in Subsection A above, the duly authorized employees shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company
and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
Town employees and the Town shall hold harmless the company against
loss or damage to its property by Town employees and against liability
claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except such as may be caused by negligence or failure
of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in § 223-6I.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
D.
The funding of the Town's share of Phase I of the Marshfield
Wastewater Treatment Project will be by bonding over a twenty-year
period. Annual debt retirement shall be apportioned so that 40% is
placed on the general tax rate and 60% is charged to the sewer users.
A.
Capital charges. The owner(s) of houses, buildings, or other properties
used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes
situated within the Town and abutting on any street, common driveway,
alley or right-of-way in which a public sewer has been installed shall
pay to the Town a capital charge. Said capital charge shall be applicable
whether the structure or its sanitary disposal system is connected to
B.
§ 223-7 CHARTER § 223-8
C:219
the public sewer or not. Said capital charge shall also be applicable
to any vacant lot that is potentially a buildable lot. In such cases,
the capital charge will be deferred until such time as a habitable
structure is constructed on the lot. Said capital charge for Phase I of
the Marshfield Wastewater Treatment Project shall be the owner's pro
rata share of 60% of the annual debt retirement on the net cost to the
Town for the construction of the Wastewater Treatment Project.
Betterment charges.
Sewer systems installed in streets, after the completion of Phase
I of the Marshfield Wastewater Treatment Project, shall be
constructed wholly or partially under betterments as determined
by majority vote of the Town Meeting. Whether a street will be
done under betterments shall be contingent upon an affirmative
vote by a majority of the Board of Public Works and funds being
made available to construct said betterments. The amounts of the
betterment charges shall be as established by the DPW from time
to time. Said betterment charges shall be determined so that the
total of such charges will not be greater than the actual net cost
to the Town of the sewerage collection system constructed by
the Town including the portion of the building sewers in public
streets and right-of-way, the collecting sewers, pumping stations,
treatment plant and ocean outfall. Costs associated with the
capacity of such facilities provided for expansion of the system
to presently unsewered areas will be excluded from the current
betterment charges.
(1)
Betterments shall be assessed upon the owner(s) of all properties
situated within the Town and abutting on any street, common
driveway, alley or right-of-way in which a public sewer has been
installed under the provisions of this Subsection C. Betterment
assessments shall be based upon a uniform unit method as
provided by MGL c. 83, § 15. The Board of Public Works shall,
with respect to those portions of the Wastewater Treatment Project
constructed pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, calculate
separately the cost of general benefit facilities from that of special
benefit facilities. A proportionate share of the construction costs
of the general benefit facilities shall be paid by all users, served
by those portions of the sewer system constructed under this
subsection, who receive benefit from such facilities.
(2)
C.
Sewer user charges. The owner(s) of houses, buildings or other
properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other
purposes situated within the Town and abutting on any street, common
driveway, alley or right-of-way in which a public sewer has been
installed shall each pay a non-capital sewer charge; provided, however,
that such charge shall not be assessed to owners who have been
granted an extension of time to connect, pursuant to § 223-4C of these
rules and regulations, during the time such extension is in effect. The
non-capital charge shall be as established by the Department of Public
D.
§ 223-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 223-8
C:220
§ 223-9. Conflicting provisions; severability. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 10]
If a provision of this bylaw is found to be in conflict with any provision of any
zoning, building, safety or health or other bylaw or regulation of the Town of
Marshfield, the State of Massachusetts or the federal government existing
on or subsequent to the effective date of this bylaw, that provision which
in the judgment of the Town establishes the higher standard of safety and
protection of health shall prevail, and that provision which sets the lower
standard is hereby declared invalid to the extent that it is found to be in
conflict with the provision which sets the higher standard and is hereby
repealed. The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of this
bylaw shall not affect the validity of any other part of this bylaw which can
be given effect without such invalid part or parts.
Works from time to time. The calculation of the non-capital charge
under Phase I of the Marshfield Wastewater Treatment Project shall
be the pro rata share of the summation of all the facilities' operating
and maintenance costs for a given year plus the capital cost as defined
under Subsection B. The normal non-capital charges shall be based
on water use wherever possible. If records of metered use are not
available or do not properly reflect the quantity of waste discharged,
the non-capital charge shall be based upon estimated water use or
on actual measurement of the volume of waste discharged into the
sewerage system. Sewer surcharges may be levied on users whose
waste characteristics are above normal strength. [Amended
10-19-1981 STM by Art. 2]
Industrial cost recovery. Industrial users connected to the sewerage
system shall make repayments to the Town of Marshfield for that
portion of the federal grants under Public Law 92-500 allocable to
the construction of wastewater facilities used for the collection and
treatment of industrial wastes as defined in 40 CFR Part 35, Subpart
E. The amounts and terms of the industrial cost recovery payments
shall be as established by the Board of Public Works in accordance with
40 CFR Part 35, Subpart E, and subject to the approval of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
E.
Sewer connection fee. For residential and commercial services a sewer
connection fee shall be paid to the Town at the time the application to
connect to the Town sewer system is filed. The sewer connection fee
shall be determined by the Board of Public Works and based on the net
value of the sewer system, capacity of the wastewater facility, capital
improvements, calculated fee per residential unit and average daily
flow for proposed connection. Said fee shall be no less than $1,000.
The Board of Public Works shall review and, if it deems appropriate,
adjust the fee every three years. The sewer connection fee or portion
thereof may be waived at the discretion of the Board of Public Works
for applicants paying sewer betterments in sewered areas developed
subsequent to Phase I. [Amended 4-26-2010 ATM by Art. 19]
F.
§ 223-8 CHARTER § 223-10
C:221
§ 223-10. Notice of violation.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation found to be violating or in
violation of any provision of this bylaw, except § 223-11, shall be served
by the Town of Marshfield with a written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit, as determined by the Town,
for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period
of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all such violations.
§ 223-11. Protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the sewage works. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct.
§ 223-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1988 STM by Art. 21]
§ 223-13. Liability.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this bylaw shall become liable to the Town of Marshfield for any expense,
loss or damage occasioned by the Town by reason of such violation.
§ 223-14. Wetland protection.
No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall discharge wastewater into
any collection line, lateral sewer, interceptor or other means of conveying
wastewater to the treatment facilities or other manner of construction
which is hereafter erected or otherwise placed, in whole or in part, upon
land which is defined as a wetland area within the meaning of the
Massachusetts Wetland Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 223-15. Unpaid charges and termination of service. [Added
10-16-2017 STM by Art. 17]
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who or which shall
continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in § 223-10
hereof shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed
$5,000 for each violation.
A.
Each day in which any such violation shall continue beyond said time
limit shall be considered a separate violation.
B.
Intent and applicability. The adoption of this bylaw shall enable the
Board of Public Works to establish due dates for the payment of sewer
and sewer use charges and, in the event of nonpayment, the accrual of
interest, the recovery of fees and expenses, and termination of sewer
service.
A.
§ 223-10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 223-15
C:222
Authority. This bylaw is adopted by the Town under MGL c. 40, § 21E,
and its authority to implement and regulate sewer usage and the
disposal of waste into the public sewer system of the Town of
Marshfield.
B.
Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw is to authorize the establishment
of due dates for municipal sewer and sewer use bills, charges and
assessments, interest rates on unpaid charges, collection of fees and
expenses on unpaid and/or late charges, and, where appropriate, the
termination of sewer service and the recovery of fees and expenses to
restore services.
C.
Definitions. See applicable definitions under § 223-2 which are
incorporated herein by reference. A "person" shall mean any person,
including individuals, corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited
liability company, or other entity. A "sewer user" or "sewer consumers"
shall mean all users of the Town's public sewer system, irrespective
of any persons responsibility for billing purposes for sewer charges
incurred at any particular facility.
D.
Municipal charges. Pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21E, the due date for
payment of municipal sewer charges and bills by any person, including
individuals, corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
company, or other entity shall be 30 days from its issuance evidenced
by the date of the postmark. If such bills or charges remain unpaid
after such due date, interest shall be charged at the same rate as that
on overdue tax bills under the provisions of MGL c. 57, § 59. By law
(MGL c. 40, § 42B) all charges for sewer become a lien against the
property immediately following the due date for such charge. Failure
to pay before the next billing cycle may result in termination of sewer
service as set forth herein.
E.
Late notices and notices of termination. On or after the 30th day after
the due date, a reminder notice may be issued to any person, including
individuals, corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
company, or other entity responsible for said charges, sewer users or
sewer consumers. On or after the 45th day a past due notice will be
issued by mail and (or) certified mail with interest along with the final
date for shutoff, plus an administrative fee to be established by the
Board of Public Works. On or after the 60th day notice will be delivered
to the home in the form of a letter notifying the person, including
individuals, corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
company, or other entity and/or sewer users or sewer consumers that
the sewer service will be shut off within 48 hours of notice. All bills,
expenses, penalties, and administration cost must be paid in full before
sewer service is restored, unless a payment plan has been worked
out with the Town, acting by and through its Superintendent of Public
Works and/or Treasurer-Collector.
F.
Termination notice and termination. If after 60 days the charges and
bill(s) remain unpaid, a shut-off notice in the form of a certified letter
G.
§ 223-15 CHARTER § 223-15
C:223
will be sent initiating a forty-eight-hour advance notice period prior
to sewer service termination. After 48 hours, sewer service may be
terminated by the Town, acting by its Board of Public Works at any
time subject to the exceptions set forth herein. The officers, employees
or agents of the Town and/or Board of Public Works, may, upon any
business day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., enter upon
the premises of any person, including individuals, corporations, trusts,
partnerships, limited liability company, or other entity whose payments
are in arrears and close a valve, remove or disconnect a meter pipe or
fitting, if necessary, for the purpose of effectuating the termination of
the flow of sewer as above authorized.
Exceptions for special circumstances.
There will be no termination of service as follows:
(a) Between November 1st and April 1st; or
(b) Everyone in the household is over 65; or
All adults living in the home are over 65 and a minor child
resides in the home; or
(c)
The person, sewer user or sewer consumer who actually lives
in the home is seriously ill; or
(d)
(e) There is a child under the age of 10 living in the home; or
(f) If there is a disabled veteran living in the home.
(1)
For the purposes of this exception policy, no sewer will be shutoff
if anyone in the household (adult or child) has a serious illness.
A serious illness can be physical (such as asthma, or pneumonia),
mental (such as depression or bipolar disorder), short-term (such
as the flu), or long-term (such as cancer). In order to substantiate a
serious illness, a letter from a doctor, nurse practitioner, physician
assistant or the local Board of Health shall be required; however,
a phone call from the doctor's office may be accepted temporarily,
but a letter must be sent within five days to the Town, acting by
and through its Superintendent of Public Works and/or Treasurer-
Collector.
(2)
H.
Financial hardship/payment plans. The Town, acting by and through
its Superintendent of Public Works and/or Treasurer-Collector, in
recognition of appropriate circumstances involving some financial
hardship, is authorized in its/their discretion to approve a payment
plan. A signed statement by the person, including individuals,
corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited liability company, or other
entity whose payments are in arrears showing that his/her income falls
within financial hardship guidelines established by the Board of Public
Works [or by analogy the financial hardship guidelines in 220 CMR
25.01(2) (CMR applicable to regulated utility bills)], shall be considered
I.
§ 223-15 MARSHFIELD CODE § 223-15
C:224
Chapter 226
SHELLFISH
§ 226-1. Authority of Selectmen.
The Selectmen are instructed and authorized to control, regulate or prohibit
the taking of eels and any or all kinds of shellfish and sea worms within the
Town of Marshfield, in accordance with MGL c. 130, § 52.
Chapter 232
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Tobacco and smoking — See Ch. 670.
§ 232-1. Findings and purpose. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
There exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoke causes cancer,
respiratory diseases, various cardiac diseases, negative birth outcomes,
allergies and irritations to the eyes, nose and throat to both the smoker and
nonsmoker exposed to secondhand smoke. Environmental tobacco smoke
(hereinafter ETS) causes the death of 53,000 Americans each year, and
in 2000 the Public Health Service's National Toxicology Program listed
environmental tobacco smoke as a known human carcinogen (U.S. DHHS,
2000, citing Cal. EPA, 1997). Therefore, the Town of Marshfield recognizes
presumptive evidence of financial hardship unless otherwise
determined by the Board of Public Works. In the event of any breach
of the payment plan, termination of services may resume in accordance
with this bylaw.
Costs, expenses and reasonable counsel fees. The Town is authorized
to recover from any person, including individuals, corporations, trusts,
partnerships, limited liability company, or other entity whose payments
are in arrears and/or sewer users or sewer consumers its costs,
expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees associated with unpaid sewer
bills, charges and assessments, interest rates on unpaid charges,
collection of fees and expenses, and costs to restore services.
J.
Rules and regulations. The Board of Public Works is authorized to make
rules and regulations and establish fees for termination of service and
restoration of sewer service.
K.
Severability. The invalidity of any portion or provisions of this bylaw
shall not invalidate any other portion or provision thereof.
L.
§ 223-15 CHARTER § 232-1
C:225
the right of those who wish to breathe smoke-free air and establishes this
bylaw to protect and improve the public health and welfare by prohibiting
smoking in public places effective September 1, 2001.
§ 232-2. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The Marshfield Board of Health.
EMPLOYEE — Any natural person who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — A natural person, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, or other organized group of individuals, including the Town of
Marshfield or any agency thereof, which utilizes the services of one or more
individuals.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY — Any office or institution providing care or
treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other
medical, physiological or psychological conditions, including but not limited
to rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics,
nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, offices
of any surgeon, chiropractor, physical therapist, physician, or dentist and all
specialists within these professions.
INDOOR SPORTS ARENA — Any sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas,
boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and
other similar enclosed recreational facilities where members of the general
public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic
competition, or witness sports events.
LOUNGE/BAR AREA — An area primarily dedicated to the serving of
alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the
consumption of such beverages.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, including but not limited to an owner,
operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any building,
establishment, business, or restaurant or retail store, or the agents or
designees of any of the foregoing.
PRIVATE CLUB — A not-for-profit establishment with a defined
membership.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any building owned, leased, operated or occupied by
the municipality, any enclosed area open to the general public, including,
but not limited to, libraries, museums, theaters, auditoriums, indoor sports
arenas and/or recreational facilities, inns, hotels and motels, educational
facilities, shopping malls, public rest rooms, lobbies, staircases, halls, exits,
entrances, and elevators accessible to the public, and licensed child care
locations.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION — Buses, taxis and other means of
transportation available to the general public while such means of
§ 232-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § 232-2
C:226
transportation is operating within the boundaries of the Town, including
indoor platforms by which such means of transportation may be accessed.
RESTAURANT — Any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and
public cafeteria, and other eating establishment which gives or offers food
for sale to the public, guests or employees for on-premises consumption,
as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving
elsewhere, including catering facilities.
RETAIL FOOD STORE — Any establishment commonly known as a
supermarket, grocery store, bakery, or convenience store in which the
primary activity is the sale of food items to the public for off-premises
consumption.
SMOKING — The inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar,
cigarette, or other tobacco product in any form.
WORKPLACE — Any area of a structure or portion thereof at which one or
more employees perform services for their employer.
§ 232-3. Posting notice of prohibition.
Every person having control of premises upon which smoking is prohibited
by and under the authority of this regulation shall conspicuously display
upon the premises "No Smoking" signs provided by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health and available from the Marshfield Board of
Health or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar
across it) and comparable in size to the sign provided by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health and available from the Marshfield Board of
Health.
§ 232-4. Smoking prohibited. [Amended April 2009 ATM by Art. 10/
26]
No person shall smoke nor shall any person, employer, or other person
having control of the premises upon which smoking is prohibited by this
regulation, or the agent or designee of such person, permit a person to
smoke in any of the following places as defined herein: health care facilities,
enclosed public places, and within 25 feet of any enclosed public building,
public transportation, restaurants, retail stores, public beaches, Town
property, Town vehicles and workplaces except as otherwise provided in
§ 232-5 of this bylaw.
§ 232-5. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 232-4 of this bylaw, smoking may be
permitted in the following places and/or circumstances:
Private residences except those portions used as a licensed child care
or health care office when operating as such.
A.
§ 232-2 CHARTER § 232-5
C:227
§ 232-6. Conflicts with other laws or regulations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing § 232-5 of this bylaw,
nothing in this regulation shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable
fire, health or other regulations so as to permit smoking in areas where it is
prohibited by such fire, health or other regulations.
§ 232-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates this regulation shall be subject to a fine of $50 for
a first offense, $100 for a second offense within one year of the first offense
and $150 for a third or subsequent offense within one year of the date of
the first offense.
§ 232-8. Enforcement.
Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests that are designated as smoking
rooms.
B.
Hotel and motel conference/meeting rooms and private and public
assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions.
C.
Private or semi-private rooms of nursing homes and long-term care
facilities, occupied by one or more patients, which are separately
ventilated and all of whom are smokers who have requested in writing
to be placed in rooms where smoking is permitted.
D.
Retail tobacco stores, which are primarily for the sale of tobacco
products and paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental and minors are prohibited from entering the
establishment, and which are not required to possess a retail food
permit. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
E.
Outdoor seating, or sidewalk portions of a food service establishment,
provided that such outdoor section may be covered but not otherwise
enclosed except for the one side which adjoins the food service
establishment.
F.
G. Private clubs, except when the private club is open to the public.
Bars and restaurants providing physical barriers separating smoking
and nonsmoking sections as well as separate systems of ventilation for
each. Ventilation systems must be approved by the Board of Health.
H.
As an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, violations of this
regulation may be enforced in the manner provided in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, by the Board or its agents. Any fines imposed under the
provisions of this regulation shall enure to the Town of Marshfield for
such use as the Town may direct.
A.
One method of enforcement may be periodic, unannounced inspections
of those establishments subject to this regulation.
B.
§ 232-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 232-8
C:228
§ 232-9. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation, the violation of which is
subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by the noncriminal method
of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, or by the filing of a criminal
complaint at the appropriate venue. Each day on which any violation exists
shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 232-10. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be illegal or
against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the legality of
any remaining paragraphs or provisions.
Chapter 238
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk — See Ch. 134. Solid waste and recycling — See Ch. 652.
Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this regulation
may request that the Board of Health initiate enforcement.
C.
Penalty.
(1) For first offense: $50.
(2) For second offense: $100.
(3) For third offense: $150.
(4) For smoking on public beaches: $25.
A.
Enforcing persons.
(1) Marshfield Board of Health and its designees.
(2) Marshfield Police Department.
B.
§ 232-8 CHARTER § 232-10
C:229

ARTICLE I
Trash Disposal
[Adopted 9-18-1990 STM by Art. 8 (Art. 55 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 238-1. Responsibility of owners. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
The owner(s) of every parcel of land upon which there exists a structure
which is occupied by human beings, or which is susceptible of such
occupancy, or which for any other reason generates solid waste of any
nature, shall make arrangements satisfactory to the Board of Public Works
for the removal and lawful disposal of the waste generated from such
parcel.
§ 238-2. Payment of trash disposal fee.
Owners who pay in full any trash disposal fee assessed by the Department
of Public Works of the Town of Marshfield for the privilege of access to the
municipal sanitary landfill, or for curbside waste pickup and disposal, shall
be presumed to have made satisfactory arrangements for waste removal as
required in § 238-1 of this bylaw.
§ 238-3. Alternative arrangements. [Amended 1999 ATM by Art. 18]
Owners who fail to pay in full, when due, the trash disposal fee described
in § 238-2 of this bylaw with respect to any parcel of land subject to this
bylaw shall be required to provide to the Board of Public Works, on or
before the date when such fee is due, written evidence that alternative
arrangements satisfactory to that Board have been made for the removal
and lawful disposal of waste from such parcel.
§ 238-4. Violations and penalties.
Persons violating the provisions of this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of
$300 for each offense.
§ 238-4.1. Unpaid charges and termination of service. [Added
10-16-2017 STM by Art. 18]
Intent and applicability. The adoption of this bylaw shall enable the
Board of Public Works to establish due dates for the payment of trash
disposal fees and curbside waste pickup fees as set forth in § 238-2 and
in the event of nonpayment, the accrual of interest, the recovery of fees
and expenses, and termination of curbside waste pickup service.
A.
Authority. This bylaw is adopted by the Town under MGL c. 40, § 21E,
and its authority to implement and regulate the disposal of solid waste
in the Town of Marshfield.
B.
Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw is to authorize the establishment of
due dates for trash disposal fees and curbside waste pickup fees and
C.
§ 238-1 CHARTER § 238-4.1
C:231
charges, and other charges and assessments, interest rates on unpaid
charges, collection of fees and expenses on unpaid and/or late charges,
and, where appropriate, the termination of trash disposal rights and/
or curbside pickup service and the recovery of fees and expenses to
restore services.
Municipal charges. Pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21E, the due date for
payment of municipal trash disposal fees and curbside waste pickup
bills by any person, including individuals, corporations, trusts,
partnerships, limited liability company, or other entity shall be 30 days
from its issuance evidenced by the date of the postmark. If such bills or
charges remain unpaid after such due date, interest shall be charged
at the same rate as that on overdue tax bills under the provisions of
MGL c. 57, § 59. Failure to pay before the next billing cycle may result
in termination of the right to dispose of trash and/or curbside waste
pickup service as set forth herein.
D.
Late notices and notices of termination. On or after the 30th day after
the due date, a reminder notice may be issued to any person, including
individuals, corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
company, or other entity responsible for said charges. On or after the
45th day a past due notice will be issued by mail and (or) certified mail
with interest along with the final date for shutoff, plus an administrative
fee to be established by the Board of Public Works. On or after the 60th
day notice will be delivered to the home in the form of a letter notifying
the person, including individuals, corporations, trusts, partnerships,
limited liability company, or other entity whose payments are in arrears
that curbside waste pickup service will be terminated within 48 hours
of notice. All bills, expenses, penalties, and administration cost must
be paid in full before trash disposal or curbside waste pickup service
is restored, unless a payment plan has been worked out with the
Town, acting by and through its Superintendent of Public Works and/or
Treasurer-Collector.
E.
Termination notice and termination. If after 60 days the charges and
bill(s) remain unpaid, a shut-off notice in the form of a certified letter
will be sent initiating a forty-eight-hour advance notice period prior to
trash disposal or curbside waste pickup service termination. After 48
hours, trash disposal rights or curbside waste pickup service may be
terminated by the Town, acting by its Board of Public Works, at any time
subject to the exceptions set forth herein.
F.
G. (Reserved)
Financial hardship/payment plans. The Town, acting by and through
its Superintendent of Public Works and/or Treasurer-Collector, in
recognition of appropriate circumstances involving some financial
hardship, is authorized in its/their discretion, to approve a payment
plan. A signed statement by the person, including individuals,
corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited liability company, or other
entity whose payments are in arrears showing that his/her income falls
H.
§ 238-4.1 MARSHFIELD CODE § 238-4.1
C:232
within financial hardship guidelines established by the Board of Public
Works [or by analogy the financial hardship guidelines in 220 CMR
25.01(2) (CMR applicable to regulated utility bills)], shall be considered
presumptive evidence of financial hardship unless otherwise
determined by the Board of Public Works. In the event of any breach
of the payment plan, termination of services may resume in accordance
with this bylaw.
Costs, expenses and reasonable counsel fees. The Town is authorized
to recover from any person, including individuals, corporations, trusts,
partnerships, limited liability company, or other entity whose payments
are in arrears its costs, expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees
associated with unpaid curbside waste pickup service bills, charges and
assessments, interest rates on unpaid charges, collection of fees and
expenses, and costs to restore services.
I.
Rules and regulations. The Board of Public Works is authorized to make
rules and regulations and establish fees for termination of service and
restoration of trash disposal rights or curbside waste pickup service.
J.
Severability. The invalidity of any portion or provisions of this bylaw
shall not invalidate any other portion or provision thereof.
K.
§ 238-4.1 CHARTER § 238-4.1
C:233

ARTICLE II
Restricted Material
[Adopted 4-28-1992 ATM by Art. 34 (Art. 68 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 238-5. Adoption of state restrictions. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
In accordance with 310 CMR 19.017, Waste Bans, the Town of Marshfield
adopts the general and specific restrictions of said regulation as it pertains
to the ban on disposal of the restricted material or the contracting for the
disposal of the restricted material.
§ 238-6. Determinations by Department of Environmental
Protection.
For the purpose of this bylaw the Department of Environmental Protection
(Department) may restrict or prohibit the disposal of certain components of
the solid waste stream when it determines that:
§ 238-7. Restrictions on disposal of material.
For the purpose of this bylaw, effective on the dates specified in the table
below, restrictions on the disposal of the materials listed therein shall
apply as specified. No person shall dispose or contract for disposal of the
restricted material except in accordance with the restriction established in
the table. No landfill shall accept the restricted material except to handle,
recycle or compost the material in accordance with a plan submitted
pursuant to 310 CMR 19.017(3) and approved by the Department.
Table 310 CMR 19.017(3)
Restricted Material
Effective Date of
Restriction
Restriction on
Disposal
Lead batteries December 31, 1990 Ban on disposal
Leaves December 31, 1991 Ban on disposal
Tires December 31, 1991 Ban on disposal of whole
tires only at landfills;
tires must be shredded
prior to disposal in
landfills
Disposal of the material presents a potential adverse impact to public
health, safety or the environment;
A.
A restriction or prohibition will result in the extension of the useful life
or capacity of a facility or class of facilities; or
B.
A specific facility or class of facilities is not approved for the disposal
of particular types of material and may not contract for the disposal of
particular types of material.
C.
§ 238-5 CHARTER § 238-7
C:235
Table 310 CMR 19.017(3)
Restricted Material
Effective Date of
Restriction
Restriction on
Disposal
White goods December 31, 1991 Ban on disposal
Other yard waste December 31, 1992 Ban on disposal
Post-consumer
recyclables
Aluminum containers December 31, 1992 Ban on disposal
Metal or glass
containers
December 31, 1992 Ban on disposal
Single polymer plastics December 31, 1994 Ban on disposal
Recyclable paper December 31, 1994 Ban on disposal
§ 238-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 238-7
C:236
ARTICLE III
Dumping into Waterways
[Adopted 1993 ATM by Art. 37 (Art. 70 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 238-8. Unlawful deposits.
No person shall throw or place any refuse, paper, trash, glass, nails, tacks,
wire, bottles, cans, yard trash, concrete, earthen fill, garbage containers,
or litter or other debris in any ditch, stream, river, or retention basin
that regularly or periodically carries surface water runoff. Any person(s)
who deposits any of the above shall remove it or cause it to be removed
immediately.
§ 238-9. Violations and penalties.
Persons violating this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of $300. Each day any
violation of this bylaw continues shall be regarded as a new and separate
offense. The penalties by the bylaw shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
§ 238-8 CHARTER § 238-9
C:237

ARTICLE IV
Dumpsters
[Adopted 4-23-2007 ATM by Art. 21 (Art. 84 of the General Bylaws);
amended 4-25-2016 ATM by Art. 20]
§ 238-10. Purpose; applicability.
This bylaw is enacted for the following reasons: to regulate solid waste
refuse and storage containers, reduce the amount of litter in areas
surrounding dumpsters, properly secure solid waste storage areas from
animals and children, to deter unauthorized use of dumpsters and minimize
the visual blight of dumpsters. This bylaw shall apply to all dumpsters
located within the Town of Marshfield.
§ 238-11. Dumpster requirements.
§ 238-12. Exemptions.
The following types of dumpsters are exempt from this bylaw:
As of January 1, 2008, all dumpsters and solid waste recycling facilities
visible to the general public from public streets and parking lots open
to the public, located within the Town of Marshfield, shall be screened
from view within an enclosure with the approval of the Fire
Department. Dumpsters shall be visually screened from view by one
of the following methods: six-foot-high solid fence, six-foot-high solid
wall or six-foot-high evergreen landscaped buffer that conceals the view
of the dumpster. The enclosure shall be maintained in good condition.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
A.
Dumpsters shall be of sufficient size and capacity to prevent overflow.
The business or residence authorized to use the dumpster shall take
appropriate action to empty dumpsters when they are filled to capacity.
B.
The property owner, tenant or business owner that contracts for the
dumpster service shall be responsible for keeping the dumpster area
free of litter, trash, debris and odor. The enclosure shall be kept closed
at all times except when the dumpster is being used or emptied.
C.
The dumpster service contractor shall have its name and business
telephone number displayed on the dumpster.
D.
Dumpsters shall comply with all other applicable state and local
sanitary code requirements.
E.
A. Temporary dumpsters in use for less than 30 days.
Construction dumpsters for which there is an active building permit
shall be removed within 30 days of project completion.
B.
§ 238-10 CHARTER § 238-13
C:239
§ 238-13. Violations and penalties.
There shall be a fifty-dollar fine from the Board of Health for each violation
of this bylaw. Each day of a violation will be considered a separate offense
until the dumpster is in compliance with this bylaw.
§ 238-13 MARSHFIELD CODE § 238-13
C:240
Chapter 246
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 246-1. Purpose and objectives.
Increased stormwater runoff and contaminated stormwater runoff are the
two major causes of impairment of lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands
and groundwater; contamination of drinking water supplies; alteration or
destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding. Regulation of
illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm drain system is
necessary for the protection of the Town's water bodies and groundwater,
and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the environment. The
objectives of this bylaw are:
§ 246-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this bylaw, the following words or terms shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Board of Public Works
(hereafter the Board), its employees or agents designated to enforce this
bylaw.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — An activity, procedure, or
structural improvement that helps to reduce the quantity or improve the
quality of stormwater runoff.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The discharge from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system
To help prevent pollutants from entering the Town's municipal storm
drain system;
A.
To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
Town's municipal storm drain system, a requirement of NPDES Phase
II General Permit (MS4);
B.
C. To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
To comply with state 314 CMR 3.0 and 314 CMR 5.0 and other state
and federal statutes and regulations relating to the quantity and quality
of stormwater discharges;
D.
To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this bylaw through inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement; and
E.
To establish the legal authority to allow connections to the Town's
municipal storm drain system through regulation adopted by the Board
of Public Works.
F.
§ 238-13 CHARTER § 246-2
C:241
or into the waters or wetlands of the United States or commonwealth or
waters of the Town from any source.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance
which allows an unauthorized illicit discharge into the municipal storm
drain system, including without limitation sewage, process wastewater,
wash water or any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets,
regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed, permitted,
or approved before the effective date of this bylaw.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm
drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as
exempted in § 246-8. The term does not include a discharge in compliance
with a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
stormwater discharge permit or a surface water discharge permit, or
discharge resulting from fire-fighting activities exempted pursuant to
§ 246-8Q of this bylaw.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on or above the
ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. "Impervious
surface" includes without limitation roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks,
and rooftops.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any
road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain,
pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or
altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that
together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the
Town of Marshfield.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or jointly with the state that
authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the municipal storm
drain system not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the
commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law,
and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter,
whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be
introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the
commonwealth. Pollutants shall include without limitation:
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
§ 246-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 246-2
C:242
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste
product.
RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater is replenished by
precipitation through the percolation of runoff and surface water through
the soil.
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water
runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER DISCHARGE — A discharge of stormwater runoff by a
system of conveyances (including pipes, conduits, ditches and channels)
used for collecting and conveying stormwater and as further defined by 314
CMR 5.04(2).
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00
that authorize the discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material which
because of its quantity, concentration, or chemical, corrosive, flammable,
reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately
or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present
or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment.
Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical,
petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and
alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C
and c. 21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.000.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or overflow of contents from
septic tank or cesspool, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning or
C. Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnances, accumulations and floatables;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
Hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens;
F.
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
H. Animal wastes;
I. Rock, sand, salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues;
K. Medical and bio-wastes; and
L. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
§ 246-2 CHARTER § 246-2
C:243
processing comes into direct contact with or results from the production or
use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product
or waste product.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel through which water
flows or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction
of the commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes,
ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and
groundwater.
WATERS OF THE TOWN — All waters within the Town outside the
jurisdiction of the commonwealth defined for the purpose of this bylaw.
§ 246-3. Applicability.
This bylaw shall apply to all flows entering the municipally owned storm
drainage system.
§ 246-4. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule
Procedures Act,11 and pursuant to the regulations of the federal Clean
Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
§ 246-5. Administration.
The Board of Public Works shall administer, implement and enforce this
bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Board may be
delegated in writing by the Board to employees or agents of the Board.
Copies of all orders of enforcement and correspondence shall be given to
the Board of Public Works for maintenance of records.
§ 246-6. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Public Works may promulgate rules and regulations to
effectuate the purposes of this bylaw. Failure by the Board to promulgate
such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or
invalidating this bylaw.
§ 246-7. Prohibited activities.
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, or cause or allow
to be discharged any pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into the
municipal storm drain system, into a watercourse, or into the waters of
the commonwealth, or waters of the Town.
A.
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or
continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain system,
B.
11.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 43B.
§ 246-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 246-7
C:244
§ 246-8. Exemptions.
The following non-stormwater discharges or flows are exempt from the
prohibition of non-stormwaters provided that the source is not a significant
contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain system:
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable
law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
Obstruction of municipal storm drain system. No person shall obstruct
or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the
municipal storm drain system without prior written approval from the
Board of Public Works.
C.
A. Waterline flushing;
B. Flow from potable water sources;
C. Springs;
D. Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
E. Diverted stream flow;
F. Rising groundwater;
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(b)(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater regulated
and permitted in accordance with the Marshfield Department of Public
Works Policy for Connection into the Town's Storm Drain System;
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
G.
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, or airconditioning
condensation regulated and permitted in accordance with
the Marshfield Department of Public Works Policy for Connection into
the Town's Storm Drain System;
H.
I. Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
J. Water from individual residential car washing;
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one ppm
chlorine) provided the water is allowed to stand for one week prior
to draining and the pool is drained in such a way as not to cause a
nuisance;
K.
L. Discharge from street sweeping;
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the Board of Public
Works prior to the time of the test;
M.
Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or a
surface water discharge permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
N.
§ 246-7 CHARTER § 246-8
C:245
§ 246-9. Emergency suspension of storm drainage system access.
The Board of Public Works may suspend municipal storm drain system
access to any person or property without prior written notice when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge of
pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health, safety,
welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an
emergency suspension order, the authorized enforcement agency may take
all reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety,
welfare or the environment.
§ 246-10. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon
as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of or
suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in
or which may result in discharge of pollutants to the municipal drainage
system or waters of the commonwealth, or waters of the Town, the person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment and cleanup of the
release. In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials, the person
shall immediately notify the Town's Fire and Police Departments,
Conservation Agent and the Town's Health Agent and Department of Public
Works. In the event of a release of non-hazardous material, the reporting
person shall notify the Conservation Agent, the Town's Health Agent and
Department of Public Works no later than the next business day. The
reporting person shall provide to the Conservation Agent and Department
of Public Works written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile or in-person
notifications within three business days thereafter. If the discharge of
prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility
owner or operator of the facility shall retain on site a written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 246-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
administered under the authority of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or the Department of Environmental Protection,
provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements
of the permit, waiver, or order and applicable laws and regulations;
Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from the
Board of Public Works as necessary to protect public health, safety,
welfare or the environment;
O.
P. Exemptions as defined under 314 CMR 3.05; and
Q. Discharge of flow resulting from fire-fighting activities.
The Board of Public Works or an authorized agent of the Board of
Public Works including the Conservation Agent and the Town's Health
A.
§ 246-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 246-11
C:246
Agent shall enforce this bylaw, regulations, orders, violation notices,
and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies
for such violations.
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this bylaw, regulations,
permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the Board of Public Works
or Conservation Agent or the Town's Health Agent may seek injunctive
relief in a court of competent jurisdiction restraining the person from
activities which would create further violations or compelling the
person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
B.
Orders. The Board of Public Works or an authorized agent of the Board
of Public Works, Conservation Agent, or the Town's Health Agent may
issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this bylaw or the
regulations thereunder, which may include:
Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the municipal
storm drain system;
(1)
(2) Performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist; and
(3)
(4) Remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
C.
If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation of
contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which
such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall
further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate
or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the Town may, at
its option, undertake such work, and expenses thereof shall be charged
to the violator.
D.
Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate the
violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the property
owner will be notified of the costs incurred by the Town, including
administrative costs. The violator or property owner may file a written
protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with the Board of
Public Works within 30 days of receipt of the notification of the costs
incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the time
in which to file a protest or within 30 days following a decision of the
Board of Public Works affirming or reducing the costs, or from a final
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall become a
special assessment against the property owner and shall constitute a
lien on the owner's property for the amount of said costs. Interest shall
begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate provided in
MGL c. 59, § 57, after the 31st day at which the costs first become due.
E.
Criminal penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw,
regulation, order or permit issued thereunder shall be punished by a
F.
§ 246-11 CHARTER § 246-11
C:247
§ 246-12. Severability.
The provisions of this bylaw are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this bylaw or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
bylaw.
§ 246-13. Transitional provisions.
fine of not more than $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the Town's enforcing officer may elect to utilize the
noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, and
adopted by the Town and set forth in Chapter 161, Article I, of the
Town of Marshfield General Bylaws. The penalty for the first violation
shall be $100. The penalty for the second violation shall be $200. The
penalty for the third and subsequent violations shall be $300. Each day
or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
G.
Entry to perform duties under this bylaw. To the extent permitted
by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control
of the property, employees authorized by the Board of Public Works,
Conservation Agent or Board of Health Agent may enter upon privately
owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this
bylaw and regulations and may make or cause to be made such
examinations, surveys or sampling as the Board of Public Works or
Conservation Agent or Town Health Agent deems reasonably necessary.
H.
Appeals. The decisions or orders of the Board of Public Works or its
agents, the Conservation Agent, or the Town's Health Agent shall be
final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
I.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this bylaw are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
J.
Existing connections. Property owners with existing connections shall
notify the DPW and provide detail of the connection to the Town's
municipal storm drainage system to obtain license or permit.
Modifications may be required due to concern with water quality, water
quantity or health and safety issues.
A.
Residential property owners shall have 365 days from the effective date
of the bylaw to comply with its provisions unless good cause is shown
for the failure to comply with the bylaw during that period. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
B.
§ 246-11 MARSHFIELD CODE § 246-13
C:248
§ 246-14. Indemnification.
Permit or license holders allowed to connect to the system shall hold the
Town harmless and the Town of Marshfield shall not be held liable for illicit
discharges to the stormwater system and receiving areas and receiving
waters caused by others.
Chapter 250
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Moving of buildings — See Ch. 40.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 43.
Coasting — See Ch. 180, Art. III.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 184.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 275.
Commercial property owners shall have 180 days from the effective
date of the bylaw to comply with its provisions unless good cause is
shown for the failure to comply with the bylaw during that period.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
C.
§ 246-13 CHARTER § 246-14
C:249

ARTICLE I
New Driveway Connections
[Adopted as Art. 36 of the General Bylaws]
§ 250-1. Authorization required.
No new driveway may be connected to an existing public way or any
alteration made to an existing shoulder or sidewalk on Town-owned land
without an authorization from the Board of Public Works.
§ 250-2. Application.
An application form must be submitted and if added information is deemed
necessary by the Board of Public Works, the applicant may be required to
submit a plan showing the necessary existing and proposed detail.
§ 250-3. Review and decision; performance bond.
The application and plan will be reviewed by the Board of Public Works and
the Police Safety Officer. The decision may result in approval, approval with
stipulations, or a request for a new plan with suggested revisions. Action by
the Department of Public Works must be taken within 15 working days of
the receipt of the application. The permit shall be valid for 12 months from
date of issue. A performance bond may be required in the amount necessary
to cover damage which might be incurred within the layout of the way.
§ 250-1 CHARTER § 250-3
C:251

ARTICLE II
Temporary Repair of Private Ways
[Adopted as Art. 52 of the General Bylaws; amended 1981 ATM by
Art. 8]
§ 250-4. Repairs by Department of Public Works.
The Department of Public Works may, subject to appropriation at the Annual
Town Meeting, make temporary repairs on private ways subject to the
following:
The extent of repairs shall be to fill holes or mend other damage with
materials similar to those used in the original construction. The intent
of repair is to maintain the private way of present quality permitting
safe passage when due caution is exercised.
A.
Drainage structures may be repaired or constructed to correct a poor
drainage or serious flowing problem which results in excessive
maintenance work.
B.
Repairs required by public necessity shall be performed without the
requirement for petition by abutters.
C.
The liability of the Town for damage caused while making the repairs
shall be limited to and inclusive of that recoverable against the Town as
provided for under Ch. 512, Acts of 1978.12
D.
Temporary repair of private ways will be limited to those ways which
have been continuously open to public use for six years and which
remain open for their future existence. Private ways posted as
restricted in use to owners and/or their guests will not be maintained.
E.
12.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 258.
§ 250-4 CHARTER § 250-4
C:253

ARTICLE III
Digging in or Obstructing Public Ways
[Adopted 1968 ATM by Art. 81 (Art. 35 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 250-5. Permit required.
No person, except the Board of Public Works and persons acting under the
Board's orders in the lawful performance of their duties, shall break up or
dig up the ground or any stones in any sidewalk or other part of any public
way, nor place thereon any staging or other temporary structure without a
written permit from the Board of Public Works. Any permit issued therefor
shall be in force for such time only as the Board may specify and shall be
subject to such conditions as it may prescribe, and in every case shall be
upon the condition that during the whole of every night, from twilight in the
evening to sunrise in the morning, lighted lanterns and proper barriers shall
be so placed as to secure travelers from danger, and upon further condition
that the permittee shall indemnify the Town against the claims of all persons
who may be injured in their persons and property by reason of the exercise
of the privileges conferred by the permit.
§ 250-6. Restoration of public way; revocation of permit; bond.
A person having a permit under § 250-5 of this article shall restore the
public way to its original condition or to a condition satisfactory to the
Board of Public Works. The Board shall have the right to revoke such permit
at any time and may require a bond, either before the work is commenced
or during its progress, to assure the proper performance of the work,
the restoration required herein, and/or the indemnification provided for in
§ 250-5 of this article.
§ 250-5 CHARTER § 250-6
C:255

ARTICLE IV
Acceptance of Streets
[Adopted 1970 ATM by Arts. 49, 51 and 52 (Art. 45 of the General
Bylaws)]
§ 250-7. Planning Board certification required.
No private way shall be accepted by the Town unless and until the Planning
Board shall have certified in writing to the Selectmen that such way is well
built and so constructed that it is at least equal to the average construction
of existing highways of the Town, with the proper grades in relation to
abutting land and connected streets, and that it conforms with the Planning
Board's rules and regulations; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to the ways laid out subject to any provisions of law relating to the
assessments of betterments.
§ 250-8. Claims for damages.
No private way shall be accepted for the purpose of construction or
alterations nor any way laid out or altered by the Selectmen until all claims
for damages have been estimated.
§ 250-9. Petitions.
Each petition for the layout of a street or way for acceptance at any Town
Meeting shall be presented to the Selectmen at least four months before
such meeting.
§ 250-7 CHARTER § 250-9
C:257

ARTICLE V
No Salt Zone
[Adopted 1971 ATM by Art. 79 (Art. 41 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 250-10. Zones established.
No sodium chloride, calcium chloride or other chemicals, except sand, shall
be used on the following Town-owned and/or Town-maintained streets for
winter road protection:
A. Old Ocean Street.
B. Mount Skirgo Street.
C. Old Mount Skirgo Street.
D. Parsonage Street (from Webster Street to Ocean Street).
E. School Street (from Forest Street to Old Main Street Extension).
F. Old Main Street Extension.
G. Forest Street (from Furnace Street to School Street).
Furnace Street (from Forest Street to Ferry Street). The Town voted to
amend its present bylaws to allow the limited use of a sand-salt mixture
(approximately eight parts sand to one part salt) in the present "No Salt
Zone" on Furnace Street extending from the intersection of Furnace
and Forest Streets to the intersection of Furnace and Ferry Streets.
[Amended 1973 ATM by Art. 38]
H.
I. Proctor Street.
§ 250-10 CHARTER § 250-10
C:259

ARTICLE VI
Deposit of Water
[Adopted 1982 ATM by Art. 27 (Art. 39 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 250-11. Prohibited acts.
No person shall pipe, or otherwise deposit, in or upon any public street,
public place, or private way open to the public, any water or substance
which may freeze or otherwise create a hazardous condition.
§ 250-12. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
If, after notice from the Department of Public Works to correct the
hazardous condition, such person shall fail to do so, a fine of $50 per day for
every day the violation continues shall be imposed. This may be recovered
on complaint in the District Court, which sum shall enure to the use of the
Town.
§ 250-11 CHARTER § 250-12
C:261

ARTICLE VII
Scenic Roads
[Adopted 1996 ATM by Art. 33; amended 2005 ATM by Art. 22;
4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 18 (Art. 73 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 250-13. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to ensure that streets and roads which have
been designated as scenic roads are not altered, repaired, reconstructed,
or paved in such a manner as to involve or include the cutting or removal
of trees, or the tearing down or destruction of stone walls, except with
the prior written consent of the Planning Board, and to establish proper
procedures, standards and conditions for obtaining approval from the
Planning Board and, when appropriate, the Tree Warden.
§ 250-14. Authority.
This bylaw is enacted pursuant to authority vested in the Town by MGL c.
40, §§ 21 and 15C, and c. 87, § 2.
§ 250-15. Designated streets and roads.
The following streets and roads have been designated by the Town as
scenic roads pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 15C (listed by name and date of
designation):
Acorn Street (1976)
Bow Street (1977)
Canal Street (1976)
Canoe Tree Street (1977)
Church Street (1974)
Cornhill Lane (1977)
Cross Street (1997)
Dog Lane (1977)
Elm Street (1997)
Ferry Street (1974)
Forest Street (1976)
Highland Street (1974)
Marginal Street (1977)
Maryland Street (1997)
New Street (1977)
Old Main Street (1976)
Old Main Street Extension (1976)
Old Mount Skirgo (1977)
§ 250-13 CHARTER § 250-15
C:263
Old Ocean Street (1996)
Old Plain Street (1976)
Parsonage Street (1974)
Pine Street (1974)
Pleasant Street (1976)
Prospect Street (1977)
Pudding Hill Lane (1976)
School Street (1974)
South River Street (1974)
Spring Street (1974)
Summer Street (1974)
Union Street (1974)
Webster Street (1976)
Willow Street (1977)
Winslow Cemetery Road (1974)
Winslow Street (1976)
§ 250-16. Procedure to designate scenic road.
The Planning Board, the Board of Selectmen, the Conservation Commission,
or the Historical Commission, or by petition of citizens of the Town
(consistent with petition requirements to place an article on the warrant),
may propose that a street or way in the Town be designated as a scenic road
within the meaning of MGL c. 40, § 15C, other than a street or way with a
numbered route or that which is considered to be a state highway.
In order to be eligible for such a designation, streets or ways must also
meet the following minimum criteria:
The street or way must be bordered by trees of exceptional quality;
and/or
(1)
(2) The street or way must be bordered by stone walls; and/or
The street or way must be bordered by other natural or man-made
features of aesthetic or historic value.
(3)
A.
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the petition, after
notifying the Selectmen, the Tree Warden, the DPW Superintendent,
the Conservation Commission and the Historical Commission of the
time, date, place and purpose of the hearing, and advertising the time,
date, place and purpose of the hearing twice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area, the first advertisement at least 14 days prior to
the date of the public hearing and the last publication to occur at least
seven days prior to such hearing.
B.
§ 250-15 MARSHFIELD CODE § 250-16
C:264
§ 250-17. Definitions.
In the absence of contrary meaning established through legislation or
judicial action pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 15C, these terms contained in that
statute shall be construed as follows:
CUTTING OR REMOVAL OF TREES — Shall not be construed to include
routine or emergency tree maintenance which removes only permanently
diseased or damaged limbs, trunks or roots or whole trees as determined by
the Tree Warden, or sound limbs, trunks or roots of a tree with a diameter
six inches or larger measured one foot above ground level, that hinder a
public way as determined by the Tree Warden.
REPAIR, MAINTENANCE, RECONSTRUCTION OR PAVING WORK — Any
work done within the right-of-way by any person or agency, public or
private. Construction of new driveways or alterations of existing ones is also
included to the extent that such work takes place within the right-of-way.
ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire right-of-way including, but not limited
to, a vehicular traveled way, plus its necessary appurtenances within the
right-of-way, including bridge structures, drainage systems, retaining walls,
traffic control devices, pedestrian facilities and the air space above them,
but not intersecting streets or driveways. When the boundary of the rightof-
way is in issue so that a dispute arises as to whether or not certain trees
or stone walls are within the right-of-way, the boundary shall be determined
in accordance with MGL c. 86.
STONE WALLS — Shall not be construed to include assemblages of stone
involving less than one cubic foot of wall material per linear foot (above the
existing grade) nor totaling less than five feet in length.
TEARING DOWN OR DESTRUCTION OF STONE WALLS — Shall not be
construed to include temporary removal and replacement within 30 days at
the same location with the same materials.
TREES — Any woody plants with a trunk two inches or greater diameter
providing visual or noise screen or aesthetic value or having a trunk
diameter with a diameter of six inches or larger, one foot above the ground.
§ 250-18. Design standards.
A scenic road application shall conform to the following design standards:
Based on the information presented at the public hearing, the Planning
Board shall make a recommendation to the Town Meeting on the merits
of designation of the proposed road as a scenic way. A majority vote
of Town Meeting is required for designation. Such designation shall be
effective as of the date of Town Meeting action.
C.
Where stone walls exist, the maximum amount of stone wall to be
removed shall be limited to a maximum of 24 feet width.
Removed stone shall be used to repair other sections of the wall
along the road.
(1)
A.
§ 250-16 CHARTER § 250-18
C:265
§ 250-19. Procedure to obtain approval for work on scenic roads.
Any person or organization seeking consent of the Planning Board under
MGL c. 40, § 15C (the Scenic Road Act), regarding the cutting or removal of
trees or the tearing down or destruction of stone walls, or portions thereof,
in connection with the repair, maintenance, reconstruction or paving work
on scenic roads, shall submit a written request to the Planning Board by
filing such request with the Town Clerk, with a copy to the Tree Warden,
together with the following:
No wall shall be cut without construction of tapered ends turning
back onto the lot along the drive (see attached drawing).13
(2)
No tree with a trunk exceeding eight inches in diameter four feet above
the ground level shall be cut for a driveway unless the curb cut cannot
be safely located otherwise; clusters of trees located within six feet of
each other with individual trunks of six inches in diameter, one foot
above ground level, shall not be cut for a driveway unless the curb cut
cannot be safely located otherwise.
B.
For each tree exceeding six inches in diameter, one foot above ground
level, removed, a tree in a species and location suitable to the Planning
Board and Tree Warden shall be planted or the amount for the planting
of a tree shall be donated to the Tree Fund to be used at the discretion
of the Tree Warden.
C.
A. A completed application form.
A plan showing the location and the nature of the proposed action and
a description of the proposed changes to trees and stone walls. Two
copies of the plan showing the proposed changes are required.
B.
C. A statement of the purpose(s) for the changes.
Notice of the public hearing, which shall include the size, type and
location of the trees(s) and/or stone wall to be cut or removed shall be
given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town
of Marshfield once in each of two successive weeks, the last publication
of said notice to occur at least seven days before the day of the hearing.
D.
Any tree(s) proposed to be removed shall be flagged (with red tape) a
minimum of 14 days before the day of the hearing.
E.
Portions of any stone wall to be removed shall be staked and flagged
(with red tape) a minimum of 14 days before the day of the hearing.
F.
G. Except in the case of Town agencies, a filing fee of $200 shall be paid.
Photograph(s) of the existing site showing the area to be affected by
work on the scenic road in question. All photographs must be signed
and dated by the applicant.
H.
13.Editor's Note: The drawing is on file at the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 250-18 MARSHFIELD CODE § 250-19
C:266
§ 250-20. Public hearing. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The Planning Board and Tree Warden shall hold a joint public hearing within
45 days from the date on which notice of submittal is received by the Town
Clerk. The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed within 14 days of the
close of the public hearing with the Town Clerk. Copies of the decision shall
also be sent to the applicant, the Tree Warden, the Building Commissioner,
the Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission and those persons
who have requested a copy of the decision.
§ 250-21. Considerations.
In acting in regard to a scenic road, the Planning Board and Tree Warden
shall consider the following:
§ 250-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of the second paragraph of the
Massachusetts Scenic Roads Act (MGL c. 40, § 15C) shall be punished
by a fine of $300 per day. For the purpose of this section, fines may be
assessed by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and/or a police officer of the
Town of Marshfield. Each day during which such a person continues to
be in violation of the provisions of said Act shall be considered to be a
separate violation for the purpose of the assessment of fines under this
bylaw. Violations of the bylaw may be handled by noncriminal disposition in
accordance with MGL c, 40, § 21D.
Any further explanatory material useful to adequately inform the Tree
Warden and/or Planning Board prior to the public hearing.
I.
A. Preservation of scenic and aesthetic characteristics;
Preservation of natural resources and environmental and historical
values;
B.
C. Public safety, traffic volume and congestion;
D. Compensatory actions proposed, such as replacement of trees or walls;
Financial and other consequences of design revision to avoid or reduce
damage to trees or stone walls;
E.
F. Other site-specific factors.
§ 250-19 CHARTER § 250-22
C:267

ARTICLE VIII
Street Opening Permits
[Adopted 1997 ATM by Art. 43 (Art. 75 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 250-23. Permit required; indemnification; conditions.
No person, except a duly authorized officer of the Town, shall, without a
permit from the Board of Public Works, dig up any portion of a public
way. Every permit granted shall specify the length of time it shall continue
in force. Every person receiving such permit shall execute a written
agreement to indemnify and save harmless the Town against all damages,
attorneys' fees or costs by reason of any claim for damages arising out of the
existence of such excavation. The Board of Public Works may impose such
conditions, terms and limitations as it shall see fit in respect to erecting
barricades, maintaining lights, and taking other precautions for the safety
of travelers.
§ 250-24. Notice of street improvements. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM
by Art. 10]
Whenever the Town has developed plans to apply an asphalt overlay (1 1/2
inches or greater in thickness) or to perform any other kind of substantial
repair or reconstruction of a publicly maintained street, the Board of Public
Works, or its representative, will give written notice to the Town
departments and to all public utilities which it knows to have pipes, wires or
other facilities in or under the street proposed for repair. Notice shall also
be given by publishing the same once in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Town. Such notices shall be given at least 60 days prior to the date
upon which construction is to begin.
§ 250-25. Installation of facilities prior to improvement.
Any person or utility wishing to install pipes, wires or other facilities under
the street proposed for repairs shall have 60 days from the date such notice
is published in which to install or lay any such facility. If an extension of
time is needed by a person or utility for the installation of such facilities,
the person or utility shall make a written application to the Board of Public
Works explaining fully the reasons for requesting such an extension of
time. In making its decision, the Board shall weigh the public interest
in expeditious completion of the proposed street improvements against
any hardship which may be suffered by the applicant if an extension is
not granted. The decision of the Board shall be final as to any requested
extension.
§ 250-26. No permit granted after construction; exceptions.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
At the expiration of the time period and after such street has been
reconstructed, no permit shall be granted to open such street for a period
of three years after conclusion of construction, unless in the judgment of
§ 250-23 CHARTER § 250-26
C:269
the Board of Public Works an emergency condition exists or the necessity
for making such installation could not reasonably have been foreseen at the
time such notice was given. If a permit is granted during such three-year
period, the Town may impose extraordinary conditions on the permittee
as necessary to preserve the structural condition of the pavement to the
same extent as if the street had not been opened, and to blend the patch
necessitated by the street opening with the existing pavement.
§ 250-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity found having opened the public right-of-way without
the proper authority or permit shall be assessed the appropriate fee plus a
fine of $300.
§ 250-26 MARSHFIELD CODE § 250-27
C:270
Chapter 253
STRETCH ENERGY CODE
§ 253-1. Adoption of provisions.
The Town of Marshfield has accepted and adopted the provisions of 780
CMR 120.AA (i.e., Appendix 120.AA of the State Building Code or the
"Stretch Energy Code"), as may be amended from time to time, in place of
the provisions set forth under 780 CMR 13.00, 34.00, 61.00 and 93.00.14
§ 253-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code shall be to provide the Town with
a more energy efficient alternative to the base energy code otherwise set
forth under the State Building Code.
Chapter 275
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 278.
14.Editor's Note: The Stretch Energy Code is now 780 CMR 115.AA.
§ 250-27 CHARTER § 253-2
C:271

ARTICLE I
Removal of Vehicles for Snow Removal
[Adopted 1964 ATM by Art. 48 (Art. 34 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 275-1. Authority of Department of Public Works. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The Department of Public Works may, for the removal or plowing of snow or
removal of ice from any public way, remove or cause to be removed to some
convenient place, including any public garage, any vehicle which interferes
with the removal or the plowing of such snow or such ice.
§ 275-2. Vehicle owner liable for costs.
In the event that such vehicle is so removed, the owner of said vehicle shall
be liable for the cost of such removal and of the storage charges, if any,
resulting therefrom, charges to be set and published by the Selectmen.
§ 275-3. Violations and penalties.
Failure to pay the aforesaid costs within 60 days after billing shall subject
the owner of any vehicle so involved to a fine of $50 for each offense
enforceable in the Third District Court of Plymouth, any such fines to enure
to the Town.
§ 275-1 CHARTER § 275-3
C:273

ARTICLE II
Motor Vehicles on Bridle Path
[Adopted 1974 ATM by Art. 87; amended 2006 ATM by Art. 17 (Art.
40 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 275-4. Use prohibited; exceptions.
No person shall operate any motor-powered vehicle on the Bridle Path
(as designated by Article 6 of the 1951 Special Town Meeting) except for
emergency use or use by Town vehicles.
§ 275-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
The penalty for violations of the foregoing shall be $300 for each offense
and may be recovered on complaint in the District Court, which sum shall
enure to the use of the Town.
§ 275-4 CHARTER § 275-5
C:275

ARTICLE III
Handicapped Parking
[Adopted 1997 ATM by Art. 31 (Art. 74 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 275-6. Number of spaces to be provided.
Designated parking spaces for vehicles owned and operated by disabled
veterans or by handicapped persons and bearing the distinctive number
plates or placards authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2, shall be provided in public
and private off-street parking areas as follows:
§ 275-7. Identification of designated spaces.
Parking spaces designated as reserved under the provisions of § 275-6A
shall be identified by the use of above-grade signs with white lettering
against a blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking:
Special Plate or Placard Required. Unauthorized Vehicles May be Removed
at Owner's Expense" and shall be as near as possible to a building entrance
or walkway; shall be adjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods
permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person; and shall be 12 feet
wide or two eight-foot-wide areas with four feet of cross hatch between
them. Such spaces shall be identified by a sign at each space. This sign shall
be located at a height of not less than five feet nor more than eight feet to
the top of the sign.
Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or private
way or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking
areas for business, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or
recreational facilities, cultural centers, residential dwellings or for any
other place where the public has a right of access as invitees or
licensees shall be required to reserve parking spaces in said off-street
parking areas for any vehicle owned and operated by a disabled veteran
or handicapped person whose vehicle bears the distinguishing license
plate or placard authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2, according to following
formula:
If the number of parking spaces in any such area is more than 15
but not more than 25, one parking space; more than 25 but not
more than 40, 5% of such spaces but not less than two; more than
40 but not more than 100, 4% of such spaces but not less than
three; more than 100 but not more than 200, 3% of such spaces
but not less than four; more than 200 but not more than 500, 2% of
such spaces but not less than six; more than 500 but not more than
1,000, 1 1/2% of such spaces but not less than 10; more than 1,000
but not more than 2,000, 1% of such spaces but not less than 15;
more than 2,000 but less than 5,000, 3/4 of 1% of such spaces but
not less than 20; and more than 5,000, 1/2 of 1% of such spaces but
not less than 30.
(1)
A.
§ 275-6 CHARTER § 275-8
C:277
§ 275-8. Prohibited parking.
The leaving of unauthorized vehicles within parking spaces designated for
use by disabled veterans or handicapped persons pursuant to this bylaw
or in such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designed for use by
handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way is
prohibited.
§ 275-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
The penalty for violations of the provisions of this bylaw shall be $100. The
illegally parked vehicle may be removed according to the provisions of MGL
c. 40, § 22D.
§ 275-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 275-9
C:278
Chapter 278
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
§ 278-1. License required.
No person shall set up, use or drive within the limits of the Town any
vehicle, however propelled, for hire for the conveyance of passengers
without a license from the Selectmen.
§ 278-2. Grant and revocation of licenses; records.
The Selectmen will from time to time grant licenses to such persons, and
upon such terms as they shall deem expedient, and they may revoke such
license at their discretion, and a record of all licenses so granted shall be
kept by the Town Clerk.
§ 278-3. Expiration of license; fee; transfer of license.
All licenses granted as aforesaid, for which a uniform fee shall be
established by the Selectmen, shall expire on December 31, after the date
thereof, and no license shall be sold or transferred without the consent of
the Selectmen endorsed thereon.
Chapter 285
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water Resource Protection District — See Ch.
417.
§ 275-9 CHARTER § 278-3
C:279

ARTICLE I
Water Pipes
[Adopted 1959 ATM by Art. 38 (Art. 26 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 285-1. Special assessments.
The Department of Public Works may levy special assessments to meet
the whole or part of the cost hereafter incurred of laying water pipes in
public or private ways for the conveyance or distribution of water to the
inhabitants of the Town. An owner of land which receives benefit from the
laying of water pipes in public or private ways upon which his land abuts,
or which by more remote means receives benefit through the supply of
water to his land or buildings, shall pay a proportionate part of the cost not
already assessed of extending such water supply to his land.
The Department of Public Works shall ascertain, assess and certify the
amount to be charged against each parcel of land receiving such benefit
and such amount shall include the cost of the pipes and other material
and labor in laying such pipes, and any other expenses incidental
thereto.
A.
Such assessment for the cost of providing and laying water pipes in
public and private ways shall be made upon the several parcels of
land receiving benefit from the laying of said pipes by a fixed uniform
rate based upon the estimated average cost of all the water pipes and
appurtenances and the laying thereof, according to the frontage of such
land on any way in which a water pipe is laid, or according to the area
of such land within a fixed depth of 100 feet from such way.
B.
C. A lien for such assessments shall run with the land so assessed.
§ 285-1 CHARTER § 285-1
C:281

ARTICLE II
Water Conservation
[Adopted 1989 ATM by Art. 26 (Art. 66 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 285-2. Findings, purpose and intent.
§ 285-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
WATER SAVINGS COST ESTIMATE — The estimated cost of procuring,
financing, installing, maintaining, and replacing of a water use system
including the cost savings in consumption of water by use of mitigating
measures and alternative solutions covered by water savings initiatives.
WATER SAVINGS INITIATIVES — Actions that will be taken by the applicant
for a water connection permit to demonstrate water savings to the
Municipal Water System equivalent to the increased demand caused by
the new service(s) by use of mitigating measures and alternative solutions,
including but not necessarily limited to use of ultra low flow devices,
recycling and reuse systems, use of nonpotable water, and/or backfit of
current water use fixtures in the Town with low flow devices.
§ 285-4. Conditions for new water connections.
The Marshfield Municipal Water System is overburdened due to
unanticipated excessive and expanded water usage, degradation of the
system material condition, and loss of water sources due to chemical
contamination. This bylaw will reduce the effect on public health and
safety resulting from the material deficiencies and minimize future
strain on the system.
A.
It is the intent of this bylaw to conserve the valuable water supply of
the Town, to minimize wastewater disposal, and to protect the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public.
B.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall not issue a permit to connect
to the Marshfield Municipal Water System unless the following are
submitted with the application for such permit:
A water savings cost estimate to demonstrate the methodology and
cost necessary to reduce water consumed in the Municipal Water
System equivalent to the increased demand for water caused by the
new service connection(s).
(1)
A written commitment to a water savings initiative that would
reduce water usage in the Municipal Water System equivalent
to the increased demand caused by the requested new water
service(s), using methods set forth in § 285-3 of this bylaw. Water
savings initiatives offered shall not be duplicative of initiatives on
(2)
A.
§ 285-2 CHARTER § 285-4
C:283
§ 285-5. Applicability; when effective.
§ 285-6. Costs.
The applicant shall assume all costs that may be incurred to comply with
this bylaw.
§ 285-7. Appeals.
file unless the Superintendent of Public Works agrees that such
duplication is appropriate under the circumstances.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall condition new water
connections upon conformity to this bylaw regarding the
implementation of measures to effectively conserve, recycle, and/or
reuse water.
B.
The Board of Health shall review and approve the water conservation,
recycling, or reuse initiatives and commitments to ensure that
applicable public health rules and regulations are not violated.
C.
The Board of Public Works will consult with the Board of Health,
the Building Commissioner, the Planning Board, and/or Conservation
Commission respecting the implementation of this bylaw and shall
promulgate further rules and regulations as deemed necessary or
prudent to reduce the demands on the Marshfield Municipal Water
System. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
D.
Water service shall not actually be provided until the Department of
Public Works verifies that the water savings initiatives committed to by
the applicant have been fully and effectively implemented.
E.
This bylaw shall apply in all use districts of the Town of Marshfield
Municipal Water System to applications for water connections intended
to serve any new commercial, industrial, or multifamily residential use,
or any new single-family residential use located in a subdivision shown
on a plan approved by the Planning Board which subdivision contains
two or more lots not yet built upon. This bylaw shall also apply to any
change in a use served by an existing water connection where such use
will substantially increase the demand for water at such connection.
A.
All practical measures to conserve, recycle, and reuse water as
indicated in the applicant's water savings initiative must be
conformable with applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules and
regulations.
B.
This bylaw shall become effective upon approval by the Attorney
General of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
C.
Persons aggrieved by a decision of the Superintendent of Public Works
as to the denial of water service connections based on this bylaw may
appeal to the Board of Public Works.
A.
§ 285-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 285-7
C:284
§ 285-8. Variances.
The Board of Public Works may, at its discretion, grant variances from
provisions of this bylaw, upon appeal, or impose reasonable conditions in
lieu of full compliance therewith, if the majority determines that any of the
following conditions exist:
§ 285-9. Declaration of public nuisance; abatement; violations and
penalties.
A public hearing shall be held by the Board of Public Works prior to
sustaining or overruling the refusal of the Superintendent of Public
Works to allow a water service connection.
B.
The requirements herein would cause an unnecessary and undue
hardship upon the owner or purchaser of the facility or the public.
Guidelines generally illustrating such potential exemptions to this
bylaw shall be proposed by the Superintendent of Public Works and
adopted by the Board of Public Works; or
A.
The requirements of this bylaw would create an emergency condition
affecting the health, sanitation, fire protection, or safety of the facility
owner or the public; or
B.
The granting of the exemption or imposition of reasonable conditions in
lieu of compliance with the requirements herein would not increase the
quantity of water consumed by the facility or otherwise adversely affect
service to other existing water consumers of the Town.
C.
Any building or structure constructed, altered or maintained contrary
to the provisions of this bylaw and/or any use of any land, building,
or premises established or maintained contrary to this bylaw shall be
declared in violation of this bylaw and a public nuisance.
A.
The Board of Public Works may summarily abate the public nuisance
and bring action to enjoin or abate the nuisance. The Board may also:
Impose a water service surcharge of up to $50 for each day that
any unlawful connection continues.
(1)
Terminate the water service for a period of time up to and including
permanent disconnection.
(2)
B.
The amount of the surcharge imposed by the Board of Public Works
shall be based on the nature, circumstances, extent, or gravity of the
violation, and with respect to the violator, on the ability to pay, prior
history of violations, degree of culpability, or such other factors as may
be appropriate under the circumstances. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM
by Art. 10]
C.
Persons violating this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of $300. Each
day any violation of this bylaw continues shall be regarded as a new
D.
§ 285-7 CHARTER § 285-9
C:285
§ 285-10. Conflicting provisions.
A conflict of one part or provision of this bylaw with any law, rule, or
regulation of competent authority shall not affect the validity or
applicability of any other part or provision of this bylaw.
and separate offense. The penalties provided by this bylaw shall be
cumulative and not exclusive.
Should any person, firm, or corporation violate the terms of this bylaw
and any action is authorized or commenced by the Board of Public
Works, then no further action shall be taken on any application for
a water hookup permit filed by or on behalf of the violators until
the action regarding the violation has been concluded or resolved.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
E.
§ 285-9 MARSHFIELD CODE § 285-10
C:286
ARTICLE III
Water Restrictions
[Adopted 10-24-2005 STM by Art. 5 (Art. 82 of the General Bylaws)]
§ 285-11. Intent and applicability.
§ 285-12. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted by the Town under its police powers to protect public
health and welfare and its powers under MGL c. 40, § 21 et seq. The Town's
authority to implement and regulate water use is authorized pursuant to
MGL c. 41, § 69B. This bylaw also implements the Town's authority under
MGL c. 40, § 41A, and is conditioned upon a declaration of water supply
emergency issued by the Department of Environmental Protection.
§ 285-13. Purpose. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The purpose of this bylaw is to protect, preserve and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare whenever there is in force a state of water
supply conservation or state of water emergency. This bylaw provides for
enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions or
conditions imposed by the Town or by the Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 285-14. Definitions.
For the purposes of this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or association, or
other entity.
STATE OF WATER EMERGENCY — An emergency declared by the
Department of Environmental Protection under MGL c. 21G, §§ 15 to 17.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — Restrictions of water use as
declared pursuant to § 285-15 of this bylaw.
The adoption of this water restriction bylaw enables the Marshfield
Board of Public Works to control and mitigate periods of high demand,
with an associated stressed water supply, typically occurring during
the summer months as outlined below in accordance with the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
A.
The restrictions are applicable to persons connected to the Town's
public water system and include odd/even day outdoor watering,
limited outdoor watering hours, outdoor watering bans, and
prohibitions on filling swimming pools and the use of automatic
irrigation sprinkler systems. Persons violating the bylaw's restrictions
are subject to civil fines.
B.
§ 285-11 CHARTER § 285-14
C:287
WATER USERS or WATER CONSUMERS — All users of the Town's public
water supply system, irrespective of any person's responsibility for billing
purposes for water used at any particular facility.
§ 285-15. Declaration of state of water supply conservation.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The Town, through the Board of Public Works, may after a public hearing
declare a state of water supply conservation upon a determination by a
majority vote of the Board of Public Works that a shortage of water exists
and conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply
of water to all water consumers. Public notice of a state of water supply
conservation shall be given under § 285-17 of this bylaw before it may be
enforced.
§ 285-16. Restricted water uses. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
10]
A declaration of a state of water supply conservation shall include one
or more of the following restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting
the use of water as necessary to protect the water supply. The applicable
restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public
notice under § 285-17.
§ 285-17. Notice of state of water supply conservation.
Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition imposed
by the Town as part of a state of water supply conservation shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Town, or by
such other means reasonably calculated to reach and inform all users of
water of the state of water supply conservation. Any restriction imposed
under § 285-16 shall not be effective until such notification is provided.
Notification of the state of water supply conservation shall also be
simultaneously provided to the Department of Environmental Protection.
Odd/even day outdoor watering. Outdoor watering by water users with
odd-numbered addresses is restricted to odd-numbered days. Outdoor
watering by water users with even-numbered addresses is restricted to
even-numbered days.
A.
B. Outdoor watering ban. Outdoor watering is prohibited.
Outdoor watering hours. Outdoor watering is permitted only during
daily periods of low demand, to be specified in the declaration of a state
of water supply conservation and public notice thereof.
C.
Filling of swimming pool. Filling of swimming pools is prohibited,
unless otherwise specified by the Board of Public Works.
D.
Automatic irrigation sprinkler system use. The use of automatic
irrigation sprinkler system is prohibited.
E.
§ 285-14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 285-18
C:288
§ 285-18. Termination of state of water supply conservation.
A state of water supply conservation may be terminated by a majority vote
of the Board of Public Works, upon a determination that the water supply
shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the termination of a state of
water supply conservation shall be given in the same manner as required
in § 285-17 and shall also be simultaneously provided to the Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 285-19. State of water emergency. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 10]
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a state of water
emergency has been issued by the Department of Environmental Protection,
no person shall violate any provision, restriction, requirement, or condition
of any order approved or issued by the DEP intended to bring about an end
to the state of water emergency.
§ 285-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this bylaw shall receive a written warning for the
first offense. Any person shall then be liable to the Town in the amount
of $50 for the second violation and $100 for each subsequent violation
thereafter which shall enure to the Town. Notwithstanding the provisions
of any special law to the contrary, fines shall be recovered by indictment
or on complaint before a district court, or by noncriminal disposition in
accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense. Repeated violations of this bylaw will also be grounds for
termination of water service by the Board of Public Works for a period of
time up to and including permanent disconnection.
§ 285-21. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision thereof.
§ 285-22. Enforcement.
The Board of Public Works is authorized to utilize the Town Counsel to file
suit seeking injunction enforcement of this bylaw.
§ 285-18 CHARTER § 285-22
C:289

ARTICLE IV
Unpaid Charges and Termination of Service
[Adopted 10-16-2017 STM by Art. 16]
§ 285-23. Intent and applicability.
The adoption of this bylaw shall enable the Board of Public Works to
establish due dates for the payment of water service and use charges and,
in the event of nonpayment, the accrual of interest, the recovery of fees and
expenses, and termination of water service.
§ 285-24. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted by the Town under MGL c. 40, § 21E, and MGL c. 41,
§ 69B, and its authority to implement and regulate water usage and public
water supply in and for the Town of Marshfield.
§ 285-25. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to authorize the establishment of due dates
for municipal water bills, charges and assessments, interest rates on unpaid
charges, collection of fees and expenses on unpaid and/or late charges, and,
where appropriate, the termination of water service and the recovery of
fees and expenses to restore services.
§ 285-26. Definitions.
See applicable definitions under § 285-14 as to definition of person and
water users or water consumers which are incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 285-27. Municipal charges.
Pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21E, the due date for payment of municipal water
charges and bills to any person, including individuals, corporations, trusts,
partnerships, limited liability company, or other entity or water users or
water consumers shall be 30 days from its issuance evidenced by the date
of the postmark. If such bills or charges remain unpaid after such due date,
interest shall be charged at the same rate as that on overdue tax bills under
the provisions of MGL c. 57, § 59. By law (MGL c. 40, § 42B) all charges for
water or service become a lien against the property immediately following
the due date for such charge. Failure to pay before the next billing cycle
may result in termination of water service as set forth herein.
§ 285-28. Late notices and notices of termination.
On or after the 30th day after the due date, a reminder notice may be issued
to person, including individuals, corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited
liability company, or other entity whose payments are in arrears, water
users or water consumers. On or after the 45th day a past due notice will
be issued by mail and (or) certified mail with interest along with the final
§ 285-23 CHARTER § 285-28
C:291
date for shutoff, plus an administrative fee to be established by the Board
of Public Works. On or after the 60th day notice will be delivered to the
home in the form of a letter notifying the person(s), including individuals,
corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited liability company, or other entity
or water user or water consumer that the water service will be shut off
within 48 hours of notice. All bills, expenses, penalties, and administration
cost must be paid in full before water service is restored, unless a payment
plan has been worked out with the Town, acting by and through its
Superintendent of Public Works and/or Treasurer-Collector.
§ 285-29. Termination notice and termination.
If after 60 days the charges and bill(s) remains unpaid, a shut-off notice
in the form of a certified letter will be sent initiating a forty-eight-hour
advance notice period prior to water service termination. After 48 hours,
water service may be terminated by the Town, acting by its Board of Public
Works, at any time subject to the exceptions set forth herein. The officers,
employees or agents of the Town and/or Board of Public Works, may, upon
any business day between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. enter
upon the premises of a person, including individuals, corporations, trusts,
partnerships, limited liability company, or other entity whose payments are
in arrears and close a valve, remove or disconnect a meter pipe or fitting,
if necessary, for the purpose of effectuating the termination of the flow of
water as above authorized.
§ 285-30. Exceptions for special circumstances:
There will be no termination of service as follows:
(1) Between November 1st and April 1st; or
(2) Everyone in the household is over 65; or
All adults living in the home are over 65 and a minor child resides
in the home; or
(3)
The water user or water consumer who actually lives in the home
is seriously ill; or
(4)
(5) There is a child under the age of ten living in the home; or
(6) If there is a disabled veteran living in the home.
A.
For the purposes of this exception policy, no water will be shut off if
anyone in the household (adult or child) has a serious illness. A serious
illness can be physical (such as asthma, or pneumonia), mental (such
as depression or bipolar disorder), short-term (such as the flu), or longterm
(such as cancer). In order to substantiate a serious illness, a letter
from a doctor, nurse practitioner, physician assistant or the local Board
of Health shall be required; however, a phone call from the doctor's
office may be accepted temporarily, but a letter must be sent within five
B.
§ 285-28 MARSHFIELD CODE § 285-30
C:292
§ 285-31. Financial hardship/payment plans.
The Town, acting by and through its Superintendent of Public Works and/or
Treasurer-Collector, in recognition of appropriate circumstances involving
some financial hardship, is authorized in its/their discretion, to approve
a payment plan. A signed statement by the person, including individuals,
corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited liability company, or other entity
whose payments are in arrears or water user or water consumer showing
that his/her income falls within financial hardship guidelines established by
the Board of Public Works [(or by analogy the financial hardship guidelines
in 220 CMR 25.01(2) (CMR applicable to regulated utility bills)], shall be
considered presumptive evidence of financial hardship unless otherwise
determined by the Board of Public Works. In the event of any breach of the
payment plan, termination of services may resume in accordance with this
bylaw.
§ 285-32. Costs, expenses and reasonable counsel fees.
The Town is authorized to recover from person, including individuals,
corporations, trusts, partnerships, limited liability company, or other entity
whose payments are in arrears or water users or water consumers its costs,
expenses and reasonable attorneys' fees associated with unpaid water bills,
charges and assessments, interest rates on unpaid charges, collection of
fees and expenses, and costs to restore services.
§ 285-33. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Public Works is authorized to make rules and regulations and
establish fees for termination of service and restoration of service.
§ 285-34. Severability.
The invalidity of any portion or provisions of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other portion or provision thereof.
days to the Town, acting by and through its Superintendent of Public
Works and/or Treasurer-Collector.
§ 285-30 CHARTER § 285-34
C:293
Chapter 290
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
§ 290-1. Fees. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
The Sealer of Weights and Measures, and any deputy appointed pursuant to
the provisions of MGL c. 98, § 34, shall receive the following fees for sealing
the following weighing or measuring devices:
Scales and Balances
Over 10,000 pounds $50
5,000 to 10,000 pounds $35
1,000 to 5,000 pounds $25
100 to 1,000 pounds $12
10 to 1,000 pounds $8
Under 10 pounds $6
Weights
Avoirdupois $0.60
Apothecary $0.60
Metric $0.60
Troy $0.60
Capacity Measures
Vehicle Tanks
Each indicator $5
Each 100 gallons or fraction thereof $3
Liquid
1 gallon or less $1
More than 1 gallon $2
Liquid measuring meters
Inlet 1/2 inch or less, oil, grease $5
Inlet more than 1/2 to 1 inch, gas or
diesel fuel
$10
Inlet more than 1 inch
Vehicle tank pump $20
Vehicle tank gravity $25
Bulk storage $50
Company supplies prover $25
Pumps
§ 285-34 MARSHFIELD CODE § 290-1
C:294
Each stop on pump $2
Other devices
Taxi meters $10
Odometer - hubodometer $10
Leather measuring (semiannual) $6
Fabric measuring $6
Wire-rope-cordage $6
Container redemption machines $10
Linear measures
Yard sticks $1
Metal rules $1
Tapes $3
Milk jars (per gross) $10
Chapter 294
WETLANDS PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands Protection Regulations — See Ch.
505.
§ 294-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to further protect and preserve the shores,
ponds, rivers and wetlands and adjoining land areas in the Town of
Marshfield by controlling activities deemed to have a significant impact
upon wetland values. The interests protected by this bylaw include
but are not limited to the following: public water supply, private water
supply, groundwater, flood control, erosion control, sedimentation
control, recreation, public safety, aquaculture, agriculture, fish,
shellfish, wildlife (and related habitats of wildlife, fish and shellfish),
and prevention of storm damage and water pollution.
A.
This bylaw seeks to protect wetlands values by furthering the
legislative purpose embodied in the Wetlands Protection Act through
more stringent controls than those promulgated by the Department
of Environmental Protection under MGL c. 131, § 40. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
B.
§ 290-1 CHARTER § 294-2
C:295
§ 294-2. Jurisdiction. [Amended 4-23-2018 ATM by Art. 24]
No person shall remove, fill, dredge or alter any bank, freshwater wetland,
coastal wetland, beach, dune, flat, marsh, meadow, bog, swamp, or lands
adjoining the ocean or any estuary, creek, river, stream, pond or lake, or
any land under said waters or any land subject to tidal action, coastal storm
flowage, or flooding, or land within a distance of 100 feet from any of
the aforesaid resource areas (buffer zone), and land within 200 feet of a
river, without filing written notice of his intention so to remove, fill, dredge
or alter and without receiving and complying with an order of conditions.
Said resource areas shall be protected whether or not they border surface
waters.
§ 294-3. Procedure.
A notice of intent (hereinafter referred to as notice) shall be sent
by certified mail or delivered in hand to the Marshfield Conservation
Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission), including
such plans as may be necessary to describe such proposed activity,
the ultimate use of the land and its effect on the environment. The
Commission may require data, information and plans under this bylaw
in addition to the information required of a notice of intent filed
pursuant to the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40.
A.
At the time of filing the notice, the applicant shall pay a filing fee
specified in regulations of the Commission. In addition, the applicant
shall agree in writing to pay the costs and expense of any expert
consultant deemed necessary by the Commission to review the
applications.
B.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any notice, with
written notification of the hearing given at the expense of the applicant
five working days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Marshfield. A copy of the written notification
of the hearing shall be mailed by certified mail at the expense of the
applicant seven days prior to the hearing to all abutters according
to the then current Assessors' records. A list of abutters shall be
submitted with the aforementioned notice.
C.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing on any notice
within 21 days from receipt of a complete notice and verification of the
list of abutters by the Board of Assessors.
D.
The Commission in an appropriate case may combine its hearing under
this bylaw with the hearing conducted under the Wetlands Protection
Act, MGL c. 131, § 40. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
E.
For reasons announced by the Commission at the hearing, the
Commission shall have authority to continue or postpone the hearing to
a date certain announced at the hearing, either for receipt of additional
information offered by the applicant or others, or for information
F.
§ 294-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 294-3
C:296
§ 294-4. Definitions and regulations.
required of the applicant, deemed necessary by the Commission in its
discretion.
The Commission shall issue its decision in writing within 21 days of the
close of the public hearing thereon.
G.
The Commission is empowered to deny permission for any removal,
dredging, filling, or altering of subject lands within the Town if, in its
judgment, such denial is necessary to preserve the health, welfare,
and safety of individuals or the community or protect subject lands in
accordance with the purposes of this bylaw. Due consideration shall be
given to possible effects of the proposal on all values to be protected
under this bylaw and to any demonstrated hardship on the petitioner by
reason of a denial, as brought forth at the public hearing.
H.
The Commission, its agent, officers and employees, may enter upon the
land upon which the proposed work is to be done or for the purpose of
carrying out its duties under this bylaw and may make or cause to be
made such examination or survey as deemed necessary.
I.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of credible evidence that the work proposed in the
application will not have significant or cumulative adverse effects upon
the wetland values protected by this bylaw, as determined by the
Conservation Commission. Failure to provide evidence to the
Commission to support this burden shall be sufficient cause for the
Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions.
[Amended 4-23-2018 ATM by Art. 25]
J.
The term "person," as used in this bylaw, shall include any individual,
group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation, company,
business organization, trust, estate, the commonwealth or political
subdivision thereof, administrative agency, public or quasi-public
corporation or body, or any other legal entity or its legal representative,
agents or assigns.
A.
Definitions shall be set forth in regulations promulgated pursuant to
this bylaw. If regulations are not promulgated or definitions are not set
forth in said regulations, then the definitions set forth in MGL c. 131,
§ 40, and the regulations promulgated thereunder shall be incorporated
as part of this bylaw for the sole purpose of providing definitions not
otherwise provided by the regulations promulgated under this bylaw.
B.
After due notice and public hearing, the Commission may promulgate
rules and regulations to further effectuate the purposes of this bylaw.
Failure by the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or
a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to
suspend or invalidate the effect of this bylaw.15
C.
§ 294-3 CHARTER § 294-5
C:297
§ 294-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 294-6. Emergency projects.
The notice required by § 294-2 of this bylaw shall not apply to emergency
projects necessary for the protection of the health or safety of the citizens
of Marshfield and to be performed or ordered to be performed by an
administrative agency of the commonwealth or by the Town. Emergency
projects shall mean any projects certified to be an emergency by the
Conservation Commission if only this bylaw is applicable. In no case shall
any removal, filling, dredging or alteration authorized by such certification
extend beyond the time necessary to abate the emergency.
§ 294-7. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other section or provision hereof.
Chapter 305
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Right to farm — See Ch. 89, Art. I.
Historic preservation — See Ch. 118.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 294 and Ch.
505.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 405.
Age-restricted adult village — See Ch. 408.
Open space residential development — See
Ch. 411.
Planned Mixed-Use Development Overlay
District — See Ch. 414.
Water Resource Protection District — See Ch.
417.
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw or any condition
of a permit issued pursuant to it shall be punished by a fine of $300.
Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense; if more than one, each condition violated
shall constitute a separate offense. This bylaw may be enforced
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, by a Town police officer or other officer
having police powers. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 10]
A.
Any person who purchases, inherits or otherwise acquires real estate
upon which work has been done in violation of the provisions of this
bylaw or in violation of any permit issued pursuant to this bylaw shall
be subject to this bylaw and shall forthwith comply with any order to
restore said land to its condition prior to such violation.
B.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 505, Wetlands Protection Regulations.
§ 294-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 294-7
C:298
ARTICLE I
Title, Authority and Purpose
§ 305-1.01. Short title.
This bylaw shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Bylaw of the
Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts," hereinafter referred to as "this bylaw."
§ 305-1.02. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by MGL c. 40A and
amendments thereto, herein called "the Zoning Act."
§ 305-1.03. Purpose. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
This bylaw is enacted for the following purposes: to lessen congestion in
the streets; to conserve health; to secure safety from fires, panic, and other
dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding
of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and
other public requirements; to conserve the value of land and buildings;
to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town; to
preserve the historical character of the Town; to prevent contamination
of and preserve the quantity and quality of ground and surface water
which provides existing or potential water supplies for the Town's residents,
institutions and businesses; and to preserve and increase its amenities. It is
made with reasonable consideration as to the character of each district and
to its peculiar suitability for particular uses, with a view to giving direction
or effect to land development policies and proposals of the Planning Board,
including the making of Marshfield a more viable and more pleasing place
to live, work and play.
§ 305-1.01 CHARTER § 305-1.03
C:299

ARTICLE II
Definitions
[Amended April 2007 ATM by Art. 19; 5-1-2008 ATM by Art. 23;
April 2010 ATM by Art. 21; April 2011 ATM]
§ 305-2.01. Word usage and definitions.
For the purpose of this bylaw certain terms and words shall have the
following meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular; the word
"used" or "occupied" includes the words "designed," "arranged," "intended,"
or "offered" to be used or occupied; the word "building" or "structure," "lot,"
"land" or "premises" shall be construed as though followed by the words
"or any portion thereof"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory. Terms and words not defined herein but defined in the
State Building Code or Subdivision Regulations16 shall have the meanings
given therein unless a contrary intention clearly appears. Words not defined
in either place shall have the meaning given in Webster's Unabridged
Dictionary, Third Edition. Uses listed in the Table of Use Regulations under
the classes Retail and Service Trades and Wholesale Trade and
Manufacturing shall be further defined by the Standard Industrial
Classification Manual published by the U.S. Bureau of Census.17
ABANDONMENT — The discontinuance or non-use by an owner of a
nonconforming use of a building or premises; or the removal of the
characteristic equipment or furnishing used in the nonconforming use,
without its replacement by similar equipment or furnishings; or the
replacement of the nonconforming use or building by a conforming use or
building.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Building Commissioner/Zoning
Enforcement Officer, Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines and other matter
which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis depicting,
describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in
MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Shall refer to the following uses as defined
in this bylaw: "adult bookstore," "adult motion-picture theater," "adult
paraphernalia store," "adult video store" and "establishments which display
live nudity."
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used for
presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined by
MGL c. 272, § 31.
16.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Subdivision of Land.
17.Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included as an attachment to this bylaw.
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:301
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE — An establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock devices, objects, tools or toys
which are distinguished or characterized by their association with sexual
activity, including sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c.
272, § 31.
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, videos, movies or other film material
which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis depicting,
describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined by
MGL c. 272, § 31.
AFFORDABLE — When applied to housing or housing units means housing
or housing units constituting low- or moderate-income housing.
AGE-RESTRICTED ADULT VILLAGE — A building, group of buildings or
unit(s) occupied by or used exclusively for either:
ALTERATION — Any construction, reconstruction or other action resulting
in a change in the structural parts, height, number of stories or exits, size,
use or location of a building or other structure.
ALTERATION OF TOPOGRAPHY — All filling, excavation, or other changes
in the landform (except after a storm or other natural disaster for the
limited purpose of restoring the topography to its preexisting condition).
AMBIENT SOUND LEVEL — The background A-weighted sound level that
is exceeded 90% of the time, measured during operation of equipment.
ANIMAL FEEDLOT — A plot of land on which 10 livestock or more per acre
are fed on a regular basis.
ANNUAL COMPLIANCE REPORT — An annual report of the auditing
agency regarding the compliance of each applicant and development with
the requirements of the affordable housing conditions set forth in the
special permit or the LIP Regulations, homeowner/association agreements,
deed riders, regulatory agreement and the use restrictions applicable to
such development.
APPLICANT — The individual or legal entity making application to the
Planning Board for a special permit.
AQUIFER — Geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that
contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable potable water.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land within the floodplain
within the Town of Marshfield subject to a one-percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. This area may be designated as an A or V Zone.
The residence of persons age 55 or older. Guests under age 55 are
allowed, not to exceed six months in any consecutive nine-month
period.
A.
The residence of handicapped persons as defined in MGL c. 121B.
In the case of a handicapped individual, one live-in personal care
attendant with some shared facilities and services is permitted.
B.
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:302
AUDITING AGENCY — The Marshfield Housing Authority or its designee.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — A portion of a building, partly below grade, which has more
than 1/2 of its height, measured from finished floor to finished ceiling, above
the average finished grade of the ground adjoining the building. A basement
is not considered a story unless its ceiling is six feet or more above the
average finished grade.
BOARD — The Board of Appeals of the Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts,
unless where specifically another board is so empowered.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A lodging house where meals are served to lodgers
on a regular basis, on the premises, by, or with the permission of, the
operator of such lodging house.
BOARD OF SELECTMEN — The Board of Selectmen of the Town of
Marshfield or its successors.
BUILDING — A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed,
having a roof, and enclosed within exterior walls or fire walls, built to form
a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or property. For the purposes
of this definition "roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering,
whether or not permanent in nature.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached building, the use of which is
customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal building, and
which is located on the same lot as that occupied by the principal building.
BUILDING AREA — The aggregate of the maximum horizontal plane area
of all buildings on a lot measured to their outer walls, but exclusive of
cornices, eaves, gutters, chimneys, unenclosed porches, bay windows,
balconies, and terraces.
BUILDING, ATTACHED — A building having any portion of one or more
walls in common with adjoining buildings.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The building area expressed as a percentage of
the total lot area.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building having open space on all sides.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average finished
grade, measured six feet horizontally from the foundation of the adjacent
ground to the top of the structure of the highest roof beams of a flat roof,
or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip, pitch or sloped
roof. In connection with floodproofing a structure above the base flood
elevation as determined by the National Flood Insurance Rate Maps, the
maximum building height listed in § 305-6.02, Table of Dimensional and
Density Regulations, may increase by the difference between the base flood
elevation as determined by the July 17, 2012, Flood Insurance Rate Maps
and the current Flood Insurance Rate Maps as adopted by the Town.[Added
4-29-2014 ATM by Art. 16; amended 10-27-2014 STM by Art. 20]
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:303
BUILDING LINE — The line, parallel to the street line, which passes
through the point of the principal building nearest to the front lot line.
BUILDING-MOUNTED WECF — A device that is mounted on a building that
converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy that drives an electrical
generator.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
CELLAR — A portion of a building, partly or entirely below grade, which has
more than 1/2 of its height, measured from finished floor to finished ceiling,
below the average established finished grade of the ground adjoining the
building. A cellar is not deemed a story.
CMR — Code of Massachusetts Regulations.
COMPREHENSIVE PERMIT — A permit for the development of low- or
moderate-income housing pursuant to MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 through 23, as
amended, or successor law, and its implementing regulations in 760 CMR
56.00 et seq. or successor regulations.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
12]
CONSERVATION RESTRICTION — A permanent restriction that meets the
requirements of MGL c. 184, §§ 31 to 33. Conservation restrictions shall
be held by the Town or by a nonprofit conservation organization approved
by the Planning Board or Conservation Commission and shall require that
the property be maintained in an open or natural state and shall prohibit
development of the subject property. The conservation restriction shall
convey to the Town or the nonprofit organization the right to monitor the
property and enforce the terms of the restriction.
CONVERSION — The changing of an existing non-affordable housing unit
to an affordable housing unit.
DENSITY BONUS — An increase in the number of market-rate units on the
site in order to provide an incentive for the provision of affordable housing
pursuant to this bylaw.
DEP — Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
DHCD — The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community
Development or its successors.
DISTRICT — A zoning district as established by Article III of this bylaw.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT — A business establishment wherein patrons
are usually served while seated in parked vehicles in the same lot. The
term "drive-in" includes drive-in eating establishments where the food is
purchased from a building on the lot but is consumed in the vehicle;
drive-in service establishments such as banks, cleaners, and the like; and
automotive service stations, gasoline stations, or the like. Drive-in movies
are excluded from this definition.
DRIVEWAY — A space, located on a lot, which is not more than 24 feet in
width built for access to a garage, or off-street parking or loading space.
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:304
DWELLING — A privately or publicly owned, permanently fixed structure
containing a dwelling unit or dwelling units. The term "one-family," "twofamily,"
or "multifamily" dwelling shall not include hotel, lodging house,
hospital, membership club, trailer or dormitory.
DWELLING, MIXED-USE — A building in the Planned Mixed-Use
Development (PMUD) Overlay District that has a commercial use(s) on the
first floor and two stories of residential above.[Added 10-27-2014 STM by
Art. 16]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building containing three or more dwelling
units.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building containing two dwelling units
constructed on a single lot.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living or sleeping rooms arranged for the
use of one or more individuals living as a single housekeeping unit, with
cooking, living, sanitary, and sleeping facilities.
DWELLING UNITS, AFFORDABLE TO LOW TO MODERATE INCOME —
Dwelling units that meet the state's affordable housing requirements for
low to moderate income. These affordable units shall be marketed through
the Marshfield Housing Authority, South Shore Housing Development
Corporation, or other housing organization approved by the Board, with
resale restrictions to assure continued affordability in perpetuity. Dwelling
units reserved for occupancy by persons or families of low to moderate
income, or for occupancy by a single individual, shall not be segregated
from market-rate or larger dwelling units in the development in which they
are proposed.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by public utility or
governmental agencies through erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water
transmission and distribution systems and collection, communication,
supply or disposal systems. Facilities necessary for the provision of essential
services include poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables,
fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and other
similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith. Specifically
excluded from this definition are buildings necessary for the furnishing of
adequate service by such public utility or governmental agencies for the
public health, safety or general welfare.
ESTABLISHMENTS WHICH DISPLAY LIVE NUDITY — Any establishment
which provides live entertainment for its patrons, which includes the display
of nudity as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
FAMILY —
An individual or two or more persons related by blood or marriage
living together as a single housekeeping unit and including necessary
domestic help such as nurses or servants and further including not
more than three lodgers or roomers taken for hire.
A.
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:305
FILLING OF LAND OR WATER AREA — The filling of natural or manmade
depressions in the earth with soil, loam, sand, gravel or other similar
earthen materials. The construction, operation, or maintenance of a
sanitary landfill or other refuse facility shall not be deemed to be the filling
of land or water area for purposes of this bylaw.
FIXTURE — An electrical device which is secured to a wall, ceiling, pole or
post and is used to hold lamps.
FLOOD LINE — The limits of flooding from a particular body of water
caused by lunar tides, a storm, or other natural phenomena whose
frequency of occurrence is one in 20 years as determined and certified by a
registered professional engineer qualified in drainage.
FLOODWAY — The area subject to periodic flooding, the limits of which are
determined by the flood line.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a
building, measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include
cellars, unenclosed porches or attics not used for human occupancy or any
floor space in accessory buildings or in the main building intended and
designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking
requirements of this bylaw, or any such floor space intended and designed
for accessory heating and ventilating equipment.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of the gross floor area to the total lot area.
FLOOR DRAIN — An intended drainage point on a floor constructed to be
otherwise impervious, which serves as a point of entry into any subsurface
drainage, treatment, disposal, containment, or other plumbing system.
FOOTCANDLE (FC) — A unit of measuring the amount of illumination equal
to one lumen per square foot on a surface.
GROUNDWATER — All the water found beneath the surface of the ground.
In this bylaw the term refers to the slowly moving subsurface water present
in aquifers and recharge areas.18
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE, HOUSEHOLD QUANTITY OF — Any
or all of the following:
A group of individuals not related by blood or marriage, but living
together as a single housekeeping unit may constitute a family. For
purposes of controlling residential density, each such group of 10
individuals shall constitute a single family. Residents of rooming,
boarding or lodging houses shall not be considered a family as defined
in this subsection.
B.
Six hundred and sixty gallons or less of oil on site at any time to be used
for heating of a structure or to supply an emergency generator; and/or
A.
18.Editor's Note: The definition of "hazardous material" which immediately followed this
definition was deleted 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12. See the definition of "toxic or hazardous
material."
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:306
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A waste, or combination of wastes, which because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in
serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness or pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health, safety, or welfare or to the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, used or
disposed of, or otherwise managed or as further defined in the
Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Regulations, 310 CMR 30.010.19
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use which customarily is carried on
entirely within a dwelling unit and is incidental and subordinate to the
dwelling use and which shall not occupy more than 25% or 400 square feet,
whichever is less, at the dwelling unit used. (See § 305-11.07.)
HORIZONTAL FOOTCANDLES — The amount of illumination equal to one
lumen per square foot on a horizontal surface.
HOSPITAL — A building providing medical service including twenty-fourhour
in-patient services for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of human
ailments and may include a sanitarium, sanatorium, clinic, rest home,
nursing home, and convalescent home.
HOTEL — A building or any part of a building for transient occupancy
containing rooming units which may have cooking facilities only in
connection with central dining facilities, which may have either a common
entrance or individual entrances and which includes an inn, motel, motor
inn, and tourist court, but not including an apartment house, a
boardinghouse, lodging house, or rooming house.
HOUSEHOLD — Two or more persons who will live regularly in a housing
unit as their principal residence and who are related by blood, marriage, or
law or who have otherwise evidenced a stable interdependent relationship,
or an individual.
HOUSING PARTNERSHIP — The Marshfield Housing Partnership or its
successors.
HUD — The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
or its successors.
Quantities of propane used for standard household or commercial
heating or cooking purposes; and/or
B.
The total bulk storage of 25 gallons (or the dry weight equivalent) or
less of other toxic or hazardous materials on site at any time, including
oil not used for heating or to supply an emergency generator; and/or
C.
A quantity of hazardous waste at the "very small quantity generator"
level as defined and regulated in the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste
Regulations, specifically 310 CMR 30.353.
D.
19.Editor's Note: The definition of "height" which immediately followed this definition was
deleted 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12. See the definition of "building height."
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:307
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Material covering the ground, including but not
limited to macadam, cement, concrete, pavement and buildings, that does
not allow surface water to penetrate into the soil.
INITIAL FOOTCANDLE — The amount of illumination (measured by
footcandles) given off by a luminaire at the point of installation.
INITIAL SALES DATA — The data with respect to the original selling price
of a specific affordable housing unit and how such price was determined.
JUNK — Any worn out, cast off or discarded articles or materials which
are ready for destruction or disposal or have been collected or stored for
salvage or conversion to some use. Any article or material which, unaltered
or unchanged or without further reconditioning, can be used for its original
purpose as readily as when new shall not be considered junk.
KENNEL — Every pack or collection of more than three dogs over six
months old owned or kept by a person on a single premises irrespective of
the purpose for which they are maintained.
LANDFILL — A facility established in accordance with a valid site
assignment for the purposes of disposing solid waste into or on the land,
pursuant to 310 CMR 19.006.
LEACHABLE WASTES — Waste materials including solid wastes, sewage,
sludge, and agricultural wastes that are capable of releasing water-borne
contaminants to the surrounding environment.
LIP — The Local Initiative Program.
LIP GUIDELINES — Rules, standards and policies explaining and detailing
regulatory provisions established by DHCD with respect to the Local
Initiative Program, as amended from time to time.
LIP REGULATIONS — The regulations with respect to the Local Initiative
Program.
LIVESTOCK — Domestic animal such as cattle, horses, sheep, hogs, or goats
raised for home use or for profit.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space used for loading or unloading,
not less than 14 feet in width, 50 feet in length, and 14 feet in height,
and containing not less than 1,300 square feet including both access and
maneuvering space.
LOCAL ACTION PROJECT — A Local Initiative Program housing
development permitted without a comprehensive permit.
LOCAL ACTION UNIT — A unit of low- or moderate-income housing which
has been developed without a comprehensive permit and which meets
the requirements set out in 760 CMR 56.00 et seq. and which has been
approved as a local action unit by the DHCD singly or as part of a local
action project.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
LOCAL INITIATIVE PROGRAM — The DHCD Local Initiative Program
described in 760 CMR 56.00 et seq. or successor regulations.[Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:308
LOCAL PREFERENCE — A preference given to local residents in
accordance with LIP Regulations and LIP Guidelines in the selection of
eligible applicants for the affordable housing units within a development.
LOCAL RESIDENT —
LODGING HOUSE — A building or any part thereof containing two or more
living or sleeping rooms which do not contain cooking facilities, and which
rooms are separately leased to more than four individuals unrelated by
blood or marriage.
LODGING UNIT — One or more rooms for the use by one or more
individuals not living as a single housekeeping unit and not having cooking
facilities. A "lodging unit" shall include rooms in boardinghouses, tourist
houses, or rooming houses.
LOT — An area or parcel of land in common ownership, designated by its
owner or owners as a separate lot on a plan filed with the administrator of
this bylaw and recorded in the Plymouth County Registry of Deeds.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the point of intersection of, and abutting on, two or
more intersecting streets, or on a continuous street, a lot having an interior
angle of not more than 100° at the point of intersection of extended street
line tangents.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
LOT DEPTH — The shortest distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line within a width at least equal to the required lot width.
LOT FRONTAGE — The total distance along a street line from one front
lot corner to the other. On a corner lot the frontage on either street is the
distance along the street line from a lot corner to the point of intersection
of the two street lines, or that of their extensions in the case of their being
connected by a rounded corner. It is required therefore that such frontage
be a continuous uninterrupted line over an area of upland of a least 60% of
the minimum required number of feet, and be contiguous to the minimum
lot area (upland portion of the lot) as provided under § 305-6.02 so as to
provide opportunity for physical access to every lot.
A household which at the time of application and at the time of final
determination of eligibility and qualification for an affordable unit
includes one or more members who:
(1) Have his, her or their principal residence in the Town;
Are the parents or stepparents or the children or stepchildren of
someone who has his or her principal residence in the Town; or
(2)
Are employees of the Town, such as teachers, firefighters, police
officers, librarians, or employees of businesses located in the Town.
(3)
A.
The Town and a developer may negotiate other reasonable preference
categories or variations of the above categories subject to approval by
the DHCD.
B.
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:309
LOT LINE, FRONT — The property line between a lot and a street or the
line defining the limit of a right-of-way set aside for road purposes. On a
corner lot the owner shall designate one street line as the front lot line for
the purpose of determining what line will be designated as the rear line.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line most nearly parallel to, opposite, and
farthest from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line or street line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot lawfully existing at the effective date
of this bylaw or any subsequent amendment thereto which is not in
accordance with all provisions of this bylaw.
LOT, THROUGH — An interior lot, the front and rear lot lines of which abut
streets, or a corner lot, two opposite lines of which abut streets.
LOT WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines as measured parallel
to the front lot line, at the rear building line and at all points between. No
dwelling may be erected or placed unless within a circle of diameter equal
to the required frontage under § 305-6.02 which can be inscribed within the
lot lines at some point between the front and rear lot lines.
LOTTERY AGENT — The Marshfield Housing Authority or its designee.
LOTTERY AGREEMENT — A contractual agreement between the lottery
agent and a developer which authorizes and defines the lottery process for
households to be selected for an affordable unit.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided
that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of
the applicable non-elevation design requirements of NFIP Regulations 60.3.
LOW OR MODERATE INCOME — Household income, computed pursuant
to LIP Guidelines, which does not exceed 80% of median income for a
comparable household size as determined by HUD for the area in which the
household is located.
LOW- OR MODERATE-INCOME HOUSING — Decent, safe and sanitary
housing created through and subsidized by LIP or other state or federal
housing production programs which is restricted to occupancy by persons
or families of low or moderate income and which qualifies for inclusion on
the Subsidized Housing Inventory.
MAINTAINED FOOTCANDLES — The amount of illumination (measured
by footcandles) given off by a luminaire after being adjusted for light loss
factors.
MARIJUANA — All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof; and resin extracted from any part of the plant;
and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation
of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the
plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:310
the plant, or any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom,
fiber, oil, or cake or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable
of germination. The term also includes marijuana-infused products except
where the context clearly indicates otherwise.[Added 4-29-2014 ATM by
Art. 15]
MARIJUANA FOR MEDICAL USE — Marijuana that is designated and
restricted for use by, and for the benefit of, qualifying patients in the
treatment of debilitating medical conditions as set forth in the Citizens
Initiative Petition No. 11-11 (Question No. 3 on the November 2012 state
ballot).[Added 4-29-2014 ATM by Art. 15]
MARSHFIELD HOUSING AUTHORITY — The Marshfield Housing Authority
or its successors.
MARSHFIELD HOUSING PARTNERSHIP — The Marshfield Housing
Partnership or its successors, or in the event the Marshfield Housing
Partnership or its successors should no longer exist, an advisory group
established and appointed by the Board of Selectmen with the responsibility
for encouraging low- and moderate-income housing which has been
recognized as a local housing partnership by the Massachusetts Housing
Partnership Fund (or which has been recognized, certified or otherwise
approved as may at the applicable time be required by applicable
regulations of DHCD).
MASSACHUSETTS ARCHITECTURAL ACCESS BOARD — The
Massachusetts Architectural Access Board or its successors.
MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION — The seasonal high level of
the groundwater table. This level shall be the same as the maximum
groundwater elevation defined and determined in 310 CMR 15.00 (Title 5,
State Environmental Code).
MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY — A "medical marijuana facility" shall
mean a not-for-profit entity, as defined by Massachusetts law, registered
under this law, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including
development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils,
or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or
administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or
educational materials to qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
These facilities shall be located inside a structure or building.[Added
4-29-2014 ATM by Art. 15]
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A social, sports or fraternal association or
organization which is used exclusively by members and their guests and is
not conducted as a gainful business.
MGL — Massachusetts General Laws.
MICRO-BREWERY — A small-scale business located in a building where the
primary use is for a restaurant, retail or tasting room and which specializes
in producing a maximum of 15,000 barrels (465,000 U.S. gallons) of
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:311
specialty beer, malt liquor, or ale annually and sold for consumption either
on or off premises.[Added 4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 14]
MINING OF LAND — The removal or relocation of geologic materials such
as topsoil, sand, gravel, metallic ores, or bedrock.
MINORITY — A member of any of the following groups of people:
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building that includes both commercial and
residential uses within a single building.[Added 5-5-2014 ATM by Art.
17]
MIXED-USE DISTRICT — A zoning district where the location of more than
one permitted principal use in one building may be allowed by special
permit. Mixed-use districts include the B-1 Business - Mixed-Use Zoning
District and the Planned Mixed-Use Development Overlay District.
MUNICIPAL WIND ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITY — A wind energy
conversion facility constructed by the Town. The primary purpose of the
municipal wind energy conversion facility is to provide power for municipal
uses or to sell electricity to wholesale markets.
NONCOMMERCIAL KENNEL — A collection of more than three dogs more
than six months old kept at, in, or adjoining a private residence for the
hobby of the householder in connection with hunting, tracking, exhibition in
dog shows, or field or obedience trials, provided the householder does not
regularly engage in the purchase and sale of dogs for profit.
NON-SANITARY WASTEWATER — Discharges from commercial and
industrial facilities as specified in the industry category list in 310 CMR
15.004(5).[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
NON-SANITARY WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITIES — Commercial
and industrial facilities which treat or dispose of wastewater on site and
require a groundwater discharge permit per 310 CMR 5.00.
ASIAN AMERICAN — A person having origins in any of the original
peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian subcontinent or
Pacific Islands, including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan,
Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Samoa, Thailand, and
Vietnam;
A.
BLACK — A person with origins in any of the black racial groups of
Africa;
B.
HISPANIC — A person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Dominican, or
Central or South American origin;
C.
D. CAPE VERDEANS — A person with origins in the Cape Verde Islands;
NORTH AMERICAN INDIAN — A person having origins in any of the
original peoples of North and South America (including Central
America), and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment
with origins in any of the original peoples of North America, with
cultural identification through tribal affiliation.
E.
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:312
OPEN DUMP — A facility which is operated or maintained in violation of
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.), as
amended, or the regulations and criteria promulgated thereunder relative
to solid waste disposal, pursuant to 310 CMR 19.006.[Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
OPEN SPACE — The space on a lot unoccupied by buildings, unobstructed
to the sky by man-made objects other than walks, swimming pools, and
terraced areas, not devoted to streets, driveways, or off-street parking or
loading spaces and expressed as a percentage of total lot area.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING FIXTURES — Outdoor artificial illuminating devices,
installed or portable, used for flood lighting, general illumination or
advertisement of commercial or industrial developments.
OWNER — The duly authorized agent, attorney, purchasee, devisee, trustee,
lessee or any person having legal or equitable interest in the use, structure
or lot in question.
PARKING LOT MOUNT PHOTOVOLTAIC FACILITY — A solar photovoltaic
facility that is structurally mounted from the ground over a parking area.
A parking lot mounted facility may supply its electrical output both on-site
and off-site.[Added 10-15-2018 STM by Art. 19]
PARKING SPACE — An off-street space at least 10 feet in width and 18
feet in length, having an area of not less than 180 square feet, plus 100
square feet of access and maneuvering space, whether inside or outside a
structure, for exclusive use as a parking stall for one motor vehicle.
PETROLEUM PRODUCT — Petroleum or petroleum by-product, including
but not limited to: fuel oil; gasoline; diesel; kerosene; aviation jet fuel;
aviation gasoline; lubricating oils; oily sludge; oil refuse; oil mixed with
other wastes; crude oils; or other liquid hydrocarbons regardless of specific
gravity. "Petroleum product" shall not include liquefied petroleum gas,
including, but not limited to, liquefied natural gas, propane or butane.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A development involving the construction of
two or more principal buildings on the same lot for any permitted use.
PLANNING BOARD — The Marshfield Planning Board or its successors.
POTABLE WATER — Suitable for drinking.
PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE — The principal home (domicile) occupied by all
members of a household.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any accessory structure that contains water
over 24 inches in depth and which is used, or intended to be used, for
swimming or recreational bathing in connection with a principal use
structure and which is available only to the family and guests of the
householder. This includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground
swimming pools, hot tubs and spas.
RECHARGE AREAS — Areas that collect precipitation or surface water and
carry it to aquifers. Recharge areas include DEP approved Zone I, Zone II,
or Zone III areas.
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:313
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA RETAILER — A person or entity licensed
consistent with MGL c. 94G to purchase and deliver marijuana and
marijuana products from marijuana establishments and to deliver, sell or
otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana
establishments and to consumers. This includes marijuana cultivator, craft
marijuana cultivator cooperative, retailer, product manufacturer,
independent testing laboratory, micro business, and third-party
transporter.[Added 4-23-2018 ATM by Art. 16; amended 10-15-2018
STM by Art. 18]
REFLECTOR — A method (in combination with the refractor) of controlling
the distribution of light on the surface.
REGULATORY AGREEMENT — Has the meaning set forth in 760 CMR
56.00 et seq. or successor regulations.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
12]
RESEARCH OFFICES/LABORATORY — Any office and/or laboratory
engaged exclusively in the pursuit of scientific research and development,
including the research and development of manufactured, processed or
compounded products, and classified as either Biosafety Level 1 or
2.[Added 10-27-2014 STM by Art. 16]
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY APARTMENT — An accessory apartment in an
owner-occupied dwelling is a second dwelling unit located within a single-
Biosafety Level 1. Biosafety Level 1 is suitable for work involving
well-characterized agents not known to consistently cause disease in
immunocompetent adult humans, and present minimal potential hazard
to laboratory personnel and the environment. BSL-1 laboratories are
not necessarily separated from the general traffic patterns in the
building. Work is typically conducted on open bench tops using
standard microbiological practices. Special containment equipment or
facility design is not required, but may be used as determined by
appropriate risk assessment. Laboratory personnel must have specific
training in the procedures conducted in the laboratory and must be
supervised by a scientist with training in microbiology or a related
science.
A.
Biosafety Level 2. Biosafety Level 2 builds upon BSL-1. BSL-2 is suitable
for work involving agents that pose moderate hazards to personnel and
the environment. It differs from BSL-1 in that:
Laboratory personnel have specific training in handling pathogenic
agents and are supervised by scientists competent in handling
infectious agents and associated procedures;
(1)
Access to the laboratory is restricted when work is being
conducted; and
(2)
All procedures in which infectious aerosols or splashes may be
created are conducted in BSCs or other physical containment
equipment.
(3)
B.
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:314
family home. Such accessory apartment shall be subordinate in size to the
principal dwelling unit in a manner that maintains the appearance of the
structure as a detached single-family home.
RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS — A structure in the RB Zone consisting of
business uses on the ground floor with a single accessory residential unit
within the structure, with sufficient on-site parking for both uses.
ROOFLINE — The surface of a horizontal roof; the highest horizontal line
of a sloped roof. An ornamental roof structure not enclosing occupied space
within a building shall not be used in the determination of the roofline of
a building. A roof covering less than 25% of the building area shall not be
used in the determination of the roofline of a building.
ROOFTOP MOUNT PHOTOVOLTAIC FACILITY — A solar photovoltaic
facility that is structurally mounted on a roof and is designed primarily to
supply its electrical output on-site.[Added 10-15-2018 STM by Art. 19]
ROOMING HOUSE — See "lodging house," above.
SANITARY LANDFILL — Facility, place or site for disposal of solid waste
on land in accordance with all federal, state, and local regulations and
requirements, including but not limited to rubbish, garbage, refuse,
demolition waste, stumps, special waste such as pathogenic or infectious
wastes, explosive materials, high- and low-level radioactive waste, chemical
waste, asbestos, and other materials of a toxic or hazardous nature or
materials requiring special handling procedures for disposal.
SEPTAGE — The liquid, solid, and semi-solid contents of privies, chemical
toilets, cesspools, holding tanks, or other sewage waste receptacles.
Septage does not include any material that is a hazardous waste as defined
by 310 CMR 30.000.
SEWAGE TREATMENT FACILITY — Facilities which dispose of wastewater
effluent into the ground or waters of the Town. This shall include the
construction of facilities serving commercial, industrial, multifamily
residential and multiple lot residential developments. This shall exclude
individual residential septic systems and the replacement of existing
systems.
SIGN — Any permanent or temporary structure, device, letter, word, model,
banner, pennant, insignia, trade flag, or representation used as, or which
is in the nature of, an advertisement, announcement, or direction or is
designed to attract the eye by any means including intermittent or repeated
motion or illumination.
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign used to direct attention to a service, product
sold or other activity performed on the same premises upon which the sign
is located.
SIGN, GENERAL ADVERTISING — Any sign advertising products or
services other than products or services available on the lot on which the
sign is located, or any sign which is not located within 200 feet of the
building or other structure at which the products or services advertised
thereon are available.
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:315
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION — A sign used simply to identify the name,
address, and title of an individual family or firm occupying the premises
upon which the sign is located.
SIGN, ROOF — A sign erected on or affixed to the roof of a building.
SIGN, STANDING — A sign erected on or affixed to the land including any
exterior sign not attached to a building.
SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF — For a sign, either freestanding or attached,
the area shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background, whether
open or enclosed, on which they are displayed, but not including any
supporting framework and bracing which are incidental to the display itself.
For a sign consisting of individual letters, designs, and symbols attached
to or painted on a surface, building, wall or window the area shall be
considered to be that of the smallest quadrangle which encompasses all of
the letters, designs, and symbols.
SIGN, WALL — A sign affixed to the exterior wall of a building and extending
not more than 15 inches therefrom. A sign attached to a roof (or ornamental
roof) with a roof slope (vertical dimension divided by horizontal dimension)
of not less than 3:1 shall be considered to be a wall sign.
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together
and sharing in common all of one or more rooms which contain sleeping,
sanitary and cooking facilities.
SLUDGE — The solid, semi-solid, and liquid residue that results from a
process of wastewater treatment or drinking water treatment. Sludge does
not include grit, screening, or grease and oil which are removed at the headworks
of a facility.
SMALL-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED WIND ENERGY CONVERSION
FACILITY — A device that is mounted on the ground, supported by a
monopole-type tower, that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational
energy, which drives an electrical generator. Small-scale ground-mounted
WECF are not intended for commercial sale of electricity. Energy generated
from a small-scale ground-mounted WECF is primarily for the principal use
structure on the same property. Any surplus electricity not used on the
property can be sold back to the electric utility. Small-scale ground-mounted
wind energy conversion facilities are accessory uses and are limited in
height to a maximum of 150 feet above the existing ground elevation.
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device, structure, or a part of a device or
structure for which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy
into thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy.[Added
10-15-2018 STM by Art. 19]
SOLID WASTE — Discarded solid material with insufficient liquid content to
be free flowing. This includes but is not limited to rubbish, garbage, scrap
materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material and landscape refuse.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — The special permit granting
authority shall be the Board of Appeals as designated by the Zoning Bylaw
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:316
for the issuance of special permits and site plan approval for the
construction and operation of all wind energy conversion facilities.
STORY — That part of a building comprised between a floor and the floor
or roof next above. If a mezzanine floor area exceeds 1/3 of the area of the
floor immediately below, it shall be deemed to be a story. A basement shall
be classified as a story when its ceiling is six or more feet above the average
finished grade.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gable, hipped, or gambrel roof, the floor
area of which does not exceed 2/3 of the floor immediately below when
measured where the vertical distance between the floor and ceiling is four
feet or more.
STREET — A way, over 24 feet in right-of-way width, which:
STREET LINE — The line between a street and an adjoining piece of
property defines the limits of the street.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
to give support or shelter, including, but not limited to, a building, bridge,
trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium,
reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole, windmill, solar devices
or the like.
STRUCTURE (Article XV only) — A walled and roofed building or mobile
home that is principally above ground, and includes gas or liquid storage
tanks.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — A structure lawfully existing at the
effective date of this bylaw, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which
does not conform to one or more provisions of this bylaw.
SUBDIVISION — A subdivision as defined in the State Subdivision Control
Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, as amended.
Is a public way laid out by a governmental entity or public authority
pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws or is shown as a public way
on an official map adopted by the Town pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 81E,
or has been accepted by the Town as a public way; or
A.
Is shown on a plan approved and endorsed in accordance with the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations of Marshfield20 and MGL c. 41,
§§ 81K to 81GG; or
B.
Has, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable
grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular
traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or
served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve
such land and buildings erected or to be erected thereon.
C.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Subdivision of Land.
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:317
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING INVENTORY — The list compiled by DHCD
containing the count of low- and moderate-income housing units in the
Town.
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING UNITS — Housing units qualifying for the
Subsidized Housing Inventory including local action units.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL EVIDENCE — Such evidence as a reasonable mind might
accept as adequate to support a conclusion.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
repair, addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed.
TERM OF AFFORDABILITY — The period of time that the unit shall remain
affordable is in perpetuity.
TOTAL CUTOFF — The point at which all light rays are completely shielded.
TOWN — The Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of such
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics as to pose a significant,
actual or potential hazard to water supplies and to human health, if such
substance or mixture were discharged to land or waters of this Town.
Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation, synthetic organic
chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive materials,
virulent infectious wastes, pesticides, herbicides, acids and alkalis, solvents,
thinners and all substances defined as hazardous or toxic under MGL c. 21C
and c. 21E and 310 CMR 30.00 and other materials which are listed as U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency priority pollutants.[Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 12]
UPLAND — Any land area not defined under the terms of MGL c. 131 or
Chapter 294, Wetlands Protection, of the Town of Marshfield Bylaws or
regulations issued thereunder as "wetland."
USE — The purpose for which a structure or lot is arranged, designed, or
intended to be used, occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use
of a structure or lot, or a use, not the principal use, which is located on
the same lot or in the same structure as the principal use. No use may be
considered an accessory use unless it is listed in § 305-5.04 of this bylaw as
an accessory use, and any such use shall not exceed 40% of the total area
of the structure(s) and/or lot in which such use is located.
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:318
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use lawfully existing at the time of adoption
by this bylaw or any subsequent amendment thereto which does not
conform to one or more provisions of this bylaw.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main or primary purpose for which a structure or
lot is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it may be used, occupied
or maintained under this bylaw. Any other use within the main structure
or the use of any other structure or land on the same lot and incidental or
supplementary to the principal use shall be considered an accessory use.
Only one principal use shall be allowed for each structure or lot except
where permitted within a mixed-use district. If more than one use is made
of a structure or the lot and where it is not clear which use is the principal
use, the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer shall designate
one such use as the principal use.[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
USE RESTRICTION —
USE, SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT — A use which by reason of its normal
operation would cause readily observable differences in patronage, service,
appearance, noise, employment or similar characteristics from the use to
which it is being compared.
UTILITY-SCALE WIND ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITY — A device that
is mounted on a monopole structure that converts kinetic wind energy
into rotational energy that drives an electrical generator. Utility-scale wind
energy conversion facilities are for commercial electricity production,
where the primary use of the facility is electricity generation to be sold to
the wholesale electricity markets.
VARIANCE — Such departure from the terms of this bylaw as the Board,
upon appeal in specific cases, is empowered to authorize under the terms of
Article X.
VERY SMALL QUANTITY GENERATOR — Any public or private entity,
other than residential, which produces less than 27 gallons (100 kilograms)
A deed restriction or other legal instrument approved by the DHCD
and recorded with the relevant registry of deeds or land court registry
district which effectively restricts occupancy of a low- and moderateincome
housing unit to households of low or moderate income during
the term of affordability.
A.
For homeownership units the model deed rider specified in the LIP
Guidelines shall be used as the use restriction.
B.
All references in this bylaw to federal or state regulations shall include
any amendments to such regulations, any successor regulations, and
any guidelines issued pursuant to any such regulations, as amended
from time to time, whether or not expressly so stated.
C.
All references to dwelling units or units (when the reference is to units
of housing) in this bylaw shall include assisted living units or living
units within facilities providing continuing care as defined in MGL c.
93, § 76, as amended, whether or not explicitly so stated.
D.
§ 305-2.01 CHARTER § 305-2.01
C:319
a month of hazardous waste or waste oil, but not including any acutely
hazardous waste as defined in 310 CMR 30.136.
WASTE OIL RETENTION FACILITY — A waste oil collection facility for
automobile service stations, retail outlets, and marinas which is sheltered
and has adequate protection to contain a spill, seepage, or discharge of
petroleum waste products in accordance with MGL c. 21, § 52A.
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION FACILITY OR FACILITIES (WECF) — A
device that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy that drives
an electrical generator. Wind energy conversion facilities include all
equipment, machinery and structures utilized in connection with the
conversion of wind to electricity. This includes, but is not limited to:
transmission, storage, collection and supply equipment, substations,
transformers, service and access roads.
WIND MONITORING OR METEOROLOGICAL TOWER — A temporary
tower equipped with devices to measure wind speeds and direction, used to
predict the amount of electricity a site can be expected to generate through
wind energy production.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY — An antenna, satellite dish, or
other communications device for commercial or public safety
communications purposes located on an existing or proposed
communications tower or nonresidential structure. This definition shall not
apply to private residential facilities or noncommercial facilities used by an
individual business.
YARD — A portion of a lot, upon which the principal building is situated,
unobstructed artificially from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise
provided herein, and having at least two sides open to lot lines.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending for the full width of the lot from a street
line to the nearest point of a building.
YARD, REAR — A yard, unoccupied except by an accessory structure or
accessory use as herein permitted, extending for the full width of the lot
between the rear line of the building wall and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — Yard extended for the full length of a building between the
nearest building wall and the side lot line.
ZONE II — The DEP approved area of an aquifer which would contribute
water to a public water supply well if such a well were pumped continuously
for a period of 180 days at its maximum safe yield without any natural
recharge to the aquifer occurring, as defined in 310 CMR 22.00.
§ 305-2.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-2.01
C:320
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 305-3.01. Division into districts.
§ 305-3.02. Superimposed zoning districts. [Amended April 2006
ATM; 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
An Inland Wetlands Zoning District, a Coastal Wetlands Zoning District,
a Water Resource Protection District, a Planned Mixed-Use Development
District, a Stormwater Management Overlay District, a Floodplain Zone and
a Brant Rock Village Overlay District are considered to be superimposed
over the other districts shown on the Zoning Map, as a recognition of the
special conditions which exist in such areas. See Article XI, Article XIII and
Article XV for applicable regulations.
§ 305-3.03. Zoning Map. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM; 4-24-2012 ATM]
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established
as shown on a map titled "Zoning Map of the Town of Marshfield,
Massachusetts" dated April 24, 2012, with revisions through April 24, 2012,
which accompanies and is hereby declared to be part of this bylaw. The
authenticity of the Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the
Town Clerk and the imprinted Seal of the Town under the following words:
"This is to certify that this is the Zoning Map of the Town of Marshfield,
The Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts, is hereby divided into 11
zoning districts to be designated as follows: [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 12]
Full Name Class Short Name
Residential - Rural Residential R-1
Residential - Suburban Residential R-2
Residential - Waterfront Residential R-3
Residential Business Business RB
Business - Mixed-Use Business B-1
Business - Highway Business B-2
Business - Neighborhood Business B-3
Business - Waterfront Business B-4
Office Park Business OP
Industrial Industrial I-1
Airport Industrial A
A.
Zoning districts shall include the land within any lake, pond, stream, or
other water body, lying therein, and shall include land under navigable
waters as far as the ownership thereof and the jurisdiction of the Town
of Marshfield extend under any other provisions of the law.
B.
§ 305-3.01 CHARTER § 305-3.03
C:321
Massachusetts, referred to in the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Marshfield,
Massachusetts, which was approved by the Town on April 24, 2012, with
revisions through April 24, 2012."
§ 305-3.04. Map amendments; copies of map. [Amended 4-24-2012
ATM]
Any change in the location of boundaries of a zoning district hereafter made
through the amendments of this bylaw shall be indicated by the alteration
of such map, such changes to be dated and authenticated as prescribed in
§ 305-3.03. The map thus altered is declared to be part of this bylaw thus
amended. The Town Clerk shall be responsible for certifying all changes to
the Zoning Map. Such changes shall be made within 14 days of the final
approval of the Attorney General's Office. An official copy of the Zoning Map
shall be located in the office of the Town Clerk. Photographic reductions of
this large-scale map may serve as copies of the Zoning Map.
§ 305-3.05. Boundaries of districts.
Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any district as
shown on the Zoning Map the following rules apply:
Where a boundary is indicated as a street, railroad, power line,
watercourse or other body of water, it shall be construed to be the
center line or middle thereof, or where such boundary approximates a
Town boundary, then to the limits of the Town boundary.
A.
Where a boundary is indicated as following approximately or parallel
to a street, railroad, power line, watercourse or other body of water, it
shall be construed to be parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom
as shown on the Zoning Map. If no dimension is given, such distance
shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map.
B.
Where a dimensioned boundary coincides within 10 feet or less with a
lot line, the boundary shall be construed to be the lot line.
C.
Where a boundary is indicated as intersecting the center line of a
street, railroad, power line, watercourse or other water body, it shall be
construed to intersect at right angles to said center line, or in the case
of a curved center line, at right angles to the tangent to the curve at the
point of intersection.
D.
The boundary limits of the Coastal and Inland Wetlands Districts are
not described by dimensions. Distance shall be determined by the
use of the scale shown on the Zoning Map. If simple scaling cannot
ascertain whether or not the parcel of land in question falls within the
boundaries of the Coastal and Inland Wetlands Districts, the Building
Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer will determine by field
inspection the location of the parcel with respect to the district. In such
determination, the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer
shall be guided by the Conservation Administrator; if he is not available
E.
§ 305-3.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-3.05
C:322
then a Conservation Commissioner, and where such guidance is given,
it shall become part of the record.
If the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer fails to
accept the guidance of said Administrator or Commissioner, he
shall state in the record, in writing, his reasons for such action.
(1)
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Planning Board shall make
determinations of boundaries with respect to Floodplain Zones
pursuant to Article XV.
(2)
The abbreviation "PL" means property line as shown on the Town
Assessor's Maps as in effect at the effective date of this bylaw. The
abbreviation "PL" when used in conjunction with a subsequent
amendment to this bylaw shall mean a property line as shown on
the Town Assessor's Maps as in effect at the effective date of such
amendment.
F.
The abbreviation "CL" means center line and "CI" means center of
intersection.21
G.
21.Editor's Note: Original § 3.05(8), which immediately followed this subsection, was
repealed 4-24-2011 ATM.
§ 305-3.05 CHARTER § 305-3.05
C:323

ARTICLE IV
Interpretation and Application
§ 305-4.01. Interpretation.
The provisions of this bylaw shall be interpreted to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the health, safety, morals, or the
general welfare of the Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts, and except for
the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of Marshfield dated 1959 and all amendments
thereto, the provisions of this bylaw are not intended to repeal or in any way
impair or interfere with any lawfully adopted bylaw, regulations, or rules.
Whenever the regulations made under the authority hereof differ from those
prescribed by any bylaw or other regulations, that provision which imposes
the greater restriction or the higher standard shall govern.
§ 305-4.02. Applicability.
Except as herein provided, or as specifically exempted by the Zoning
Enabling Act,22 the provisions of this bylaw shall apply to the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or use of buildings and structures
or use of land. Except as herein provided, any existing conforming use,
structure or lot shall not by any action become nonconforming and any
existing nonconforming use, structure, or lot shall not become further
nonconforming.
§ 305-4.03. Existing buildings and land.
Except as herein provided, this bylaw shall not apply to existing buildings or
structures, nor to the existing use of any building or structure or of land, to
the extent to which it is legally used at the time of adoption of this bylaw, but
it shall apply to any change of use thereof and to any alteration of a building
or structure when the same would amount to reconstruction, extension or
structural change, and to any alteration of a building or structure to provide
for its use for a purpose or in a manner substantially different from the use
to which it was put before alteration, or for its use for the same purpose to
a substantially greater extent.
§ 305-4.04. Mixed uses. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
In cases of mixed occupancy, the regulation for each use shall apply to
the portion of the building or land so used. Allowable residential densities
and nonresidential square footage requirements shall apply to each use
individually per lot; provided, however, that building bulk, height, setbacks
and other dimensional characteristics shall comply with the standards set
forth in § 305-6.02, Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations.
22.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40A.
§ 305-4.01 CHARTER § 305-4.04
C:325

ARTICLE V
Use Regulations
§ 305-5.01. Applicability of use regulations.
Except as provided in the Zoning Enabling Act23 or in this bylaw, no
building, structure, or land shall be used except for the purposes permitted
in the district as described in this article. Any use not listed shall be
construed to be prohibited.
§ 305-5.02. Permitted uses.
§ 305-5.03. Uses subject to other regulations.
In the following Table of Use Regulations, the uses permitted by right in
the district shall be designated by the letter (P). Those uses that may be
permitted by special permit in the district, in accordance with Article
X, shall be designated by the letter (S). Uses designated (-) shall not be
permitted in the district.
A.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this bylaw, the following lots
owned by the Town may be used for beach parking, for residents
and nonresidents, during the months of May, June, July, August and
September of each year: Marshfield Assessor's Map Lots M05-05-86
Beach Street and M07-03-01 Dyke Road. Any provisions of this bylaw
which may be deemed to require that such lots be paved prior to such
use shall not apply thereto. The provisions of Article VIII of this bylaw
shall not apply to such use.
B.
Uses permitted by right or by special permit shall be subject, in
addition to use regulations, to all other provisions of this bylaw.
A.
There shall not be any business operation for vehicle repair for profit
or gasoline or oil service facilities or any repair made to any motor
vehicles, except on a lot occupied by a permitted automotive use. Any
gasoline or oil facilities shall be at least 25 feet from any lot line.
B.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this bylaw, the following uses
shall be prohibited in the recharge areas of surface water drinking
supplies as defined by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection and as shown on the Marshfield Zoning Map, as amended,
and in areas within the zone of contribution of existing or potential
public supply wells as defined by said Department:
(1) Sewage treatment facility.
(2) Sanitary landfill.
(3) Incinerator.
C.
23.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40A.
§ 305-5.01 CHARTER § 305-5.03
C:327
§ 305-5.04. Table of Use Regulations. [Amended 5-1-2008 ATM by
Art. 22; April 2010 ATM by Art. 22; April 2011 ATM; 4-22-2013 ATM
by Arts. 12 and 20; 4-29-2014 ATM by Art. 15; 5-5-2014 ATM by Art.
17; 10-27-2014 STM by Art. 17; 10-26-2015 STM by Art. 9;
4-23-2018 ATM by Arts. 15 and 18; 10-15-2018 STM by Art. 20]
See table attached to this bylaw which is declared to be a part of this bylaw.
In addition, uses are subject to Articles XI, XIII and XV where appropriate.24
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
Principal Uses
Residential
1. One-family detached
dwelling
P P P P — S P P — — — — P P
2. Open space residential
development (see
§ 305-11.04)
S S S S — — — — — — — — S —
3. Age-restricted adult
village (see
§ 305-11.08)
S S S S — — — — — — — S S —
4. Small-scale groundmounted
wind energy
conversion facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
5. Building-mounted wind
energy conversion
facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
(4) Application and storage of sludge and/or septage.
The B-1 Zoning District shall be considered a mixed-use district as
defined within this bylaw. Allowable uses within a mixed-use district are
as shown in the underlying zoning districts in which the use is proposed
as shown in the Table of Use Regulations unless otherwise specified
herein.
D.
24.Editor's Note: Original § 5.05, Temporary moratorium on medical marijuana treatment
centers, which immediately followed this section and was added 4-22-2013 STM by Art.
11, has been removed as the moratorium expired on 5-30-2014.
§ 305-5.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:328
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
6. Mixed-use building
(see § 305-13.05, Brant
Rock Village Overlay
District)
— — — — — — — — — — — — — S
7. Dwelling, mixed-use — — — — — — — — — — — S — —
Community Facilities
1. Church or other
religious purposes
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
2. Educational purposes
which are religious
sectarian,
denomination or public
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
3. Nursery school P P P P — — — — — — — S S —
4. Public park,
conservation area and
preserved open spaces
including areas for
passive recreation, but
not including active
recreational facilities
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
5. Nonprofit recreational
facility, not including a
membership club
S S S S S — S S — — S S S S
6. Country, hunting,
fishing, tennis, or
boating club
S S S S — — S S — S S S S S
7. Day camp or other
camp for children
S S S S — — — — — — — P — —
8. Town building except
public works
equipment garage
P P P P P P P P — P P P S P
9. Cemetery S S S — — — — — — — — S — —
§ 305-5.04 CHARTER § 305-5.04
C:329
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
10.Public libraries,
museums, historical
association or society,
nonprofit cultural
institutions
P P P P P P P P P — — P S P
11.Hospital, sanitarium or
philanthropic
institutions
S S S — — — — — — — — S — —
12.Nursing, rest or
convalescent home not
to exceed 24 beds per
acre
S S S S — S — — — — — S — —
13.Town equipment
garage
— S — S — P — — — P P P — —
14.Public utility including
water filter plant,
sewage treatment
facility and refuse
facility
S S S S S S S S — S S S S S
15.Essential services P P P P P P P P P P P S S P
16.Golf course or facility S S S — — — S S — — S S — S
17.Indoor athletic
facilities including
indoor skating rinks
— — — — S S S — — S — S S —
18.Municipal utility-scale
wind energy
conversion facility
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
19.Municipal buildingmounted
wind energy
conversion facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
20.Municipal small-scale
ground-mounted wind
energy conversion
facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
§ 305-5.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:330
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
21.Medical marijuana
facility
— — — — — — — — — S — — — —
22.Recreational marijuana
retailer
— — — — — — — — — S — — — —
Agricultural
1. Agriculture,
horticulture, and
floriculture, including
marine agriculture and
the catching and
taking of marine flora
and fauna and the
seeding of catchment
areas, except a
greenhouse or stand
for retail sale
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
2. Year-round greenhouse
or stand for wholesale
and retail sale of
agricultural or farm
products raised
primarily on the same
premises
S S S P S — P — P P S P S(1) —
3. Temporary (not to
exceed erection or use
for period exceeding 5
months in any 1 year)
greenhouse or stand
for retail sale of
agricultural or farm
products raised
primarily on the same
premises
P P S P — — S — P P S P S(1) —
§ 305-5.04 CHARTER § 305-5.04
C:331
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
4. Raising and keeping of
livestock, horses and
poultry, not including
the raising of swine or
fur animals for
commercial use
P P P S — — — — — — — — S(1) —
5. Commercial stables,
kennels or veterinary
hospital in which all
animals, fowl or other
forms of animal life are
completely enclosed in
pens or other
structures
S — — S S S — — S — — — S(1) —
6. Noncommercial
forestry and growing
of all vegetation
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
7. Commercial forestry S S — — — — — — — S S S S(1) —
8. Year-round greenhouse
or stand for wholesale
and retail sale of
agricultural or farm
products
— — — P — P — — — — — P —(1) —
(1) Applies only to lots under 5 acres in size.
Retail and Service
1. Retail establishment
selling principally
convenience goods,
including but not
limited to: food, drugs
and proprietary goods
(but not including the
sale of gasoline)
§ 305-5.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:332
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
a. With a maximum
floor area limitation
of 8,000 square feet
for any single
establishment
— — — — P S P P — — — S S P
b. With no limitation
with respect to floor
area
— — — — S — — — — — — S S —
2. Retail establishment
selling general
merchandise, including
but not limited to dry
goods, apparel and
accessories, furniture
and home furnishings,
home equipment, small
wares, and hardware
and including discount
and limited price
variety stores
a. With a maximum
floor area limitation
of 8,000 square feet
for any single
establishment
— — — — P S S S — — — S S S
b. With no limitation
with respect to floor
area
— — — — S — — — — — — — — —
3. Eating and drinking
places not including
drive-in establishments
— — — S P P P P — — — S S P
4. Drive-in eating
establishments
— — — — S S — S — — — S S S
5. Sales by vending
machines as a
principal use
— — — — P P — S — — — — P S
§ 305-5.04 CHARTER § 305-5.04
C:333
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
6. Establishment selling
new or new and used
automobiles and
trucks, new automobile
tires and other
accessories, aircraft,
motorcycles and
household trailers
— — — S — P — — — — — — — —
7. Establishment selling
boats and boat
accessories
— — — — — P P P — — — — — P
8. Establishments selling
or renting aircraft and
aircraft accessories or
repairing aircraft
— — — — — S — — — — P — — —
9. Hotels and motels — — — S — S — — — S S S S —
10.Bank — — — P P P P P — — — S S P
11.Other personal and
consumer service
establishment
— — — P P P P P — — — S S P
12.Funeral establishment — — — P P P — — P — — — S —
13.Membership club S S S P P P — P — — S S S P
14.Professional and
business offices and
services
a. With a maximum
floor area limitation
of 8,000 square feet
for any single
establishment
— — — P P P S S P P P S S S
b. With no limitation
with respect to floor
area
— — — — S S S — S S S S S —
15.Governmental offices
and post offices
— — — S P S S S S S P — S S
§ 305-5.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:334
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
16.Gasoline sales,
automotive repair,
automobile service
station or garage (not
including a junkyard or
open storage of
abandoned
automobiles or other
vehicles), and
including the sale of
convenience goods,
including but not
limited to food, drugs
and proprietary goods
— — — S — S S — — — — — — —
17.Boat marina or boat
yard
— — S — — — — P — — — — — P
18.Miscellaneous business
repair
— — — S P S — — — S — S S —
19.Motion-picture
establishment outdoor
— — — — — S — — — — — — S —
20.Motion-picture
establishment indoor
— — — — S S — S — — — S S S
21.Other amusement and
recreation service,
outdoor, except
amusement parks
— — — — — S — S — — — S S S
22.Other amusement and
recreation service,
indoor, except coinoperated
amusement
devices
— — — — S S — S — — — S S S
§ 305-5.04 CHARTER § 305-5.04
C:335
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
23aC.ommunications tower
containing wireless
communications
facilities (in
compliance with height
requirements of
§ 305-6.02) (see
§ 305-11.12)
S S S S S P P P P P P S P P
23bO.ther communications
tower containing
wireless
communications
facilities (see
§ 305-11.12)
S S — — — S — — — S S S — —
24.Commercial parking
lot (see Article VIII)
— — S S P S P S — S S S S S
25.Filling of land or water
area (see § 305-11.03)
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
26.Planned business
development (see
§ 305-11.05)
— — — — S S S S — — S S S S
27.Construction of
drainage facilities
(other than essential
services or damming
up or relocating any
watercourse, water
body or wetland)
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
28.Residential business — — — P — — — — — — — — — —
29.Adult entertainment — — — — — — — — — S — — S(1) —
Wholesale, Transportation and Industrial
1. Removal of soil, loam,
sand, gravel, quarry or
other earth material
Now General Bylaws Chapter 70
§ 305-5.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:336
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
2. Processing and
treating of raw
materials including
operations
appurtenant to the
taking, such as
grading, drying,
sorting, crushing,
grinding and milling
operations (see
§ 305-11.02)
— — — S S S — — — S S — — —
3. Construction industry
including suppliers
— — — P S P — — — P — S S —
4. Manufacturing — — — — — — — — — S — S S —
5. Bakery, laundry — — — — S P — — — — — S S —
6. Motor freight terminal
and warehousing
— — — — — — — — — S — S — —
7. Bus passenger
terminal
— — — — P P — — — P — P — —
8. Heliport — — — — — — — — — S P S — —
9. Airport and airport
facilities
— — — — — — — — — — P — — —
10.Other transportation
services
— — — — S S S S — S S S — S
11.Wholesale trade and
distribution
— — — — — S — — — S — S S —
12.Open storage of raw
materials, finished
goods, or construction
equipment and
structures for storing
such equipment
— — — P — P — — — S — S — —
§ 305-5.04 CHARTER § 305-5.04
C:337
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
13.Research offices or
establishments
devoted to research
and development
activities limited to
Biosafety Levels 1 and
2
a. With a maximum
floor area limitation
of 8,000 square feet
for any single
establishment
— — — — — P — — P P P S S —
b. With no limitation
with respect to floor
area
— — — — — S — — S S S S S —
14.Planned industrial
development (see
§ 305-11.06)
— — — — — — — — — S S S S —
15.Dry-cleaning plant — — — — S P — — — S — S — —
16.Automobile graveyards
and/or junkyards
— — — — — — — — — — — — —
17.Utility-scale wind
energy conversion
facility
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
18.Building-mounted wind
energy conversion
facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
19.Small-scale groundmounted
wind energy
conversion facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
§ 305-5.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:338
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
20.Renewable or
alternative energy
research and
development facilities
in buildings 50,000
square per feet or
greater
— — — — — — — — — P* — P* — —
21.Large-scale groundmounted
photovoltaic
installations producing
250 KW DC or greater
— — — — — — — — — P* SP — —
22.Micro-brewery/
processing
— — — — S — — — — P — P S —
Accessory Uses
1. Home occupation (see
§ 305-11.07)
S S S P P P P P — — — — S P
2. Private day nursery or
kindergarten, provided
it shall not occupy
more than 40% of the
gross floor area of the
structure and there
shall be a minimum of
75 square feet of
outside play area for
each enrolled child
P P P P — — — — — — — — P —
3. Accessory professional
office of a licensed
medical or dental
practitioner, lawyer,
engineer, optometrist
or public accountant in
an existing dwelling
S S S P P P P P P — — — S P
§ 305-5.04 CHARTER § 305-5.04
C:339
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
4. Accessory building
such as a greenhouse,
toolshed, private
swimming pool, or
similar accessory
structure, subject to
provisions of Article VI
P P P P P P P P — S P S P P
5. Accessory private
garage for not more
than 3 noncommercial
motor vehicles, and,
except on a farm, not
more than 1/2 ton
rated or less in size
commercial motor
vehicle
P P P P P P — P — — — — P P
6. Accessory storage of a
trailer, unregistered
automobile, boat or
accessory marine
agriculture equipment
provided it shall either
be stored within a
principal or accessory
building or not less
than 25 feet from any
front lot line and 10
feet from any side lot
line and it shall not be
used for dwelling or
sleeping purposes;
maximum number: 2
trailers and autos and
boats
P P P P P P — P — — — — P P
§ 305-5.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:340
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
7. Accessory repair and
storage facilities in any
retail sales or
consumer established
provided it shall not
occupy more than 25%
of the gross floor area
— — — P P — P P — — — — S P
8. Accessory outside
storage clearly
necessary to the
operation and conduct
of a permitted
principal wholesale,
transportation,
industrial and/or
commercial use
— — — S S S S S — P P P S S
9. Accessory
manufacturing use
provided it shall not
occupy more than 25%
of the gross floor area
of the building and it
shall not be located
within 100 feet of any
R District or within 50
feet of any street lot
line
— — — P S P — — — P P P S —
10.Accessory building to a
nonresidential
principal use occupied
by a person employed
on the premises and
his immediate family,
unless such structure
is located in the rear of
the principal building
and has no immediate
street frontage
— — — S P S P S — S S S P S
§ 305-5.04 CHARTER § 305-5.04
C:341
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
11.Newsstand,
barbershop, dining
room or cafeteria and
similar accessory
services only for
occupants or users
thereof within a hotel,
office or industrial
building, hospital
containing more than
50 sleeping rooms, or
transportation terminal
facility
P P P P P P P P S P P S P P
12.Up to 2 lodging units
in an existing dwelling
P P P P S S S P — — — — P P
13.Accessory signs
subject to the
provisions of Article
VII
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
14.Accessory off-street
parking and loading
spaces as required in
Article VIII
P P P P P P P P P P P P S P
15.Licensed day-care
centers
P P P P P P P P P P P P S P
§ 305-5.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:342
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
16.Trailers: To be used as
a temporary office in
connection with a
construction project
provided that the use
is authorized by the
Board of Selectmen
and further provided
that the trailer is not
used for family
habitation; trailers to
be parked and
occupied for a period
of not more than 6
months by the owner
of the premises
provided that the use
is authorized by the
Board of Selectmen
and further provided
that such owner is in
the process of
constructing or
reconstructing a house
thereon for his own
occupancy and further
provided that there are
suitable facilities for
running water and
sanitary sewage
disposal as approved
by the Board of Health
and further provided
that not more than 1
6-month extension is
granted; trailers to be
parked and occupied
for family use for a
period of not more
than 10 days provided
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
§ 305-5.04 CHARTER § 305-5.04
C:343
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
that the use is
authorized by the
Board of Selectmen
and further provided
that there are suitable
facilities for running
water and sanitary
sewage as approved by
the Board of Health;
for the purpose of this
bylaw, a trailer shall be
defined to be any
trailer-type body,
whether mobile or
immobile
17.Agricultural: raising
and keeping of
livestock, horses and
poultry, not including
the raising of swine or
fur-bearing animals for
commercial use
P P P P — — — — — — — — P —
18.Accessory
noncommercial kennel
upon any lot occupied
by an owner or tenant
as a dwelling house
provided that all dogs
kept on such lot must
be owned by the
occupant
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
19.Accessory apartment
(see § 305-11.09)
S S S — S S — — — — — S P —
§ 305-5.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:344
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
20.Accessory commercial
parking lot to be
operated only during
the time events are
being conducted on the
property of the
Marshfield
Fairgrounds, such
parking lot to be used
solely for the purpose
of providing parking
for persons attending
the Marshfield Fair or
events on the
Marshfield
Fairgrounds
P P P P P P P — — — — P
21.Accessory barn:
accessory barn for
noncommercial use for
agriculture,
horticulture,
floriculture, and
related storage
purposes
P S S — — — — — — — — — S —
22.Accessory
communications tower
to a nonresidential use
(in compliance with
height requirements of
§ 305-6.02) (see
§ 305-11.12)
S S S S S P P P P P P P P P
§ 305-5.04 CHARTER § 305-5.04
C:345
Uses Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2R-3 RBB-1 B-2B-3 B-4OP I-1 A PMUDWRPDBRVO
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
23.Accessory
communications tower
to a nonresidential use
(not in compliance
with height
requirements of
§ 305-6.02) (see
§ 305-11.12)
S S S — S — — — — S S — — —
24.Wireless
communication facility
(placed on existing
tower complying with
§ 305-6.02)
S S S S S P P P P P P S P P
25.Wireless
communications
facility (located on a
tower not in
compliance with
§ 305-6.02 or other
nonresidential
structure)
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
26.Automatic teller
machines, excluding
drive-through facilities
— — — — P P P P — — — P — P
27.Accessory photovoltaic
installations over
parking lots
S S — — P P P P P P P P S S
* = Expedited permitting: The by-right site plan approval process administered by Board
of Appeals for renewable or alternative energy research and development facilities in
buildings 50,000 square feet or greater shall be completed within one year of the date
of submission of a complete application package. All other locally required permits for
renewable or alternative energy research and development facilities in buildings
50,000 square feet or greater shall also be issued within one year of the date of
submission of a complete application package.
§ 305-5.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-5.04
C:346
ARTICLE VI
Dimensional and Density Regulations
§ 305-6.01. Applicability of dimensional and density regulations.
The regulations for each district pertaining to minimum lot area, minimum
lot frontage, minimum lot depth, minimum front yard depth, minimum
side yard depth, minimum rear yard depth, maximum height of buildings,
maximum number of stories, maximum building area, and minimum open
space shall be specified in this article and set forth in the Table of
Dimensional and Density Regulations and subject to the further provisions
of this bylaw.
§ 305-6.02. Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations.
See table attached to this bylaw plus attached notes, which is declared to
be a part of this bylaw.
§ 305-6.03. Reduction of lot areas.
The lot, yard areas or open space required for any new building or use may
not include any part of a lot that is required by any other building or use to
comply with any provisions of this bylaw, nor may these areas include any
property of which the ownership has been transferred subsequent to the
effective date of this bylaw, if such property was a part of the area required
for compliance with the dimensional regulations applicable to the lot from
which such transfer was made.
§ 305-6.04. Separation of lots.
Lots shall not be so separated or transferred in ownership as not to comply
with the provisions of this bylaw.
§ 305-6.05. Screening and buffers in industrial and business
districts.
Screening and buffers shall be required in any industrial or business
district which adjoins a residential district as follows: this strip shall be
at least 35 feet in width; it shall contain a screen of plantings in the
center of the strip. The screen shall be not less than five feet in width
and six feet in height at the time of occupancy of such lot. Individual
shrubs or trees shall be planted not more than three feet on center
and shall thereafter be maintained by the owner or occupants so as to
maintain a dense screen year round.
A.
At least 50% of the plantings shall consist of evergreens. A solid wall
or fence, not to exceed six feet in height, complemented by suitable
plantings, may be substituted for such landscape buffer strip by special
permit. The strip may be part of the yard area.
B.
§ 305-6.01 CHARTER § 305-6.05
C:347
§ 305-6.06. Route 139 grandfathering. [Added April 2012 ATM]
Where any interest in a lot of land adjacent to the existing public way of
Plain Street (State Route 139), between School Street and Furnace Street,
is taken by eminent domain by the Town or the commonwealth in connection
with the widening of Plain Street, the remainder of the lot outside of the
area subject to the taking shall be treated for purposes of dimensional and
density requirements as though the portion of the lot acquired by eminent
domain were still included as part of the original lot.
§ 305-6.07. Accessory buildings.
In the "R" District a detached accessory building shall conform to the
following provisions: it shall not occupy more than 25% of the required
rear yard; it shall not be less than 20 feet from the front street line, or
less than 10 feet from any other lot line or from any principal building;
and it shall not exceed 20 feet in height. An accessory building attached
to a principal building shall be considered as an integral part thereof and
shall be subject to front, side, and rear yard requirements applicable to
the principal building. An accessory outdoor private swimming pool in any
district shall comply with the State Board of Building Regulations and
Standards, 780 CMR 421.0, Swimming Pools. No permanent swimming pool
shall be located within any required front yard nor within 10 feet from any
side or rear lot line. The height of an accessory barn may be increased to 35
feet if the minimum front setback is increased to 50 feet and the other lot
line setbacks are increased to 30 feet.
§ 305-6.08. Other general dimensional and density provisions.
In addition to the regulations in §§ 305-6.01 through 305-6.07, the following
regulations shall apply:
Where an "I" or "B" District abuts an "R" District, no building within the
"I" or "B" District shall be within 25 feet of the boundary line of the "R"
District.
C.
Existing and permitted residential uses in the "B" or "I" District shall be
subject to the dimensional density regulations of the nearest residential
district as determined by the Building Commissioner/Zoning
Enforcement Officer or, in the case of an age-restricted adult village
as authorized under § 305-11.08, shall be governed by the dimensional
density regulations set forward therein and as approved by the SPGA.
A.
Except for planned developments, community facilities, and public
utilities, only one principal structure shall be permitted on a lot. In
the case of planned developments, the minimum distance between the
walls of such principal buildings which contain windows shall be twice
the minimum side yard or side setback required in the district.
B.
A corner lot shall have minimum street yards which shall be the same
as the required front yard depths for the adjoining lots.
C.
§ 305-6.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-6.08
C:348
At each end of a through lot, there shall be a setback depth required
which is equal to the front yard depth required for the district in which
each street frontage is located.
D.
Projections into required yards or other required open spaces are
permitted only as follows:
Balcony or bay window, limited in total length to 1/2 the length of
the building, but not projecting more than two feet.
(1)
Open decks, terraces, steps or stoops under four feet in height, up
to 1/2 the required yard setback.
(2)
Open decks, steps, or stoops over four feet in height, windowsills,
chimneys, roof eaves, fire escapes, fire towers, storm enclosures or
similar architectural features, not more than two feet.
(3)
Corner boards, sheathing and the normal construction practice of
squaring the structure, not more than four inches.
(4)
E.
The provisions of this bylaw governing the height of buildings shall not
apply to chimneys, elevator bulkheads, electronic equipment, elevator
shafts, and other necessary appurtenances usually carried above the
roof; nor to domes, towers, stacks or spires, if not used for human
occupancy and which occupy not more than 20% of the ground floor
area of the building; nor to ornamental towers, observation towers,
radio broadcasting towers, television and radio antennae, and other like
structures which do not occupy more than 20% of the lot area; nor to
churches or public, agricultural or institutional buildings or buildings
of private schools not conducted for profit that are primarily used for
school purposes; provided, however, that the height of all structures
exempted by this subsection shall not be more than four times the
distance between the nearest lot line and the point directly below the
specific structure and further provided the excepted appurtenances are
not located within the flight paths of an airport as defined by Federal
Aviation Administration regulations. Any proposed communications
tower that exceeds the height requirements set forth in § 305-6.02 must
file for a special permit with the SPGA. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 12]
F.
The maximum gross floor area for a commercial establishment in the
Neighborhood Business District shall be 8,000 square feet.
G.
Where the existing development along a block amounts to more than
50% of the block frontage, and where said development has an average
setback less than that required by this bylaw, then any vacant lot
setback may be reduced to said average of the existing development.
H.
In all districts the lot width shall not be less than that prescribed in the
Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations as measured at any point
between the front lot line and the rear building line.
I.
§ 305-6.08 CHARTER § 305-6.08
C:349
§ 305-6.09. (Reserved)25
§ 305-6.10. Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations.
At no street intersection in any district shall any obstruction to vision
exceeding three feet in height above the plane established by the
intersecting streets be placed or permitted to grow on any lot within
the triangle formed by the lot lines abutting the intersecting streets and
a line connected points on these lot lines at a distance of 25 feet from
the point of intersection of the lot lines.
J.
A fence, hedge, wall, sign or other structure or vegetation may be
maintained on any lot provided that in the front yard area, no such
structure or vegetation shall be over three feet in height above the
adjacent ground within five feet of the front lot line unless it can be
shown that such structure or vegetation will not restrict visibility in
such a way as to hinder the safe entry of a vehicle from any driveway to
the streets.
K.
In all residential areas where buildings other than single-family
dwellings are constructed, a buffer zone of 35 feet must be provided as
described in § 305-6.05.
L.
When floodproofing an existing home on a preexisting nonconforming
residential lot, one single-story thirty-two-square-foot utility addition
(bump out) located on the first floor may project into the side or rear
setback. The utility addition is only for utilities such as furnaces, water
heaters and/or HVAC systems and shall be above the minimum flood
elevation. The owner shall provide the Building Department with proof
of recording of a restrictive covenant on said utility addition prior to the
issuance of the building permit. A minimum setback of five feet shall be
maintained from the property line. [Added 10-26-2015 STM by Art.
8]
M.
Projections into required yards or other required open spaces for
residential lots under 5,000 square feet in size shall be covered through
the issuance of a special permit or variance. [Added 10-26-2015 STM
by Art. 8]
N.
25.Editor's Note: Original § 6.09, Lot width, was deleted 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12. See the
definition of "lot width" in Art. II.
§ 305-6.08 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-6.10
C:350
Minimum Yards
ZoneUse
Minimum
Lot
Area2
(square
feet)
Width
and
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Stories
Maximum
Building
Area
Minimum
Open
Space
Area
R-1 Any
permitted
use
43,560 125 150 40 20 40 35 2.51 15% 50%
R-2 Any
permitted
use
20,000 100 120 40 15 40 35 2.51 25% 40%
R-3 Any
permitted
use
10,000 80 100 15 15 30 35 2.51 40% 30%
RB a.
Residential
use
20,000 125 150 40 15 40 35 2.5 25% 40%
b. Other use 20,000 125 150 40 15 40 255 15 40% 30%
OP Any
permitted
use
20,000 125 100 40 20 40 25 2 40% 30%
B-1 Any
permitted
use
10,000 100 100 5 None 10 35 3 None None
B-2 Any
permitted
use
20,000 150 150 40 154 40 35 2.5 40% 20%
B-33 Any
permitted
use
5,000 80 80 20 5 15 35 2.5 40% 20%
B-43 Any
permitted
use
10,000 100 100 10 5 15 35 2.5 60% 20%
I-1 Any
permitted
use
40,000 150 150 40 20 40 65 2 None 30%
A Any
permitted
use
20,000 125 100 40 20 40 35 3 40% 30%
NOTES:
1 In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the height may be increased to three stories if the minimum front
yard is increased by 14 feet and the minimum side yard is increased by five feet.
§ 305-6.10 CHARTER § 305-6.10
C:351
Minimum Yards
ZoneUse
Minimum
Lot
Area2
(square
feet)
Width
and
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot
Depth
(feet)
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Stories
Maximum
Building
Area
Minimum
Open
Space
Area
2 For lots partially within the Inland Wetlands or the Coastal Wetlands District, the application of the
minimum lot areas set forth in this table shall be governed by the regulations of Article XIII.
3 Except as noted in § 305-6.08.
4 The minimum side yard setback may be reduced or eliminated as noted in § 305-11.11 of the bylaw.
5 Buildings may be increased by 1.5 stories (maximum 35 feet) for a residential unit above the first
floor.
§ 305-6.10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-6.10
C:352
ARTICLE VII
Signs
§ 305-7.01. Applicability.
Except as shall be exempt under the jurisdiction of the State Billboard Act,
Chapter 584, Section 4, of the Acts of 1955,26 and as amended, and except
for signs of less than two square feet in surface area identifying occupancy
of a residence, no signs shall be attached, erected or otherwise installed
on any property without first obtaining a sign permit from the Building
Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer, such permit to be granted only
in accordance with the following regulations.
§ 305-7.02. General sign regulations.
No sign shall extend above the roofline of the building to which it is
attached. Roof signs are not allowed.
A.
Any traffic, directional, trespass or ownership sign owned or installed
by a governmental agency shall be permitted.
Public interest signs; Adopt a Street Program. Informational
standing signs, not including general advertising signs, owned or
installed by the Board of Public Works, may be erected on public
ways and traffic islands by said Board, after receiving a permit
therefor from the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer. Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface area
per side and shall be erected so that no portion of the sign is
over five feet above the ground level beneath the sign. Such signs
shall contain no more than two colors and shall not be illuminated.
The Board may place on such signs the name(s) of persons or
businesses who or which are participating in the so-called Adopt
a Street Program operated by the Department of Public Works.
The Board of Public Works shall adopt and publish written policies
and procedures consistent with this section governing the Adopt a
Street Program.
(1)
Community service announcements. Standing signs containing
community service announcements, not including general
advertising signs, may be erected on public ways and traffic islands
with the approval of the Board of Selectmen, after receiving a
permit therefor from the Building Commissioner/Zoning
Enforcement Officer. Such signs shall not exceed 12 square feet
in surface area per side and shall be erected so that no portion
of the sign is over five feet above the ground level beneath the
sign. Such signs shall not be illuminated. Provided however that
so-called banner-type signs may be erected in the air space over
public ways without complying with the height and size limitations
contained herein.
(2)
B.
26.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 93, § 29.
§ 305-7.01 CHARTER § 305-7.02
C:353
Welcome to Marshfield signs. Signs which welcome travelers to the
Town of Marshfield and which are owned or installed by the Board
of Public Works may be erected on public ways and traffic islands
at the entrances to the Town by said Board, with the approval
of the Board of Selectmen, after receiving a permit therefor from
the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer. Such signs
shall not exceed 24 square feet in surface area per side and shall
be erected so that no portion of the sign is over eight feet above
the ground level beneath the sign. Such signs shall contain no more
than three colors and shall not be illuminated.
(3)
Temporary interior window displays or temporary banners for drive-in
establishments or automotive establishments shall be permitted except
as provided in Subsection D below. "Temporary" shall be construed
to mean any period not exceeding 30 consecutive days. Temporary
political signs are permitted in any district, for a period of one month
before election to three days after. Not more than one sign per
candidate per lot, with permission of the owners, shall be allowed. They
shall be subject to all provisions of this bylaw unless such provision be
specifically superseded by this section.
Each political sign shall be freestanding and secured to a post or
a stake driven into the ground. Such signs shall not be attached to
public property, trees, fences, utility poles or rocks. Whenever the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer determines
that any political sign has been erected in violation of the
provisions of this subsection, he shall so notify the candidate whose
name appears on such sign, and/or any committee formed to
advocate the candidacy of such person, of the violation. If the
illegal signs are not removed within 24 hours from the time of such
notice, then the candidate and committee shall both be liable for
the penalties provided under § 305-10.08 of this bylaw.
(1)
The maximum size of a political sign shall not exceed six square
feet. A permit must be obtained from the Building Department
before any political sign can be erected or displayed. A permit fee
of $10 shall be paid plus a deposit of $50 as a security for all signs
erected for any one candidate. Removal shall be within three days
after election day. The deposit shall be refunded upon the timely
removal of the signs and verification of the enforcement officer.
Signs not so removed at the end of that period shall be removed by
order of the enforcement officer and the fifty-dollar security deposit
shall be used for such purposes of removal and any excess amount
of said deposit shall be forfeited to the Town.
(2)
C.
A sign (including temporary interior window displays or banner) or
its illuminator shall not by reason of its location, shape, size or color
interfere with traffic or be confused with or obstruct the view or
effectiveness of any official traffic sign, traffic signal or traffic marking.
Therefore, flashing or animated signs are not permitted and red, yellow
or green colored lights shall not be permitted.
D.
§ 305-7.02 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-7.02
C:354
No more than two signs shall be allowed for any one business or
industrial establishment in the "B" and "I" Districts.
E.
No more than two permanent signs shall be allowed for any one
premises in the "R" Districts.
F.
The limitation as to the number of signs permitted does not apply
to traffic or directional signs, or posting of trespassing or warning
signs which are necessary for the safety and direction of residents,
employees, customers, and visitors, whether in a vehicle or on foot, of
any business, industry or residence. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 12]
G.
The supporting members of any pole sign, projecting sign, or any other
sign shall be in acceptable proportion to the size of the sign.
H.
No sign shall be erected so as to obstruct any door, window, or fire
escape on a building.
I.
At the boundary line of the Town and within a street right-of-way, a sign
not exceeding five square feet in area indicating the meetings of any
Marshfield civic organization may be erected only after the granting of
a special permit by the Board.
J.
If lighting is provided, the source of light shall be shielded as to
prevent direct glare from the light source onto any public street or onto
adjacent property.
K.
In any district one unlighted sign offering premises for sale or lease for
each parcel in one ownership shall be permitted provided it shall not
exceed six square feet in surface area and it shall be set back at least
10 feet from the street lot line.
L.
In any residential class district, one unlighted temporary sign of an
architect, engineer or contractor erected during the period such person
is performing work on the premises on which such sign is erected shall
be permitted provided it shall not exceed four square feet in surface
area and it shall be set back at least 10 feet from the street lot line.
M.
In business and industrial districts one unlighted temporary sign of an
architect, engineer or contractor erected during the period such person
is performing work on the premises on which such sign is erected shall
be permitted provided it shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area
and it shall be set back at least 10 feet from the street lot line.
N.
In the business, airport, office park and industrial zones, site plan
approval from the Board of Appeals may include recommendations
from the Beautification Committee; the Board shall transmit one copy
to the Beautification Committee which shall have 30 days to make
recommendations to the Board in regard to the signs.
O.
§ 305-7.02 CHARTER § 305-7.03
C:355
§ 305-7.03. Signs permitted in any "R" District. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
The following signs shall be permitted in any residential district:
§ 305-7.04. Signs permitted in any "B" District. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
The following signs shall be permitted in any business district:
One professional nameplate for each medical doctor, dental
practitioner, lawyer, engineer, optometrist or home occupation,
provided such sign shall not exceed two square feet in surface area.
A.
One identification sign for each dwelling unit, provided such sign shall
not exceed two square feet in surface area; if lighted, it shall be
illuminated with white light by indirect method only; and it shall not be
used other than for identifying the occupancy.
B.
One identification sign for each membership club, funeral
establishment, hospital, church, other place of public assembly,
community facility or public utility use, provided the sign shall not
exceed 10 square feet in surface area, and if lighted, it shall be
illuminated with white light by indirect method only. Such sign shall be
set back at least 1/2 of the required depth of the front yard.
C.
One unlighted sign relating to a new residential subdivision during the
actual period of construction, provided it shall not exceed 20 square
feet in surface area and it shall be set back at least 10 feet from any
street lot line.
D.
Signs permitted in § 305-7.03, subject to the same regulations, and
business signs. General advertising signs shall be prohibited. Projecting
signs not more than 10 square feet in area in lieu of a permitted pole
sign or standing sign may be permitted by special permit from the
Board of Appeals. Such permit may be granted under the conditions
of Article X, § 305-10.10, Special permits. Upon receipt of such
application, the Board shall transmit a copy of such plan to the
Beautification Committee which may make recommendations. No
recommendation within 30 days shall be deemed approval.
A.
One wall sign for each lot street frontage of each establishment,
provided it shall be attached and parallel to the main wall of a building;
the surface area of the sign shall not aggregate more than 10% of the
area of the wall on which it is displayed, or 40 square feet, whichever
is lesser; and if lighted, it shall be illuminated internally or by indirect
method only.
B.
One pole sign for each street frontage lot held in single ownership
regardless of the number of businesses on that lot; it may be doublefaced,
but shall not exceed 40 square feet in surface area per side; no
portion of it shall be set back less than 10 feet from any street lot line;
C.
§ 305-7.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-7.04
C:356
it shall not be erected so that any portion of it is over 30 feet above the
ground or sidewalks; and if lighted, it shall be illuminated internally or
by indirect method with white light only.
One standing sign for each lot street frontage of a business
establishment in the Highway Business District, provided it shall not
exceed 40 square feet in surface area, on any one side; no portion of
it shall be set back less than 10 feet from any street lot line; it shall
not rise to more than 12 feet from the ground or sidewalk; and it shall
be illuminated internally or by indirect method with white or blue light
only. Where a single lot is occupied by more than one business, whether
in the same structure or not, there shall not be more than one standing
sign.
D.
Businesses or civic institutions located within the area known as
Library Plaza within the B-1 Zoning District, said area including
Assessor's Parcels H7-05-07 and H7-05-02, said businesses not having
legal frontage on a street but accessible from both Ocean Street and
Webster Street, may be permitted to construct a total of two shared
signs subject to the following conditions:
One pole sign at the intersection of both Ocean Street and Webster
Streets with the primary access road to Library Plaza, with said
sign located on Town-owned land and held in ownership by the
Town regardless of the number of businesses referenced on the
sign; it may be double-faced, but shall not exceed 40 square feet in
surface area per side; no portion of it shall be set back less than
10 feet from any street lot line; it shall not be erected so that any
portion of it is over 12 feet above the ground or sidewalks; and if
lighted, it shall be illuminated by indirect method with white light
only.
(1)
Such permit may be granted under the conditions of Article X,
§ 305-10.10, Special permits. Upon receipt of such application, the
Board shall transmit a copy of such plan at least to the Planning
Board, the Safety Officer and the Beautification Committee, if
applicable, which may make recommendations. No
recommendation within 30 days shall be deemed approval.
(2)
Any site plan review permit issued for new construction,
redevelopment or reuse within Library Plaza shall be conditioned
upon approval of an amended sign design reflecting the addition of
the new business to the shared sign or signs.
(3)
The commercial tenant(s) located on Assessor's Parcel H7-05-01
may elect to be included on the two signs authorized herein
provided that any reference on said sign(s) shall serve as the
primary and only signage for said tenant(s) visible from either
Ocean Street or Webster Street, and shall disallow, for the duration
of the reference to said tenant(s) on the shared sign(s), the
(4)
E.
§ 305-7.04 CHARTER § 305-7.04
C:357
§ 305-7.05. Signs permitted in "I" District. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 12]
The following signs shall be permitted in the Industrial District:
presence on any other sign on the parcel's frontage on Ocean
Street.
A. Wall signs permitted in § 305-7.04, subject to the same regulations.
One standing sign for each lot street frontage, provided it shall be set
back at least 15 feet from any street lot line; it shall not be erected so
that any portion of it is over 15 feet above the ground or sidewalk; and
if lighted, it shall be illuminated internally or by indirect method with
white light only.
B.
In the Industrial Zone, a sign or assembly of signs which are similar in
size and appearances, and which serve as a directory of occupants, is/
are permitted, provided the aggregate area of such sign or signs does
not exceed 40 square feet. Not more than one such directory sign may
be located at each entrance roadway to the Industrial Zone within 250
feet of the boundary of the zone and not closer than 15 feet to the edge
of the roadway. Illumination, if any, will be by indirect white light only.
C.
§ 305-7.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-7.05
C:358
ARTICLE VIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading and Lighting Regulations
§ 305-8.01. Minimum off-street parking requirements. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
After the effective date of this bylaw, off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for every new structure, the enlargement of an existing structure,
the development of a new land use or any change in an existing use in its
entirety in accordance with the Table of Off-Street Parking Regulations and
the other requirements contained herein.
Table of Off-Street Parking Regulations
Uses
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces per Unit
Dwelling, single- and two-family
units
2 per unit
Lodging house, dormitory,
fraternity, sorority, YMCA, YWCA
and similar types of group
quarters
1 per rental or sleeping unit; any
bedroom or group of 2 beds in a single
room constitutes a sleeping unit
Theater, restaurant, gymnasium,
auditorium, church, or similar
place of public assembly with
seating facilities
1 for each 4 seats of total seating
capacity
Automotive retail and service
establishment and other retail and
service establishments utilizing
extensive display areas, either
indoor or outdoor, which are
unusually extensive in relation to
customer traffic
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
space; in the case of outdoor display
areas, 1 for each 1,000 square feet of
lot area in such use
Hotel, motel, tourist court 1 for each sleeping room, plus 1 for
each 400 square feet of public meeting
area and restaurant space
Other retail, service, finance,
insurance, or real estate
establishment, medical/dental
office building
1 per each 500 square feet of gross
floor space
Wholesale establishment,
warehouse, or storage
establishment
1 per each 1,000 square feet of gross
floor space
Manufacturing or industrial
establishment
1 per each 600 square feet of gross
floor space or 0.75 per each employee
of the combined employment of the 2
largest successive shifts, whichever is
larger
§ 305-8.01 CHARTER § 305-8.01
C:359
Table of Off-Street Parking Regulations
Uses
Minimum Number of Off-Street
Parking Spaces per Unit
Hospital 2 per bed at design capacity
Nursing home 1 per bed at design capacity
Business, trade or industrial
school or college, country clubs
1 per each 200 square feet of gross
floor area in classrooms and other
teaching stations, plus space for
gymnasium or auditorium, whichever
has the larger capacity
Other school 2 per classroom in an elementary and
junior high school; 4 per classroom in
a senior high school, plus space for
auditorium or gymnasium, whichever
has the larger capacity
Community facility (Town
building, recreation, etc.)
1 per each 400 square feet of gross
floor space
Public utility 1 for each 400 square feet of gross
floor space devoted to office space; 1
for each 800 square feet of gross floor
area per other use
Transportation terminal
establishment; home occupation
1 for each 600 square feet of gross
floor area
Any use permitted by this bylaw
not interpreted to be covered by
this schedule
Closest similar use as shall be
determined by the Building
Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer
§ 305-8.02. Minimum off-street loading and unloading
requirements. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
For every building hereafter erected for retail and service, wholesale,
transportation and industrial, and community facility use as specified in the
Table of Use Regulations and for every such use hereinafter established
in an existing building or area, the off-street loading and unloading
requirements presented in the Table of Off-Street Loading Regulations shall
apply.
§ 305-8.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-8.02
C:360
Table of Off-Street Loading Regulations
Use
Number of Loading Spaces Per
Unit
Retail trade, manufacturing and
hospital establishment with over
5,000 square feet floor area
1 per 20,000 square feet or fraction
thereof of gross floor area up to 2
spaces; 1 additional space for each
60,000 square feet or fraction thereof
of gross floor area over 40,000 square
feet; space used for ambulance
receiving at a hospital is not to be
used to meet these loading
requirements
Business services, other services,
community facility (school,
church, Town building, recreation,
etc.) or public utility
establishment with over 5,000
square feet of gross floor area
1 per every 75,000 square feet of
gross floor area
§ 305-8.03. Existing spaces.
Parking or loading spaces being maintained in any district in connection
with any existing use on the effective date of this bylaw, or any spaces
subsequently provided in accordance with this bylaw, shall not be decreased
or in any way removed from service to the use originally intended to be
served so long as said use remains, unless a number of parking or loading
spaces is constructed elsewhere such that the total number of spaces
conforms to the requirements of the tables of this article, provided this
regulation shall not require the maintenance of more parking or loading
spaces than are required according to the tables.
§ 305-8.04. Computation of spaces.
When the computation of required parking or loading spaces results in the
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of 1/2 or more shall require
one space.
§ 305-8.05. Combined facilities.
Parking required for two or more buildings or uses may be provided in
combined facilities on the same or adjacent lots subject to approval by the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer where it is evident that
such facilities will continue to be available for the several buildings or uses.
Recognizing that parking requirements in the underlying zoning district
may hamper development of village-style land use and development, the
Board may, by way of special permit, permit the reduction of the parking
space requirements to 80% of that required in the Table of Off-Street
Parking Regulations where uses on adjacent lots generate substantially
different peak-hour parking lot use patterns. In determining the appropriate
§ 305-8.02 CHARTER § 305-8.05
C:361
reduction, if any, the Board may give consideration to the hours of usage
of the proposed use/structure, hours of usage of other uses/structures
within the district, amount of shared parking with other uses, the opinions
of merchants, residents and municipal officials as to the adequacy or
inadequacy of parking spaces within the specific area of the proposed
use/structure, as well as other relevant information to assist the Board in
determining the need for additional parking for motor vehicles.
§ 305-8.06. Location and design of parking spaces. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as
the principal use they are required to serve or, when practical difficulties
as determined by the Board prevent their establishment upon the same
lot, they shall be established no further than 300 feet from the premises
to which they are appurtenant. The Board may permit parking spaces to
be located greater than 300 feet but in no case further than 500 feet
from the premises to which they are appurtenant where the applicant
provides pedestrian improvements in addition to those required by this
bylaw, including but not limited to benches, lighting, bicycle racks and
street trees, to the corridor between the parking spaces and the premises
to which they are appurtenant.
Parking facilities and appurtenant driveways shall be designed to the
extent feasible so as to gather pedestrians out of vehicle travel lanes
and to maximize the safety and convenience of pedestrians walking
between parked cars and business entrances as well as between
external points and locations on site.
A.
Pedestrian walkways shall be:
Integrated, to the extent feasible, into the interior and/or perimeter
landscaping of parking lots;
(1)
Constructed with a paved or similarly firm surface, at least five feet
in width; and
(2)
Separated, to the extent feasible, from vehicular and parking areas
by grade, curbing and/or vegetation, except for necessary ramps.
(3)
B.
To the extent possible, parking areas within the B-1 Zoning District
shall be located to the side and rear of the structure and shall include
provisions for the parking of bicycles in locations that are safely
segregated from automobile traffic and parking. No parking area shall
be designed such that parking is within the required or authorized front
yard setback.
C.
To the extent possible, parking areas shall be shared with adjacent
businesses in common ownership or where a written agreement to
share parking exists between adjacent landowners.
D.
§ 305-8.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-8.06
C:362
§ 305-8.07. Location of loading spaces.
The loading spaces required for the uses listed in the Table of Off-Street
Loading Regulations shall in all cases be on the same lot as the use they are
intended to serve. In no case shall the required loading spaces be part of
the area used to satisfy the parking requirements of this bylaw.
§ 305-8.08. Parking and loading space standards.
All parking and loading areas containing over five spaces, including
automotive and drive-in establishments of all types, shall be either
contained within structures or subject to the following:
Parking areas shall include adequate provisions for on-site retention
and treatment of stormwater except where the Board determines that
the overall site drainage plans are adequate.
E.
The area shall be effectively screened with suitable planting or fencing
on each side which adjoins or faces the side or rear lot line of a lot
situated in any "R" District.
A.
The area and access driveways thereto shall be surfaced with
bituminous or cement concrete material and shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulation in
accordance with acceptable engineering practices. The location of
spaces shall be suitably marked by painted lines or other appropriate
markings.
B.
A substantial bumper of masonry, steel or heavy timber, or a concrete
curb or berm curb which is backed, shall be placed at the edge of
surfaced areas except driveways in order to protect abutting
structures, properties and sidewalks and screening materials.
C.
The layout of the parking area shall allow sufficient space for the
storage of plowed snow unless removal by some other means is
assured.
D.
Any fixture used to illuminate any area shall be so arranged as to direct
the light away from the street and away from adjoining premises used
for residential purposes.
E.
There shall not be any storage of materials or equipment or display of
merchandise within required parking area except as part of approved
building operations.
F.
Parking shall not be located within the required front yard area
between the front lot line and the required setback in any district
except residential.
G.
Parking and loading spaces other than those required for single-family
dwellings shall be so arranged as not to permit backing of vehicles onto
any street.
H.
§ 305-8.06 CHARTER § 305-8.08
C:363
§ 305-8.09. General exterior lighting design standards.
Parking and loading spaces serving new residential uses shall be
surfaced with a durable pavement.
I.
Any portion of any entrance or exit driveway shall not be closer than
50 feet to the curbline of an intersecting street except where subject
to the provisions of Article XI, § 305-11.11, in which case the minimum
distance shall be 75 feet.
J.
Any two driveways leading to or from a street, to or from a single lot,
shall not be within 30 feet of each other at their intersections with the
front lot line for an interior lot and 40 feet for a corner lot.
K.
Any entrance or exit driveway shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the
street line except for fire stations, in which case the widths may be
increased to 40 feet. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
L.
The Board may, by way of special permit, permit the reduction of the
parking space requirements to 80% of that required in the Table of
Off-Street Parking Regulations where conditions unique to the use will
reasonably justify such a reduction.
M.
The Board may, by way of special permit, permit the reduction of the
size of the loading space where such reduced size is consistent with the
dimensions of the commercial vehicle serving the premises.
N.
The Board may, by way of special permit, permit the reduction of the
size of the parking space to no less than nine feet in width and 18 feet
in length, plus 100 square feet of access and maneuvering space, for
properties located within the B-1 Zoning District where such reduced
size allows for increased landscaping.
O.
The Board may, by way of special permit, permit the reduction of the
parking space requirements to 80% of that required in the Table of Off-
Street Parking Regulations where there is adequate capacity to meet
the standards set forth in the Table of Off-Street Parking Regulations
within a Town-owned parking lot within 500 feet of the premises to
which they are appurtenant.
P.
The provisions of this bylaw shall apply to business and industrial uses
only. The luminaires should be the shoebox type or decorative in nature
(with interior directional shielded), consistent with the architectural
theme of the development.
A.
Flood and area lighting is unacceptable. All luminaires shall have a total
cutoff of all light at less than 90° from vertical.
B.
Reflectors of proper distribution shall be selected for maximum
efficiency. Reflectors and shielding shall provide total cutoff of all light
at the property lines of the parcel to be developed.
C.
§ 305-8.08 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-8.09
C:364
The light fixture shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Light fixtures
utilized for walkway lighting shall not exceed 12 feet in height.
D.
Where wall pack type luminaires are utilized for outdoor lighting
fixtures, the fixture shall be equipped with a prismatic lens to reduce
glare. Wall pack lighting should be designed to a maximum cutoff of 70°
from vertical. The location of wall pack luminaires shall not exceed 20
feet in height.
E.
The following footcandle levels shall be adhered to:
The maximum horizontal footcandle level (initial) as measured
directly below the luminaires at grade: 8.0 footcandles.
(1)
The minimum horizontal footcandle level (maintained) measured at
the point of least illumination of grades: 1.0 footcandle.
(2)
F.
§ 305-8.09 CHARTER § 305-8.09
C:365

ARTICLE IX
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 305-9.01. Nonconformity by initial enactment or amendment.
The provisions of this article apply to nonconforming uses, structures, and
lots as created by the initial enactment of this bylaw or by any subsequent
amendment.
§ 305-9.02. Extension and alteration.
§ 305-9.03. Residential lot of record.
Any lot lawfully laid out by deed duly recorded, or any lot shown on a
recorded plan endorsed by the Planning Board pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 81P
or 81U, which complies at the time of such recording with the minimum
area, frontage, width, and depth requirements, if any, of the zoning bylaws
then in effect, may be built upon for residential use provided it has a
minimum area of 5,000 square feet with frontage of at least 50 feet and
is otherwise in accordance with the provisions of Section 6 of the Zoning
Enabling Act.28
Except where used primarily for agriculture, including marine
agriculture and the catching and taking of marine flora and fauna
and the seeding of catchment area, horticulture or floriculture, any
nonconforming use of any structure or of any open space on a lot
outside a structure, or of a lot not occupied by a structure, shall not be
altered or extended except in accordance with this Article IX.
A.
Certain nonconforming principal or accessory uses or structures may
be extended or altered by special permit from the Board of Appeals in
accordance with the procedures established by Article X.27
B.
Any nonconforming one- or two-family residential structure may be
altered, extended, or reconstructed and the use extended throughout
the extended, altered, or reconstructed portion provided that any
resultant alteration shall not cause the structure to violate the
maximum building area and yard regulations of the district in which
it is located. Nonconforming structures may be altered or relocated
on the same lot if it makes the altered or relocated structure more
conforming with respect to the current building and yard regulations.
[Amended April 2007 ATM]
C.
Any nonconforming structure or portion thereof which has come into
conformity shall not again become nonconforming.
D.
27.Editor's Note: See § 305-10.12, Permit for extension or alteration of nonconforming use or
structure.
28.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40A, § 6.
§ 305-9.01 CHARTER § 305-9.04
C:367
§ 305-9.04. Reduction or increase. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 17]
§ 305-9.05. Change.
§ 305-9.06. Restoration.
Any nonconforming lot shall not be changed in any way that would
reduce any dimensional requirements in § 305-6.02, Table of
Dimensional and Density Regulations.
A.
Any required open space shall not be reduced as to make it
nonconforming.
B.
No building area or floor already nonconforming shall be changed so as
to be in greater nonconformity.
C.
Any nonconforming use of a structure may be changed to another
nonconforming use, provided the changed use is not a substantially
different use, determined by the Building Commissioner/Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
A.
Any nonconforming use which has been once changed to a permitted
use shall not again be changed to a nonconforming use.
B.
Any nonconforming lot which has come into conformity shall not again
be changed to a nonconforming lot.
C.
Any nonconforming structure or any structure occupied by a
nonconforming use which is totally destroyed by fire or other natural
cause may be rebuilt on its original foundation according to original
floor area limitations and used for its original use. Otherwise, it shall
not be rebuilt, except in accordance with the use, dimensional, and
density regulations of this bylaw. Historical buildings may be exempt by
special exception of the Board.
A.
Any nonconforming structure or any structure occupied by a
nonconforming use which is damaged by fire or other natural cause
may be repaired or rebuilt according to the dimensions and floor area
limitations of the original structure and used for its original use or a
conforming use.
B.
Restoration under this section shall be completed within two years of
the fire or natural disaster.
C.
This time frame may be extended by one year in the case of natural
disasters when the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer
makes a finding that the property owner has made a good faith effort to
complete reconstruction within the said two-year period. The provisions
of this amendment shall be effective as of August 1, 1991.
D.
§ 305-9.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-9.07
C:368
§ 305-9.07. Abandonment.
Any nonconforming use of a structure or lot which has been abandoned for
a continuous period of two years or more shall not be used again except
for conforming use. For agricultural, horticultural, or floricultural uses, the
abandonment period shall be five years. For purposes of this section, the
abandonment period shall not be broken by temporary occupancy except
when such temporary occupancy is for a period of 90 consecutive days. The
abandonment of the use of a lot where such use was for removal of soil,
loam, sand, gravel, quarry or other earth materials shall be governed by
§ 305-11.02.
§ 305-9.08. Moving.
Any nonconforming structure shall not be removed to any other location on
the lot or any other lot unless every portion of the structure, the use thereof,
and the lot shall be conforming. Nonconforming historical structures may
be moved by special exception of the Board.
§ 305-9.09. Unsafe structure.
Any structure determined to be unsafe and not subject to § 305-9.06 may
be restored to a safe condition provided such work on any nonconforming
structure shall not place it in greater nonconformity, and provided further,
except for historic buildings, if the cost to restore any structure shall exceed
50% of its physical replacement value, it shall be reconstructed only as a
conforming structure and used only for a conforming use.
§ 305-9.10. Nonconforming signs.
Any sign which is nonconforming at the date of adoption of this bylaw
by reason of its size, type, or lighting shall be altered so as to become
conforming within five years of the date of adoption of this bylaw or shall be
removed within five years.
§ 305-9.07 CHARTER § 305-9.10
C:369

ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 305-10.01. Administrative official.
It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer to administer and enforce the provisions of this bylaw. If the Building
Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer receives in writing a request
for enforcement and declines to act, or if a person alleges a violation in
writing to that office who declines to act, the Building Commissioner/Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall notify in writing the party requesting action of
his refusal to act and the reasons therefor within 14 days of receipt of such
request.
§ 305-10.02. Permit required.
Except for the erection of a structure enclosing an area of 64 square feet
or less and except for the erection of signs of less than two square feet
in surface area identifying occupancy of a residence, it shall be unlawful
for any person to erect, construct, reconstruct, or alter a structure, or
change the use or lot coverage, increase the intensity of use, or extend
or displace the use of any building, structure, or lot, without applying for
and receiving from the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer
a building permit. It shall also be unlawful for any person to attach, erect,
or otherwise install any sign without applying for and receiving from the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer a sign permit.
§ 305-10.03. Previously approved permit.
The status of previously approved permits shall be as determined by the
Zoning Act.29
§ 305-10.04. Certificate of occupancy required.
It shall be unlawful to occupy any structure or lot for which a building
permit is required herein without the owner applying for and receiving
from the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer a
certificate of occupancy specifying thereon the use to which the
structure or lot may be put. The certificate of occupancy shall state
that the building and use comply with the provisions of the Zoning
Bylaw and the Building Code in effect at the time of issuance. No such
certificate shall be issued unless the building and its accessory uses and
the uses of all premises are in conformity with the provisions of this
bylaw and of the Building Code at the time of issuance. A certificate
of occupancy shall be conditional on the provision of adequate parking
space and other facilities as required by this bylaw and shall lapse if
such areas and facilities are used for other purposes.
A.
29.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40A.
§ 305-10.01 CHARTER § 305-10.04
C:371
§ 305-10.05. Permit and certificate fees.
Fees shall be as established by the Selectmen.
§ 305-10.06. Permit time limits.
Any work for which a permit has been issued by the Building Commissioner/
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall be actively prosecuted within 90 days
and completed within one year of the date of the issuance of the permit.
Any permit issued for a project which is actively prosecuted for one year
may be extended at the discretion of the Building Commissioner/Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
§ 305-10.07. Notice of violation and order.
The Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice
of violation and order to any owner or person responsible for the erection,
construction, reconstruction, conversion, or alteration of a structure or
change in use, increase in intensity, or extension or displacement of use
of any structure or lot in violation of any approved plan, information or
drawing pertinent thereto, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this bylaw, and such order shall direct the immediate
discontinuance of the unlawful action, use or condition and the abatement
of the violation. Any owner who has been served with a notice and ceases
any work or other activity shall not leave any structure or lot in such a
condition as to be a hazard or menace to the public safety, health, morals or
general welfare.
§ 305-10.08. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by
Art. 12]
If the notice of violation and order is not complied with promptly, the
Selectmen shall institute the appropriate action or proceeding at law or
A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following in
conformity with the Building Code and this bylaw:
Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally
altered.
(1)
Change in use of an existing building or the use of land to a use of
a different classification.
(2)
B.
Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally with the
application for a building permit and shall be acted upon within 10
days after receipt by the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer of approved inspection certificates and/or provisions of all
governmental bodies so lawfully designated as required by the
applicable laws, bylaws, and codes. Such certificates of occupancy shall
be posted by the owner of the property in a conspicuous place for a
period of not less than 10 days after issuance.
C.
§ 305-10.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-10.08
C:372
in equity to prevent any unlawful action, use or condition and to restrain,
correct, or abate such violation. Any person, firm or corporation violating
any of the provisions of this bylaw shall for each violation, upon conviction
thereof, pay a fine of $300. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist after notice to remove the same shall constitute a separate offense.
Penalties for violations in connection with the removal of soil, loam, sand,
gravel, quarry, or other earth materials shall be as set forth in the Earth
Removal Bylaw.30
§ 305-10.09. Board of Appeals.
Membership. There shall be a Board of Appeals of five members and
two associate members.
A.
Appointment. Members of the Board in office at the effective date
of this bylaw shall continue in office. Hereafter, as terms expire or
vacancies occur, the Board of Selectmen shall make appointments
pursuant to the Zoning Act.31
B.
Powers. The Board shall have those powers granted under the Zoning
Act.
C.
Adoption of rules. The Board shall adopt rules to govern its proceedings
pursuant to the Zoning Act.
D.
Plans.
Whenever a plan is required to be submitted under any provision
of this bylaw, for good cause shown, the Board may waive the
submission, or modify the requirements, of such plans, according
to its judgment; provided, however, that the Board shall not waive
such submission if any other Town official or agency required or
requested to pass on such plan objects to such waiver.
(1)
All plans required to be submitted to the Board of Appeals shall
be drawn to the largest practicable scale which in no case shall
be smaller than one inch equals 40 feet. They shall contain a
locus map, shall show sufficient contour information to enable the
Board to determine drainage flow, and shall contain all engineering
information necessary for any proposed construction. All elevations
provided must be relative to mean sea level as determined by the
U.S. Geological Survey.
(2)
E.
Appeals. Any appeal to the Board shall be taken within 30 days from the
date of the order or decision which is being appealed by filing a notice
of appeal specifying the grounds thereof with the Town Clerk who shall
transmit copies to the officer whose decision is being appealed and
the permit granting authority. No appeal, application or petition to the
Board of Appeals with respect to a particular parcel of land or with
F.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 70, Earth Removal.
31.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40A.
§ 305-10.08 CHARTER § 305-10.09
C:373
§ 305-10.10. Special permits.
Certain uses, structures or conditions are designated as allowed by special
permit in Article V, Table of Use Regulations, and elsewhere in this bylaw.
Upon written application duly made to the Board, the Board may, in
appropriate cases subject to the applicable conditions set forth in Articles
XI and XII of this bylaw and elsewhere, and subject to other appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant a special permit for such uses, structures
and conditions. When site plan approval is required, the granting authority
shall be the Board of Appeals except in the Planned Mixed-Use District
where a special permit is also required and that special permit granting
authority is the Planning Board. In that case, the special permit granting
authority for the site plan approval shall be the Planning Board.
respect to any structure which has been unfavorably acted upon by
the Board of Appeals shall be considered on its merits by said Board
within two years after the date of such unfavorable action, except in
accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 16.
Before granting an application for a special permit, the Board, with due
regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent structures and uses
and the district within which the same is located, shall find all of the
following general conditions to be fulfilled:
The use requested is listed in the Table of Use Regulations as a
special permit in the district for which application is made or is so
designated elsewhere in this bylaw.
(1)
The requested use is essential or desirable to the public
convenience or welfare.
(2)
The requested use will not create undue traffic congestion or
unduly impair pedestrian safety.
(3)
The requested use will not overload any public water, drainage or
sewer system or any other municipal system to such an extent that
the requested use or any developed use in the immediate area or
in any other area of the Town will be unduly subjected to hazards
affecting health, safety or the general welfare.
(4)
Any special regulations for the use, set forth in Article XI, are
fulfilled.
(5)
The requested use will not impair the integrity or character of
the district or adjoining zones, nor be detrimental to the health,
morals, or welfare.
(6)
A.
The Board shall also impose in addition to any applicable conditions
specified in this bylaw such applicable conditions as it finds reasonably
appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood or otherwise serve the
purposes of this bylaw, including, but not limited to, the following:
front, side, or rear yards greater than the minimum required by this
B.
§ 305-10.09 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-10.10
C:374
§ 305-10.11. Variances.
bylaw; screening buffers or planting strips, fences, or walls, as specified
by the Board; modification of the exterior appearance of the structures;
limitation upon the size, number of occupants, method and time of
operation, time duration of permit, or extent of facilities; regulation
of number and location of driveways or other traffic features; and offstreet
parking or loading or other special features beyond the minimum
required by this bylaw. Such conditions shall be imposed in writing,
and the applicant may be required to post bond or other security for
compliance with said conditions in an amount satisfactory to the Board.
In order that the Board may determine that the above-mentioned
restrictions are to be met, a site plan shall be submitted, in
quadruplicate, to the Board by the applicant. Said site plan shall show,
among other things, all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
parking spaces, driveway openings, driveways, service areas, and other
open uses, all facilities for sewage, refuse, and other waste disposal and
for surface water drainage, and all landscape features, such as fences,
walls, planting areas and walks.
The Board shall, within 10 days after receipt thereof, transmit
one copy of such plan to the Planning Board. The Planning Board
may, in its discretion, investigate the case and report in writing its
recommendation to the Board.
(1)
The Board shall not take final action on such plan until it has
received a report thereon from the Planning Board or until said
Planning Board has allowed 30 days to elapse after receipt of such
plan without submission of a report thereon.
(2)
C.
The special permit is granted for a period of two years and shall
lapse if substantial use or construction has not commenced by such
date, except for good cause shown, and provided further that such
construction once begun shall be actively and continuously pursued to
completion within a reasonable time.
D.
The Board shall hold a public hearing within 65 days after the filing by
the applicant of the appropriate forms and plans with the Town Clerk
who shall forthwith transmit said application to the Board. It shall act
within 90 days of the hearing on the petition; failure to do so shall be
deemed approval.
E.
The Planning Board may appoint an associate member. The term of
office of such associate member shall be two years. The Chairperson of
the Planning Board may designate the associate member to sit on the
Board for the purpose of acting on a special permit application, in the
case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of
any members of the Planning Board or in the event of a vacancy on the
Board. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
F.
§ 305-10.10 CHARTER § 305-10.11
C:375
§ 305-10.12. Permit for extension or alteration of nonconforming
use or structure.
Upon written application duly made to the Board and subsequent public
hearing duly advertised by the Board, the Board may, in appropriate cases,
subject to the applicable conditions set forth in Articles XI, XII, XIII, and
XV of this bylaw and elsewhere, and subject to other appropriate conditions
and safeguards, grant a special permit for an extension or alteration of
The Board may authorize a variance for a particular use of a parcel of
land or to an existing building thereon from the terms of this bylaw
where, owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape,
or topography of such land or structures and especially affecting such
parcel or such building but not affecting generally the district in which
it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this bylaw would
involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant,
and where desirable relief may be granted without substantial
detriment to the public good and without nullifying or substantially
derogating from the intent or purpose of this bylaw. The Board may
impose conditions, safeguards and limitations both of time and of use,
including the continued existence of any particular structures but
excluding any condition, safeguards or limitations based upon the
continued ownership of the land or structures to which the variance
pertains by the applicant, petitioner or any owner. If the rights
authorized by a variance are not exercised within one year of the date
of the grant of such variance they shall lapse and may be reestablished
only after notice and a new hearing pursuant to this section.
A.
Before any variance is granted, the Board must find all of the following
conditions to be present:
Conditions and circumstances are unique to the applicant's lot,
structure or building and do not apply to the neighboring lands,
structures or buildings in the same district.
(1)
Strict application of the provisions of this bylaw would deprive
the applicant of reasonable use of the lot, structure or building
in a manner equivalent to the use permitted to be made by other
owners of their neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the
same district. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
(2)
The unique conditions and circumstances are not the result of
actions of the applicant taken subsequent to the adoption of this
bylaw.
(3)
Relief, if approved, will not cause substantial detriment to the
public good or impair the purposes and intent of this bylaw.
(4)
Relief, if approved, will not constitute a grant of special privilege
inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the
district.
(5)
B.
§ 305-10.11 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-10.12
C:376
a nonconforming use or structure. The Board may, subject to the same
conditions, grant a special permit for expansion of parking and other
accessory uses appropriate to said nonconforming use or structure or
expanded nonconforming use or structure.
Before granting a special permit for extension or alteration of such
nonconforming use or structure, the Board, with due regard to the
nature and condition of all adjacent structures and uses and the district
within which the same is located, shall find all of the following general
conditions to be fulfilled:
The use requested for extension or alteration is listed in the Table
of Use Regulations as permitted, or permitted by special permit, in
at least one district within the Town.
(1)
The requested extension or alteration of the use or structure is
essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare.
(2)
The requested extension or alteration of the use or structure will
not further create undue traffic congestion or unduly impair
pedestrian safety.
(3)
The requested extension or alteration of the use or structure will
not further overload any public water, drainage, or sewer system
or any other municipal system to such an extent that the requested
use or any developed use in the immediate area or in any other area
of the Town will be unduly subjected to hazards affecting health,
safety, or the general welfare.
(4)
Any special regulations for the use or structure as set forth in
Article XII are fulfilled.
(5)
The requested extension or alteration of the use or structure will
not impair the integrity or character of the district or adjoining
zones, nor be detrimental to the health, morals, or welfare.
(6)
The requested extension or alteration of the use or structure will
not bring the use or structure into violation of, or further violation
of, the regulations set forth in Article VI, Table of Dimensional and
Density Regulations, unless a variance is also granted subject to
the provisions of § 305-10.11 of this bylaw.
(7)
The extended or altered use or structure will not be substantially
different in character.
(8)
The extended or altered use or structure will not be more
detrimental or objectionable to the neighborhood.
(9)
The extended or altered use or structure does not cause violation
or further violation of Article VIII of this bylaw.
(10)
A.
The Board shall also impose in addition to any applicable conditions
specified in this bylaw such applicable conditions as it finds reasonably
B.
§ 305-10.12 CHARTER § 305-10.12
C:377
appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood, or otherwise serve the
purpose of this bylaw, including, but not limited to, the following: front,
side, or rear yards greater than the minimum required by this bylaw;
screening buffers or planting strips, fences, or walls, as specified by
the Board; modification of the exterior appearances of the structures;
limitation upon the size, number of occupants, method or time of
operation, time duration of permit, or extent of facilities; regulation
of number and location of driveways or other traffic features; and offstreet
parking or loading or other special features beyond the minimum
required by the bylaw. Such conditions shall be imposed in writing
and the applicant may be required to post bond or other security for
compliance with said conditions in an amount satisfactory to the Board.
In order that the Board may determine that the above-mentioned
restrictions are to be met, a site plan prepared by a registered land
surveyor or registered professional civil engineer shall be submitted
with six copies to the Board by the applicant. Said site plan shall show,
among other things, all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
parking spaces, driveway openings, driveways, service areas, and other
open uses, all facilities for sewage, refuse, and other waste disposal,
and for surface water drainage, wetlands, and all landscape features,
such as fences, walls, planting areas and walks. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 12]
The Board shall, within 10 days after receipt thereof, transmit
one copy of such plan to the Planning Board. The Planning Board
may, in its discretion, investigate the case and report in writing its
recommendation to the Board.
(1)
The Board shall not take final action on such plan until it has
received a report thereon from the Planning Board or until said
Planning Board has allowed 30 days to elapse after receipt of such
plan without submission of a report thereon.
(2)
C.
§ 305-10.12 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-10.12
C:378
ARTICLE XI
Special Permit Conditions
§ 305-11.01. Special conditions.
In addition to the general conditions set forth in § 305-10.10 of this bylaw
for all special permits the following special conditions shall apply to the
following uses in this article listed as special permits in various districts in
the Table of Use Regulations.
§ 305-11.02. Removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel, quarry or other
earth materials.
Now General Bylaws Chapter 70, Earth Removal.
§ 305-11.03. Filling of land or water area. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 12]
For the filling of any land or water area where such filling is not covered
by Article XIII of this bylaw, where such filling in requires an amount of
fill equivalent to 500 cubic yards or more, or where the area to be filled
in exceeds 10,000 square feet, a permit must be issued by the permit
granting authority prior to initiation of site work. Where said filling is
proposed within a project subject to review by the Board of Appeals and/or
the Planning Board, the reviewing board shall serve as the permit granting
authority under this bylaw. Where a proposed project must receive permits
from both boards, or where the work does not require additional permits,
the Board of Appeals shall serve as the permit granting authority. The
following conditions apply to any filling authorized under this bylaw except
for the construction of a new subsurface disposal system or repair and/
or alteration of an existing subsurface disposal system: (Such conditions
shall include, where applicable, prior approval by the Board of Selectmen,
the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection and the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation under MGL c. 130 and c.
131.)
Submission of a location plan at a scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet
showing the area to be filled in or excavated, lot lines within which the
filling is proposed and tie-in to the nearest road intersection.
A.
Submission of a site plan to a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet
of the lot and surrounding area within 100 feet showing, in addition
to Subsection A above, existing and proposed contour lines at intervals
of not more than two feet resulting from the proposed filling in, in
relation to the topography of the premises, said plan to be prepared by
a registered land surveyor.
B.
C. Provision for temporary and permanent drainage of the site.
Limitation of fill to terrace fills which are not to exceed 10 feet at any
one time nor be within 10 feet of an adjacent lot line or any cut.
D.
§ 305-11.01 CHARTER § 305-11.03
C:379
§ 305-11.04. Open space residential development.
E. Regrading of all parts of the slopes resulting from such fill.
Replacement of at least four inches of topsoil over all filled or otherwise
disturbed surfaces and seeding with a perennial cover crop, reseeded
as necessary to assure uniform growth and soil surface stabilization.
F.
G. Submission of plan for lighting, if night operation is contemplated.
Where any fill will have a depth of 10 feet or more and create a slope
of more than one foot in two feet, there shall be a substantial fence
enclosing the fill at least six feet in height with suitable gates. Such
fence shall be located 10 feet or more from the edge of the fill.
H.
In granting a permit hereunder, the reviewing authority shall impose
reasonable conditions specially designed to safeguard the
neighborhood and the Town which may include conditions as to the
overall operation and as relating to the submitted items above.
I.
Where filling proposed under this bylaw is proposed within a project
subject to review by the Board of Appeals and/or the Planning Board,
the reviewing authority shall conduct a public hearing to consider
the application for filling concurrent with the hearing to consider the
project itself.
J.
Purposes. The purpose of the bylaw is to allow for flexibility and
creativity in the design of residential developments; encourage
preservation of scenic vistas, natural resources and existing and
potential municipal water supplies; facilitate construction and
maintenance of streets, utilities and public services in a more
economical and efficient manner; encourage a less sprawling form of
development that consumes less open land and conforms to existing
topography and natural features better than a standard subdivision;
preserve open space areas for active and passive recreational use,
including the provision of neighborhood parks and trails; encourage
provision of diverse housing opportunities and integration of a variety
of housing types; and further the goals and policies of the Town's
Comprehensive Plan.
A.
Definition.
OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (OSRD) — A singlefamily
detached residential development in which the buildings are
clustered together with reduced lot sizes and frontage. The land not
included in building lots is permanently preserved as open space as
defined herein. OSRD is the preferred form of residential development
and/or redevelopment in the Town of Marshfield for residential
developments of five or more lots.
B.
Applicability. The Planning Board may grant a special permit for an
OSRD for any parcel or contiguous parcels of at least five acres in any
C.
§ 305-11.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.04
C:380
district permitting single-family residences subject to the regulations
and conditions herein.
Procedural requirements.
Rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt rules and
regulations consistent with the provisions of this bylaw and shall
file them with the Town Clerk. Such rules shall address the size,
content, and number of copies of preliminary and definitive plans
and other submittals and the procedure for the review of special
permits.32
(1)
Density/number of dwelling units.
The number of dwelling units permitted shall not exceed that
which would be permitted under a conventional subdivision
that complies with the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw and the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board and
other applicable laws and regulations of the Town or the state.
The total number of dwelling units shall be determined by the
following formula:
[Total area of land subject to the application] - [Area of
wetlands/water bodies] = Applicable land area
[Applicable land area] x [0.90] divided by minimum lot area =
Total number of dwelling units
(a)
A preliminary subdivision plan may be submitted to assist in
demonstrating the allowable number of units. If the parcel lies
in more than one zoning district, the total for each district shall
be calculated separately.
(b)
(2)
Review and decision. The Planning Board shall act on applications
according to the procedure specified in MGL c. 40A, § 9, with
the exception that a decision shall be rendered within the time
frame for definitive subdivision plans specified in MGL c. 41, § 81U,
whenever this time frame is shorter. Public hearings for the
subdivision application and the special permit application shall be
held concurrently.
(3)
Criteria for special permit decision.
Findings.
The Planning Board may approve the development upon
finding that it complies with the purposes and standards
of the OSRD bylaw and is at least equivalent to a
conventional subdivision with regard to protection of
natural features and scenic resources of the site. The
[1]
(a)
(4)
D.
32.Editor's Note: See Ch. 411, Open Space Residential Development.
§ 305-11.04 CHARTER § 305-11.04
C:381
Planning Board shall consider the following criteria in
making its decision:
Upland open space as required by this bylaw has been
provided and generally conforms with Subsection H of
this bylaw.
[a]
Proposed streets have been aligned to provide
vehicular access to each house in a reasonable and
economical manner. Lots and streets have been
located to avoid or minimize adverse impacts on open
space areas and to provide views of and access to the
open space for the lots.
[b]
Lots meet the applicable dimensional requirements of
Subsection E of the OSRD bylaw and the Marshfield
Zoning Bylaw.
[c]
The Board's findings, including the basis of such findings,
shall be stated in the written decision of approval,
conditional approval or denial of the special permit. The
Board shall impose conditions in its decision as needed to
ensure compliance with the bylaw.
[2]
Time limit. Special permits are granted for a period of two
years and shall lapse if substantial use or construction has not
commenced by such date, except for good cause shown.
(b)
Relationship to Subdivision Control Law. Nothing contained
herein shall exempt a subdivision from compliance with other
applicable provisions of these bylaws or the Marshfield
Subdivision Rules and Regulations, nor shall it affect the right
of the Board of Health and Planning Board to approve,
condition or disapprove a plan in accordance with the
provisions of such rules and regulations and the Subdivision
Control Law.33
(c)
Standards and dimensional requirements. Where the requirements of
this section differ from or conflict with the requirements in the Table
of Dimensional and Density Regulations found elsewhere in this bylaw,
the requirements of this section shall prevail for OSRD developments.
Minimum lot size: 1/2 the square footage otherwise required by the
zoning district in which the project is located or 15,000 square feet,
whichever is less.
(1)
Minimum frontage. The minimum frontage may be reduced from
the frontage otherwise required in the zoning district; provided,
however, that no lot shall have less than 75 feet of frontage and
(2)
E.
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Subdivision of Land, and MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 305-11.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.04
C:382
provided further that such frontage reduction shall apply only to
lots fronting on proposed internal roadways.
Lot shape. All building lots must be able to contain a circle of a
minimum diameter of 75 feet from the front lot line to the rear
building line.
(3)
Setbacks. The Planning Board may permit a reduction by up to
1/2 of the setbacks otherwise listed in the Table of Dimensional
and Density Regulations in this bylaw, if the Board finds that such
reduction will result in better design and improved protection of
natural and scenic resources and will otherwise comply with the
bylaw. Notwithstanding this provision or the requirements of the
Zoning Bylaw, every dwelling fronting on the proposed roadways
shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the roadway rightof-
way and a minimum of 30 feet from the outer perimeter of the
land subject to the application. This thirty-foot setback shall be
maintained in a naturally vegetated state to screen and buffer the
development. Wherever feasible, construction of the dwelling at
the front setback line is encouraged.
(4)
Required open space. All land area not utilized for lots, roads, and
drainage shall be set aside as permanent open space. A minimum of
50% of the upland area of the parcel ("applicable land area") shall
be provided as open space. Applicants are encouraged to include
wetlands and water bodies within the open space; however, they do
not count toward the open space requirement. Roadway layouts do
not count toward the open space requirement.
(5)
Permissible uses of open space.
Purposes. Open space shall be used solely for recreation,
conservation, agriculture or forestry purposes by residents of the
OSRD development and/or the public. Where appropriate, multiple
use of open space is encouraged. At least half of the required open
space may be required by the Planning Board to be left in a natural
state. The proposed use of the open space shall be specified in the
application. If several uses are proposed, the plans shall specify
what uses will occur in what areas. The Board may approve or
disapprove the proposed uses.
(1)
Recreation lands. Where appropriate to the topography and natural
features of the site, the Planning Board may require that at least
10% of the open space or two acres (whichever is less) be of a
shape, slope, location and condition to provide an informal field
for recreation or community gardens for the residents of the
subdivision.
(2)
Leaching facilities. Subject to the approval of the Board of Health,
as otherwise required by law, the Planning Board may permit a
portion of the open space to be used for components of sewage
disposal systems serving the subdivision, where the Planning Board
(3)
F.
§ 305-11.04 CHARTER § 305-11.04
C:383
finds that such use will not be detrimental to the character, quality,
or use of the open space, wetlands, or water bodies and enhances
the site plan. The Planning Board shall require adequate legal
safeguards and covenants that such facilities shall be permanently
maintained by the lot owners. Where a parcel straddles the
boundary of the Water Resource Protection District, leaching
facilities shall be located outside of the district to the maximum
extent feasible.
Accessory structures. Up to 5% of the open space may be set
aside and designated to allow for the construction of structures and
facilities accessory to the proposed use of the open space including
parking. With this exception, no other impervious areas may be
included within the open space.
(4)
Ownership of open space.
Ownership options. At the developer's option and subject to
approval by the Planning Board, all areas to be protected as open
space shall be:
Conveyed to the Town to be placed under the care, custody and
control of the Conservation Commission, and be accepted by it
for a park or open space use;
(a)
Conveyed to a nonprofit organization, the purpose of which
is the conservation or preservation of open space, with a
conservation restriction as specified in Subsection G(2) below.
Such organization shall be acceptable to the Town as a bona
fide conservation organization; or
(b)
Conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by
the owners of lots or residential units within the development
("homeowners' association") and placed under conservation
restriction as specified in Subsection G(2) below. If such a
corporation or trust is utilized, ownership thereof shall pass
with conveyance of the lots or residential units. The developer
is responsible for the maintenance of the open space and other
common facilities until such time as the association is capable
of assuming such responsibility. Thereafter, the members of
the association shall share the cost of maintaining these areas.
The Planning Board shall require the applicant to provide
documentation that the homeowners' association is an
automatic (mandatory) association that has been established
prior to the conveyance of any lots within the subdivision.
(c)
(1)
Permanent restriction. In any case where open space is not
conveyed to the Town, a permanent conservation, agricultural or
historical preservation restriction approved by Town Counsel and
enforceable by the Town, conforming to the standards of the
Massachusetts Executive Office of Energy and Environmental
Affairs, Division of Conservation Services, shall be recorded to
(2)
G.
§ 305-11.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.04
C:384
ensure that such land shall be kept in an open or natural state
and not be built for residential use or developed for accessory uses
such as parking or roadways except as permitted by this bylaw
and approved by the Planning Board. Restrictions shall provide for
periodic inspection of the open space by the Town. Such restriction
shall be submitted to the Planning Board prior to approval of
the project and recorded at the Registry of Deeds/Land Court
simultaneously with recording of the endorsed definitive
subdivision plan. A management plan may be required by the
Planning Board which describes how existing woods, fields,
meadows or other natural areas shall be maintained with good
conservation practices.
Encumbrances. All areas to be set aside as open space shall be
conveyed free of any mortgage interest, security interest, liens or
other encumbrances.
(3)
Maintenance of open space. In any case where open space is not
conveyed to the Town, the Town shall be granted an easement
over such land sufficient to ensure its perpetual maintenance as
conservation or recreation land. Such easement shall provide that
in the event the trust or other owner fails to maintain the open
space in reasonable condition, the Town may, after notice to the lot
owners and public hearing, enter upon such land to maintain it in
order to prevent or abate a nuisance. The cost of such maintenance
by the Town shall be assessed against the properties within the
development and/or to the owner of the open space. The Town may
file a lien against the lots to ensure payment of such maintenance
expenses.
(4)
Monumentation. Where the boundaries of the open space are not
readily observable in the field, the Planning Board may require
placement of surveyed bounds sufficient to identify the location of
the open space.
(5)
Design requirements. The location of open space provided through this
bylaw shall be consistent with the policies contained in the Marshfield
Comprehensive Plan and the Marshfield Open Space and Recreation
Plan. The following design requirements shall apply to open space and
lots provided through this bylaw:
Open space shall be planned as large, contiguous areas whenever
possible. Long thin strips or narrow areas of open space (less
than 100 feet wide) shall occur only when necessary for access, as
vegetated buffers along wetlands, or as connections between open
space areas.
(1)
Open space shall be arranged to protect valuable natural and
cultural areas such as stream valleys, wetland buffers, forestland
and significant trees, wildlife habitat, open fields, scenic views,
trails and archaeological sites and to avoid development in
(2)
H.
§ 305-11.04 CHARTER § 305-11.04
C:385
§ 305-11.05. Planned mixed-use development.34 [Amended
10-19-2009 STM by Art. 11; 10-27-2014 STM by Art. 18]
This section of the Zoning Bylaw is to allow a Planned Mixed-Use
Development (PMUD) Overlay District within a portion of the Industrial
District as shown on the Zoning Map.
hazardous areas such as floodplains and steep slopes. The
development plan shall take advantage of the natural topography
of the parcel and cuts and fills shall be minimized.
Open space may be in more than one parcel provided that the size,
shape and location of such parcels are suitable for the designated
uses. Where feasible, these parcels shall be linked by foot trails.
(3)
Where the proposed development abuts or includes a body of water
or a wetland, these areas and a minimum fifty-foot buffer to such
areas should be incorporated into the open space. Where
appropriate, reasonable access shall be provided to shorelines.
(4)
The maximum number of house lots compatible with good design
shall abut the open space and all house lots shall have reasonable
physical and visual access to the open space through internal
roads, sidewalks or paths. An exception may be made for resource
areas vulnerable to trampling or other disturbance.
(5)
Open space shall be provided with adequate access, by a strip of
land at least 20 feet wide, suitable for a footpath, from one or more
streets in the development.
(6)
Where a proposed development abuts land held for conservation
purposes, the development shall be configured to minimize adverse
impacts to abutting conservation land. Trail connections shall be
provided where appropriate.
(7)
Purpose. The purpose of this planned mixed-use development section is
as follows:
To provide an opportunity to comprehensively plan large tracts of
land in a pedestrian-friendly, campus-like setting, around a public
green.
(1)
To ensure high-quality site planning, architecture and landscape
design to create a distinct visual character and identity for the
development that provides the Town with a mixed-use environment
with convenience and amenities.
(2)
To ensure any potential traffic impacts of the planned mixed-use
development are properly mitigated and in keeping with the
character of the Town of Marshfield.
(3)
A.
34.Editor's Note: For related Planning Board regulations see Ch. 414, Planned Mixed-Use
Development Overlay District.
§ 305-11.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.05
C:386
To generate positive tax revenue, while providing the opportunity
for new business growth and additional local jobs.
(4)
Process. The applicant files a special permit application with the
Planning Board serving as the special permit granting authority (SPGA)
for an element (or combination of elements) within the planned mixeduse
district. A new element is a tract in single or consolidated
ownership at the time of application and shall be a minimum of seven
acres in size and contain at least 150 feet of frontage. An element
can be planned for and developed in phases. Existing elements shall
not require a minimum tract size. An element may be a single use
or group of uses and may be broken into phases. Each element shall
contain or provide for the overall road network, roadway drainage, a
public green, park, and/or playground, bike and pedestrian ways, lots
and proposed uses. A proposed element may, with the written approval
of the Planning Board based on an express finding that off-site public
improvements are in the public interest, provide financial support to
off-site public improvements in lieu of on-site improvements as part of
the application. When site plan approval is required for the proposed
uses in the PMUD, the site plan approval authority shall be the Planning
Board.
B.
Applicability and uses. In addition to the uses allowed in the 1-1 Zone
that are not specifically prohibited in the PMUD, the following uses may
be allowed by special permit: retail and service; eating and drinking
places; banks; membership club; hotel; educational campus; medical
facility or offices; general offices; research facilities; other amusement/
recreation service; mixed-use buildings with commercial on first floor
and residential units above with a base density of six units per acre
(subject to affordability requirements under Subsection F below); agerestricted
adult village residential units with a base density of four
units per acre (subject to affordability requirements under Subsection
F below); attached nursing, rest or convalescent home not to exceed 24
beds per acre.
C.
Required performance standards.
Uses shall be grouped together to maximize pedestrian access by
connecting sidewalks and pathways. Buildings, when abutting a
public green, shall be oriented around a public green and not Route
139 (Plain Street).
(1)
Access to Route 139 (Plain Street) from a proposed development or
elements within the PMUD shall be through a secondary street as
defined in the Planning Board Subdivision Rules and Regulations at
a signalized intersection.35
(2)
Maximum percentage of land area allowed by use within the
Planned Mixed-Use Development Overlay District:
(3)
D.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Subdivision of Land.
§ 305-11.05 CHARTER § 305-11.05
C:387
Use
Maximum
Percentage
Allowed Within
the PMUD
Maximum in
Acres Allowed
Within the PMUD
Major retail and service
(including grocery store)
8% 17.3
Retail and service mixeduse
(including but not
limited to residential
units above)
22% or a
maximum of 75
residential units
above whichever
is more restrictive
48
Office/research/medical 35% 75.6
Age-restricted adult
village
5% 10.8
Nursing home/assisted
living
10% 21.6
Hotel/motel (with
conference center)
5% 10.8
Educational campus
(including residential
units above)
5% 10.8
Profit recreation 10% 21.6
Total 100% 216.5 acres
Development of the future elements within the PMUD shall be
required to balance commercial and other nonresidential
developments with residential elements. Future elements that are
all residential (age-restricted adult village) shall be preceded by a
minimum of 10,000 square feet of commercial development.
(4)
The base number of dwelling units in the PMUD shall be
determined by the following formula: Total area of land subject
to the application minus (-) wetlands/water bodies multiplied (*)
by applicable base density add (+) affordable housing and density
bonus (see Subsection F) equals (=) Total number of dwelling units.
(5)
Mixed-use residential units within the PMUD shall provide a
minimum of 1.25 parking spaces for each bedroom. Age-restricted
adult village/attached residential units within the PMUD shall
provide a minimum of two parking spaces per unit. Enclosed or
covered parking may be allowed as an accessory use in the rear of
the first floor of a mixed-use building.
(6)
The majority of the parking shall be located to the rear or sides
of buildings. All parking and loading areas shall be completely
screened from Route 139 (Plain Street) by a minimum fifty-footwide
raised and landscaped buffer. Parking lots and loading areas
(7)
§ 305-11.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.05
C:388
shall be appropriately screened from roadways within the overlay
district by a minimum twenty-foot-wide raised and landscaped
buffer. Appropriately designed view corridors of buildings from the
roadways within the overlay district shall be allowed.
Reduction in parking space requirements may be permitted by
written request in the application as part of the granting of the
special permit where by design and use it is shown to the Planning
Board's satisfaction that the parking is compatibly shared by
multiple uses. However, in no case shall a parking requirement
reduction exceed 20% of those parking spaces required under
normal application of requirements for the nonresidential uses
proposed.
(8)
Individual retail establishments shall be limited to a maximum
gross floor area of 55,000 square feet. An individual retail
establishment may be increased to 65,000 square feet where the
Planning Board finds that individual sections of the retail
establishment front a public green with access and windows or
where the additional space is used as small retail uses lining the
wall facing the public green of the large retail establishment.
(9)
All elements that create mixed-use residential or attached
residential units are required to provide affordable housing in
compliance with Subsection F. All affordable housing created by
this bylaw shall be Local Initiative Program (LIP) dwelling units
in compliance with the requirements of the Massachusetts
Department of Housing and Community Development LIP Program.
Affordable housing units will count toward the Town's Subsidized
Housing Inventory, in accordance with MGL c. 40B.
(10)
All residential development which occurs as a result of this bylaw
shall meet the affordable housing requirements and shall be
entitled to a density bonus as follows: The number of affordable
units and density bonus units shall equal the number of base
density units multiplied by 25% and rounded up to the next even
number divided by two. [Example: A base density of 9 units will
result in 9 base density units plus 4 units (0.25 x 9 units = 2.25
units rounded up to 4 units, 2 affordable units and 2 density bonus
units) or 13 units in total. A base density of 31 units will result in 31
base density units plus 8 units (0.25 x 31 units = 7.5 units rounded
up to 8 units, 4 affordable units and 4 density bonus units) or 39
total units.]
(11)
The development site design shall be integrated into the existing
terrain and surrounding landscape to provide the least amount of
site disturbance, and shall be designed, including with appropriate
noise, light and open space buffering and screening, to protect
abutting properties, neighborhood and community amenities.
Building sites shall, to the extent deemed feasible by the Planning
Board:
(12)
§ 305-11.05 CHARTER § 305-11.05
C:389
(a) Preserve unique natural or historical features.
Minimize grade changes and removal of trees, vegetation and
soil.
(b)
(c) Maximize buffers to wetlands and water bodies.
Screen objectionable features from neighboring properties and
roadways.
(d)
All elements of the PMUD shall provide for access on roads and
driveways that in the opinion of the Planning Board have sufficient
width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for
the needs of vehicular traffic generated by the proposed
development. The development shall maximize the convenience
and safety of vehicular, bike and pedestrian movement within the
site and in relation to adjacent ways through proper layout,
location and design.
(13)
All dead-end roads and driveways shall terminate in a cul-de-sac or
provide, if approved by the Planning Board as part of the special
permit, other accommodations for vehicles to reverse direction
when it is deemed in the public interest to do so. Turnaround areas
shall be designed to accommodate the largest emergency vehicles
of the Town of Marshfield. Dead-end streets and connecting
driveways shall not exceed 800 feet in length, measured from the
intersection of the road that provides access.
(14)
The mass, proportion and scale of the building, roof shape, roof
pitch, and proportions and relationships between doors and
windows should be harmonious among themselves. Plans shall
provide information and elevations to show massing of buildings,
height and spacing between buildings. Plans shall provide a table
with properties, entity, use, area (in acres) and area (in percentage)
for both the proposed element and total for the overlay district.
(15)
Architectural details, including elevation plans of all sides, shall
be submitted of new buildings and additions, and textures of walls
and roof materials should be harmonious with the building's overall
architectural style and should preserve and enhance the historic
character of Marshfield.
(16)
The building's location shall be oriented parallel or perpendicular
to the public green(s) and/or street. Where the minimum setback
cannot be maintained, the applicant shall provide adequate spatial
definitions through the use of walls, fences and/or other elements
which will maintain the street line.
(17)
The building's main entrance may be placed to the side of the front
facade to facilitate access to parking.
(18)
§ 305-11.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.05
C:390
Mixed-use and residential building facades in excess of 40 feet
shall incorporate recesses and projections of a minimum of two feet
in depth or otherwise be designed to break up the building's mass
and scale.
(19)
A minimum of 60% of the building's public green(s) and/or street
side facade shall contain windows and other appropriate
architectural elements, excluding the facade facing Route 139
(Plain Street) where the landscaped buffer is determined by the
Planning Board to be adequate. The windows should be divided
by muntins and framed with a casing trim; awnings should be
designed as an integral part of the building facade; metal awnings
are discouraged.
(20)
All utility connections to buildings and structures shall be located
underground.
(21)
All building rooftop utilities such as air conditioners shall be
appropriately screened from public view and from the view of
abutting properties.
(22)
All ground-mounted utilities such as transformers, switching units,
and ventilation pipes shall be appropriately screened from view.
(23)
All loading docks and service entrances where equipment,
furniture, goods and materials are loaded into buildings shall be
appropriately screened from view.
(24)
All dumpsters and other waste refuse containers shall be covered
and appropriately fenced and screened from view. Collection times
for dumpsters and other waste refuse containers located in the
mixed-use and residential parcels of the PMUD Overlay District
shall be scheduled for normal daytime (7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.)
residential collection hours.
(25)
Individual special permit applications shall comply with
§ 305-11.10 (Traffic impact study).
(26)
The large retail establishment shall either provide an entrance to
the public green or it should be designed so that the facade facing
the public green is lined with accessory shops or uses to enhance
pedestrian activities.
(27)
A public green, playground, recreation field or other recreational
amenities (trails/paths/bikeways) shall be required for each
element of development within the PMUD. The public green(s)
shall be a minimum of 1/2 acre in size per every seven acres
within an element and shall be designed as a bike- and pedestrianfriendly
park. The public green(s) shall contain some combination
of benches, tables, playground equipment, sidewalks, lighting and
landscaping. Each green shall be used solely for active and passive
recreation purposes and shall be open to the public. The total
(28)
§ 305-11.05 CHARTER § 305-11.05
C:391
acreage of the green in each element may be used toward the
land area calculations to determine allowable density within that
element. The Planning Board may allow for an off-site location for
the public green, playground, recreation field or other recreational
improvement if determined to be in the best interest of Town.
The public green, playground, recreation field or other recreational
improvement requirement may (with Planning Board's approval) be
met by adding to an existing public green, playground or recreation
field or facility.
Setbacks for the overlay district shall be as follows:
Minimum Yards
Building Setbacks
Minimum
(feet)
Public green (where applicable) 5
Front 20
Front (mixed-use) 5
Side 10
Rear 30
(29)
Front setbacks for buildings facing the public green(s) may vary.
All other standards for I-1 Zoning Districts contained in the Table
of Dimensional and Density Regulations shall apply.
(30)
In cases where the proposed traffic mitigation is deemed by the
Planning Board to be out of character for the Town, the applicant
may propose additional open space from within the PMUD District
or adjacent districts or may donate an amount equal to the cost of
the proposed mitigation to the Town for the purpose of open space
acquisition. Where permanently protected open space is provided
in lieu of traffic mitigation, said open space shall be at least equal
in area to the total acreage of land of said proposed use.
(31)
Ownership of public green.
Subject to approval by the Planning Board, all areas designated
as public greens shall be either placed under a permanent
conservation restriction or deeded to the Town as a condition
of special permit and site plan approval. If placed under a
conservation restriction, said restriction shall be in a form
approved by Town Counsel and enforceable by the Town,
conforming to the standards of the Massachusetts Executive Office
of Energy and Environmental Affairs, Division of Conservation
Services, that shall be recorded to ensure that such land shall be
kept in an open state. Such restriction shall be submitted to the
Planning Board prior to approval of the project and recorded at
(1)
E.
§ 305-11.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.05
C:392
the Registry of Deeds/Land Court with the issuance of the building
permit.
Maintenance of public green. The Town shall be granted an
easement over such public green sufficient to ensure its perpetual
maintenance as recreation land. Such easement shall provide that
in the event the owner fails to maintain the public green in
reasonable condition, the Town may, after notice to the lot owners
and public hearing, enter upon such land to maintain it in order
to prevent or abate a nuisance. The cost of such maintenance
by the Town shall be assessed against the properties within the
development and/or to the owner of the open space. The Town may
file a lien against the undeveloped lots within the corresponding
phase of the PMUD to ensure payment of such maintenance
expenses.
(2)
Monumentation. Where the boundaries of the public green are not
readily observable in the field, the Planning Board shall require
placement of permanent surveyed bounds sufficient to identify the
location of the public green.
(3)
Affordable housing provisions.
The requirement for affordable units shall be met by one or a
combination of the following methods:
On-site development. Constructed or rehabilitated on the locus
subject to the special permit (preferred); or
(a)
Fees in lieu of construction. The applicant may offer, and the
Planning Board, upon receiving a favorable recommendation
from the Housing Partnership, may approve fees in lieu of
construction of affordable housing units as satisfying the
requirements of Subsection D above. The applicant shall make
the payment of the fee in lieu of construction to the Marshfield
Housing Authority for the sole purpose of creating affordable
housing units in the Town of Marshfield that meet the state's
LIP and add to the Town's Subsidized Housing Inventory as
determined by the Housing Partnership. Fees in lieu of
construction are more fully addressed below. The applicant
may offer, and the Planning Board may accept, a combination
of the on-site and fees in lieu of construction, provided that in
no event shall the total number of affordable units provided
on site and the number of affordable units for which a fee
in lieu of construction is paid be less than the equivalent
number or value of affordable units required for the applicable
development by this bylaw. Note: If affordable units are for
rent, the provisions below for fees in lieu of construction are
not applicable.
(b)
(1)
(2) Provision of affordable housing units on site.
F.
§ 305-11.05 CHARTER § 305-11.05
C:393
Location of affordable units. All affordable units shall be
situated within and dispersed throughout the development so
as not to be in less desirable locations than market-rate units
in the development and shall, on average, be no less accessible
to public amenities, such as open space, than the market-rate
units.
(a)
Minimum design and construction standards for affordable
units. Affordable housing units within market-rate
developments shall be integrated with the rest of the
development and shall be identical to the market-rate units in
size, design, appearance, construction, building systems such
as HVAC, electrical and plumbing, and quality and types of
materials used in all interior space including bedrooms,
kitchen, bathrooms, living rooms, studies, hallways, closets,
garages and basements and provided with identical amenities
and appliances such as, but not limited to, decks, central
vacuum cleaning systems, stoves, refrigerators, compactors,
disposals, dishwashers and landscape fencing, walls and
plantings unless otherwise approved in the special permit by
the Planning Board. No changes to these standards may be
made by the Planning Board without the approval of the
Housing Partnership.
(b)
Marketing plan for affordable units. Applicants shall submit
a marketing plan which describes the number of affordable
housing units, their approximate sales price or rent level, the
means for selecting buyers or tenants of the affordable units,
how the applicant will accommodate local preference
requirements and the method of affirmatively marketing the
affordable units (including the marketing of such units) to
minority households, in a manner that complies with the LIP
Guidelines. This requirement is further addressed in
§ 305-11.14I of this bylaw.
(c)
The marketing plan shall be developed by the applicant with
the assistance of the lottery agent and submitted to the
Housing Partnership. The Housing Partnership shall review the
marketing plan to determine its appropriateness in addressing
the affordable housing needs within the community and its
compliance with applicable federal and state statutes and
regulations, the LIP Guidelines and this bylaw. The Housing
Partnership may require modifications of the marketing plan
or, if it determines the plan to be satisfactory, may forward
it to DHCD with a favorable recommendation. Following the
approval of the marketing plan by DHCD, the Housing
Partnership shall notify the Planning Board and the lottery
agent. The special permit and building permits may be granted
prior to receiving DHCD approval so as to facilitate the
construction of the development; however, certificates of
(d)
§ 305-11.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.05
C:394
occupancy, whether for affordable or market-rate units, shall
not be issued until such time as the marketing plan has been
approved by DHCD.
Applicants shall comply with the requirements of the lottery
agent and certify their acceptance and willingness to comply
with the lottery process or other requirements of the lottery
agent for the selection of qualified housing buyers or renters
for the affordable units. The lottery system and requirements
are further addressed in § 305-11.14I of this bylaw. Applicants
may use a lottery agent from a list of DHCD approved lottery
agents or may use the Marshfield Housing Authority as its
lottery agent. The recommended lottery agent shall be
approved by the Housing Partnership.
(e)
Provision for fees in lieu of construction of affordable housing units.
Fees in lieu of construction of affordable housing units. An
applicant may propose to pay a fee in lieu of construction of
affordable housing units to the Marshfield Housing Authority.
A fee in lieu of construction shall be for the sole purpose of
creating affordable housing in the Town of Marshfield that
meet the state's LIP and adds to the Town's Subsidized
Housing Inventory as determined by the Housing Partnership.
The fee in lieu of construction shall be held in trust and in
separate interest-bearing accounts by the Marshfield Housing
Authority for such purpose.
(a)
For each affordable unit for which a fee in lieu of construction
is paid, the cash payment per unit shall be equal to 65% of
the average price being asked for the market-rate units in the
applicable development.
(b)
The fee in lieu of construction shall not result in an increase in
the total number of units contained in the application for the
special permit approved by the Planning Board.
(c)
The Marshfield Housing Authority shall submit to the Housing
Partnership, annually and upon request, reports and other
documentation of the use of its financial accounting for the
fees in lieu of construction.
(d)
The Marshfield Housing Authority shall hold all fees in lieu
of construction of affordable housing units paid to it and all
investment income and profit thereon received by it separately
from all other moneys of the Marshfield Housing Authority. It
shall cause such fees, income and profit to be audited at least
once a year by an independent certified public accountant or
independent firm of certified public accountants experienced
in auditing accounts of governmental entities (which may be
its regular auditor if such regular auditor meets the foregoing
criteria), such audit to be completed no later than the general
(e)
(3)
§ 305-11.05 CHARTER § 305-11.05
C:395
audit of the Marshfield Housing Authority's financial
statements for the applicable fiscal year. A copy of such audit
shall be promptly submitted to the Town Accountant, the Town
Treasurer/Collector, the Town Administrator, the Board of
Selectmen, the Housing Partnership, and the Planning Board.
Such audit may be combined with the general audit of the
Marshfield Housing Authority as long as all matters relating
to such fees, income and profit are set forth separately from
all other accounts of the Marshfield Housing Authority.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
Schedule of fees in lieu of payments. Fees in lieu of
construction payments shall be made prior to application for
the first residential certificate of occupancy of the element.
(f)
Criteria for review and approval.
The Planning Board shall review all applications for planned mixeduse
development to determine compliance of the proposal with the
following criteria:
(a) Subsection A, Purpose.
(b) Subsection D, Required performance standards.
That the proposed element provides the proper fiscal balance
for the Town, ensuring that additional nonresidential growth
(within the PMUD) occurs prior to or at the same time as
additional residential development.
(c)
That any proposed residential units provide the Town with
the type of affordable housing as called for in the Housing
Production Plan.
(d)
That the projected traffic increase of the proposed uses to
the local road(s) and Route 139 is within the capacity of the
existing road network, or that the applicant's proposed traffic
mitigation measures will adequately address actual and
proposed traffic impacts from the proposed element and all
other projected development in accordance with standard
traffic impact assessment practices and traffic flow.
(e)
That the proposed streets have been aligned to provide
vehicular access to lots and/or buildings in a reasonable and
economical manner. Lots, buildings, parks, playgrounds and
streets have been located to avoid or minimize adverse impacts
on wetlands and water bodies.
(f)
That the proposed development improves pedestrian and
bicycle access and safety.
(g)
(h) That suitable public green(s) and facilities have been provided.
(1)
G.
§ 305-11.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.05
C:396
§ 305-11.06. Planned industrial development. [Amended 4-24-2017
ATM by Art. 12]
For the planned development of land for industrial purposes subject to area
regulations less than the minimum required in the Table of Dimensional and
Density Regulations, the following regulations shall apply:
(i) Acceptability of building and site design.
That the proposal conforms with the goals of the Marshfield
Master Plan and Housing Production Plan as amended.
(j)
The Board's findings, including the basis of such findings, shall be
stated in the written decision of approval, conditional approval or
denial of the special permit. The Board shall impose conditions in
its decision as needed to ensure compliance with the bylaw.
(2)
Severability. If any provision or provisions of this bylaw is or are
declared unconstitutional or inoperative by a final judgment, order
or decree of the supreme judicial court of the commonwealth, the
remaining parts of said bylaw shall not be affected thereby. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
H.
Exemption. The Marshfield Planning Board shall have the right to
waive strict compliance with the provisions of this bylaw for nonprofit
recreational uses proposed on any municipally owned land within the
PMUD.
I.
The tract in single or consolidated ownership at the time of application
shall be at least 15 acres in size.
A.
A site plan shall be presented for the entire tract showing two-foot
finished contours, existing and proposed drainage, sewerage, water,
parking, street access and landscaping, and shall be subject to approval
by the Planning Board where it constitutes a subdivision as per the
Subdivision Control Law.36
B.
Individual lot sizes shall not be reduced more than 10% below that
normally required for manufacturing or service industrial purposes in
the district.
C.
The total number of lots in the development shall not exceed the
number of lots which could be developed under normal application
requirements of the district.
D.
The permitted uses shall be limited to manufacturing or service
industrial uses with the total use completely within the building.
E.
F. The development shall be served by a public water system.
36.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 305-11.05 CHARTER § 305-11.06
C:397
§ 305-11.07. Home occupation.
For the use of a dwelling in any "R" District for a home occupation, the
following conditions shall apply:
At least 10% of the total tract area (of which at least 80% shall not
be wetlands or land with a slope of over 5%) shall be set aside as
common land and shall be either deeded to the Town or covenanted
to be maintained as permanent open space in private or cooperative
nonprofit ownership. The common land shall be either in a single
contiguous parcel or in several separated parcels as deemed
appropriate by the Board.
G.
Such common land shall be deeded to the Town or permanently
covenanted simultaneously with the Planning Board's approval of the
subdivision plan, if any.
H.
Such common land shall be restricted to open space, play field, golf
course, or conservation areas.
I.
J. Such common land shall have suitable access to a street.
A. No more than one nonresident shall be employed therein.
B. The use is carried on strictly within the principal building.
Not more than 25% of the existing net floor area not to exceed 400
square feet is devoted to such use.
C.
D. That there shall be no display of goods or wares visible from the street.
There shall be no advertising on the premises other than a small
nonelectric sign not to exceed two square feet in area, and carrying
only the occupant's name and his occupation such as physician, artisan,
teacher, day nurse, lawyer, architect, salesman (type), engineer,
clergyman, accountant, osteopath, dentist and similar occupations or
professions. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
E.
The buildings or premises occupied shall not be rendered objectionable
or detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood due
to the exterior appearance, emission of odor, gas, smoke, dust, noise,
electrical disturbance, or in any other way. In a multifamily dwelling,
the use shall in no way become objectionable or detrimental to any
residential use within the multifamily structure.
F.
Any such building shall include no feature or design not customary in
buildings for residential use.
G.
Such uses as clinics, barbershops, bakeries, gift shops, beauty parlors,
tea rooms, tourist homes, animal hospitals, kennels, and others of a
similar nature shall not be considered as home occupations.
H.
§ 305-11.06 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.08
C:398
§ 305-11.08. Age-restricted adult village. [Amended 5-5-2008 ATM
by Art. 21]
For age-restricted adult village (ARAV) housing not subject to the Table
of Dimensional and Density Regulations nor subject to § 305-10.10 of the
Zoning Bylaw, the following regulations shall apply:
Applicability and use.
The tract of single or consolidated ownership at the time of
application shall be at least six acres in size in all residential zones,
and shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board acting as
the special permit granting authority (SPGA).
(1)
The following uses shall be permitted: attached ARAV housing
units; community facilities such as religious, recreational,
educational or membership club for the exclusive use of the
residents of the ARAV.
(2)
A.
Required performance standards. In addition to other minimum
requirements stated elsewhere in this bylaw, the following
improvements, performance standards and/or conditions are required
for all age-restricted adult villages (ARAV) in the Town of Marshfield:
Yield plan. Applicants shall submit a yield plan that shows how
many acres are available for development after subtracting all
areas needed for stormwater management facilities, roads and
common driveways. The yield plan will determine the total number
of acres available for calculating the number of as-of-right (AOR)
housing units. One acre is equal to one AOR unit.
(1)
Density of housing. The total number of housing units allowed in
an ARAV in all residential zoning districts shall be determined by
the following formula that includes as-of-right units, affordable and
density bonus units. The number of affordable units and density
bonus units shall equal the number of as-of-right (AOR) units
multiplied by 25% and rounded up to the next even number, divided
by two. [Example: A 9-unit AOR development will result in 9 AOR
units plus 4 units (0.25 x 9 units = 2.25 units rounded up to 4 units,
2 affordable units and 2 density bonus units) or 13 units in total. A
31-unit AOR development will result in 31 AOR units plus 8 units
(0.25 x 31 units = 7.5 units rounded up to 8 units, 4 affordable units
and 4 density bonus units) or 39 total units.]
(2)
Natural open space.
In all residential zones, at least 50% of the total tract area
subject to the ARAV special permit application shall be upland
natural open space. The natural open space shall be set aside
as common land and shall be either deeded to the Town or
placed under a conservation restriction, as defined in Article
II, and maintained as permanent open space in private or
(a)
(3)
B.
§ 305-11.08 CHARTER § 305-11.08
C:399
cooperative nonprofit ownership. The SPGA shall provide for
the disposition and control of the open space land in a manner
and form acceptable to it and approved by Town Counsel.
Natural open space is the area of the parcel(s) that is left
undisturbed, in its natural state, as described further in this
section. Areas of natural open space shall be preserved for
wildlife habitat, aquifer protection, historic preservation,
passive recreation and/or forestry management. Natural open
space shall not be used for any of the following activities:
buildings or structures, impervious surfaces, aboveground
utilities or subsurface infrastructure with the exception of
stormwater management facilities as noted below. Natural
open space areas should encompass or protect valuable
natural and cultural resources such as large tracts of forest
land, buffer zones to wetlands and water bodies, significant
trees, scenic views, river valleys, geological features,
archaeological sites, historic trails or ways and open fields.
Natural open space areas shall be contiguous areas of land.
Narrow parcels or portions of lots less than 50 feet wide cannot
be included in required natural open space calculations unless
they are used for access to a walking trail. Walking trails may
be constructed of organic materials such as wood chips or
stone dust.
(b)
For the purpose of calculating the required 50% natural open
space, the area of proposed development activity shall be
enclosed within a polygon. The inside of the polygon shall be
considered the area of the development footprint. Remaining
areas outside of the development footprint, greater than 50
feet in width, shall be used to satisfy the 50% natural open
space requirement. Areas of natural open space may be
managed utilizing standard, accepted forestry practices.
Additional landscape plantings can be planted in natural open
space areas to supplement existing vegetation. Stormwater
management facilities may be allowed within the area of
natural open space, with the approval of the SPGA, if site
conditions leave no other feasible alternatives. However, the
area of the stormwater management facilities shall not be
included in the 50% calculation for natural open space. Areas
disturbed for construction of stormwater management
facilities must be restored with native vegetation.
(c)
Mandatory affordable housing. All ARAVs are required to provide
affordable housing in compliance with § 305-11.14, Inclusionary
zoning for affordable housing. All affordable housing created by
this bylaw shall be Local Initiative Program (LIP) dwelling units
in compliance with the requirements of the Massachusetts
Department of Housing and Community Development LIP Program.
(4)
§ 305-11.08 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.08
C:400
Affordable housing units will count toward the Town's Subsidized
Housing Inventory, in accordance with MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 to 23.
Site design. The development shall be integrated into the existing
terrain and surrounding landscape and shall be designed to protect
abutting properties and community amenities. Building sites shall,
to the extent deemed feasible by the SPGA:
Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible
locations.
(a)
(b) Preserve unique natural or historical features.
Minimize grade changes and removal of trees, vegetation and
soil.
(c)
(d) Maximize open space.
(e) Maximize buffers to wetlands and water bodies.
Screen objectionable features from neighboring properties and
roadways.
(f)
(5)
Roads and driveways.
The ARAV shall provide for access on roads that have sufficient
width, suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide
for the needs of vehicular traffic generated by the proposed
ARAV. The development shall maximize the convenience and
safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site
and in relation to adjacent ways through proper layout,
location and design.
(a)
All roads and driveways serving more than one dwelling unit
shall be designed and constructed in accordance the following
sections of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the
Planning Board of the Town of Marshfield: Article IV, Design
Standards and Required Improvements, with the exception of
§§ 405-9E and 405-12I in their entirety and § 405-9D, Note **,
which are exempt from this requirement. Roads and driveways
serving more than one dwelling unit shall also be designed and
constructed in accordance with Article V, Completion of the
Way, §§ 405-14, 405-16, 405-18 and 405-19 only.
(b)
(6)
Dead-end roads.
All dead-end roads and common driveways shall terminate
in a cul-de-sac or provide other accommodations for vehicles
to reverse direction. Turnaround areas shall be designed to
accommodate emergency vehicles.
(a)
(7)
§ 305-11.08 CHARTER § 305-11.08
C:401
Dead-end streets and connecting common driveways shall not
exceed 800 feet in length, measured from the intersection of
the road that provides access to the ARAV.
(b)
Architecture.
Architectural style shall be in harmony with the prevailing
character and scale of buildings in the neighborhood and the
Town through the use of appropriate building materials,
screening, breaks in roof and wall lines and other architectural
techniques. Variation in detail, form and siting shall be used to
provide visual interest and avoid monotony. Proposed buildings
shall relate harmoniously to each other with adequate light,
air, circulation, and separation between buildings. All buildings
shall be separated a minimum distance of 1 1/2 times the
height of the proposed buildings.
(a)
The maximum building height shall be 35 feet from the existing
natural elevation.
(b)
(8)
Parking.
The proposed development shall provide two parking spaces
per each unit, plus one visitor parking space for every 10
units, plus one parking space per each 200 square feet of
nonresidential area.
(a)
Parking areas, including maneuvering space for parking and
loading areas, shall not be located within the required fifty-foot
buffer areas. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
(b)
Parking areas shall be screened from public ways and adjacent
or abutting properties by building location, fencing, and/or
dense landscape plantings.
(c)
(d) No parking shall be allowed on interior streets or ways.
(9)
Landscaping.
Connecting tree-lined walkways shall be provided between
structures, parking areas and abutting public ways. A mixture
of shade trees shall be spaced a minimum of 40 feet apart
along streets and walkways. Landscape plans should be
prepared and stamped by a professional landscape architect.
The type, size and location of all plantings shall be included in
the landscape plan.
(a)
Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck loading
areas, solid waste disposal facilities, utility buildings,
structures and other unsightly uses shall be set back and/
or screened to protect neighbors and residents from
objectionable views, noise, odors and vibration.
(b)
(10)
§ 305-11.08 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.08
C:402
A fifty-foot-wide natural buffer shall be required along the
perimeter of the property, except for access roads, which in
the opinion of the SPGA provides suitable screening of abutting
properties. The SPGA may require the natural buffer to be
supplemented with additional plantings if the natural buffer
does not provide adequate screening of abutting properties.
(c)
Lighting. All exterior lighting on roads, walkways and buildings
shall be approved by the SPGA. Lighting specification cut sheets
shall be submitted for all lighting in the ARAV. Lighting shall be
designed to avoid unnecessary glare to abutting properties.
Sufficient lighting should be provided to accommodate the needs
of senior residents. A lighting plan shall be provided showing the
intensity of light on the property. Reflectors and shields shall
provide total cutoff of all light at the property boundaries.
(11)
Stormwater management. The stormwater management system
shall be designed so that the volume and rate of runoff shall not
exceed pre-development conditions. The use of low-impact
development principles is encouraged, such as bioretention areas
and decentralized stormwater management facilities. Groundwater
recharge shall be maximized; surface and ground water quality
shall be maintained or improved by employing best management
practices. Neighboring properties shall not be adversely affected.
The SPGA may require that existing problems on or adjacent to
the site be mitigated as a condition of approval of a special permit
under this section. Open air drainage facilities shall have a
minimum fifteen-foot landscaped evergreen buffer area around the
facility (excluding basin cleanout accessway).
(12)
Utilities. All electric, telephone, cable TV, and other such utilities
shall be located underground. An evergreen landscaped buffer
shall be provided around all transformers and other utility
facilities.
(13)
Water Resource Protection District. Applicants submitting ARAV
special permit applications within the Water Resource Protection
District (WRPD) shall file for a WRPD special permit concurrently
with the ARAV special permit and conform to the performance and
design standards of § 305-13.03.
(14)
Wastewater. Wastewater treatment systems in all other ARAV
developments shall be designed to not exceed 10 parts per million
for the concentration of nitrate-nitrogen loading for the subject
property as a whole, measured at the property boundaries.
(15)
Historic resources. The SPGA and applicant shall seek guidance
from the Historical Commission to ensure the protection,
restoration, or preservation of historic locations, artifacts or
structures within the proposed development.
(16)
(17)Management of common areas.
§ 305-11.08 CHARTER § 305-11.08
C:403
If an ARAV is owned or converted to ownership of more than
one ownership entity, a nonprofit community association (CA)
shall be established, requiring membership of each property
owner in the development. The CA shall be responsible for
the permanent maintenance of all communal water and septic
systems, common open space, roads, stormwater management
and recreational facilities. Prior to the closing of the public
hearing, the applicant shall submit a CA agreement
guaranteeing continuing maintenance of common utilities,
land and facilities. The CA shall assess each homeowner an
equal share of maintenance expenses. Such agreement shall be
subject to the review and approval of Town Counsel and the
SPGA.
(a)
CA agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event
that the association fails to maintain common facilities, such as
the wastewater treatment system or stormwater management
system, in reasonable order and condition, in accordance with
the agreement, the Town may, after notice to the CA and a
public hearing, enter upon the property and conduct necessary
maintenance to protect the environment. The cost of any work
shall be assessed equally against the properties within the
development. All costs incurred by the Town for needed
maintenance will be reimbursed by the CA.
(b)
Administrative procedures. The Planning Board shall be the special
permit granting authority (SPGA) for ARAV applications. Applicants
shall follow the administrative procedures relative to the issuance of
special permits set forth in the Marshfield Planning Board Rules
Governing Housing for the Elderly and Handicapped Persons as
adopted on March 19, 1990, as amended, or any successor
regulations.37 Copies of the above-mentioned administrative rules shall
be on file with the Town Clerk. The SPGA shall follow the procedural
requirements for special permits as set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 9.
[Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
C.
Criteria for review and approval. The SPGA shall review all applications
for ARAV developments to determine the suitability of the site to the
following criteria:
(1) Compliance with Subsection B, Required performance standards;
(2) Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood;
(3) Compliance with adopted public plans;
The requested use will not overburden any public infrastructure
such as water, roads, drainage or sewer system or any other
municipal system to such an extent that the proposed ARAV in the
immediate area or in any other area of the Town will be subjected
(4)
D.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 408, Age-Restricted Adult Village.
§ 305-11.08 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.08
C:404
§ 305-11.09. Residential accessory apartments.
to development-related impacts that would adversely affect health,
safety or the general welfare;
(5) Acceptable design and layout of streets and common driveways;
That the projected traffic increase to the local road(s) is within the
capacity of the existing network and does not impair pedestrian
safety;
(6)
(7) Compliance with environmental performance standards;
Appropriateness of building architecture, orientation and site
design; and
(8)
The preservation of important areas of open space or items of
historical and/or archaeological significance.
(9)
Decisions.
The findings, including the basis of such findings, of the SPGA shall
be stated in the written decision of approval, conditional approval,
or denial of the application for special permit, and shall require
a four-fifths majority vote for approval. For approval of a special
permit granted under this section, an affirmative finding of the
SPGA shall be required for all of the nine criteria listed above.
(1)
The SPGA may also require, in addition to any applicable conditions
specified in this bylaw, such conditions as it finds reasonably
appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood or otherwise serve the
purposes of this bylaw, including but not limited to the following:
front, side, or rear yards greater than the minimum required by
this bylaw; screening buffers or planting strips, fences, or walls;
modification of the architectural design and exterior appearance of
the structures; lighting, regulation of the number and location of
driveways, or other traffic features; off-street parking or loading;
or any other special features beyond the minimum required by this
bylaw.
(2)
Such conditions shall be provided in writing, and the applicant
may be required to post a performance bond or other surety for
compliance with said conditions in an amount satisfactory to the
SPGA.
(3)
The special permit is granted for a period of two years and shall
lapse if substantial use or construction has not commenced by such
date, except for good cause shown as determined by the SPGA.
Once construction has begun, it shall be actively and continuously
pursued to completion within a reasonable time.
(4)
E.
§ 305-11.08 CHARTER § 305-11.09
C:405
Purpose. The creation of any accessory apartment within an existing
owner-occupied, single-family residence may be authorized by special
permit in order to achieve the following objectives:
To enable homeowners who wish to remain in their homes and
neighborhoods to do so.
(1)
To promote more efficient use of the existing housing stock by
allowing flexibility in response to changing household size.
(2)
To promote affordable rental housing and homeownership for small
households.
(3)
To protect and maintain the character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
(4)
A.
Applicability. Special permits may be granted within R-1, R-2, R-3, B-1,
and B-2 Districts by the Board of Appeals, acting as the special permit
granting authority (SPGA), when the plan submitted meets the review
criteria contained in Subsection C.
B.
Review criteria. In reviewing and evaluating the plan, and in making a
final determination regarding the special permit application, the SPGA
may grant a special permit, provided that the following criteria are met.
These criteria are the minimum over and above any other criteria which
may be set forward in any portion of this bylaw which is specifically
necessary to carry out the stated purposes for owner-occupied
accessory apartments.
Only one accessory apartment shall be allowed per single-family
dwelling unit;
(1)
The accessory apartment shall occupy no more than 40% of the
total living area of the dwelling;
(2)
The accessory apartment shall be designed so that the appearance
of the building remains that of a one-family residence. In general,
any new entrance shall be located on the side or rear of the
building. Reasonable deviation from this condition shall be allowed
in order to facilitate access and mobility for disabled persons;
(3)
(4) Compliance with Board of Health policies and regulations;
Approved water conservation devices shall be required for new
installations. This would include low-flow shower heads and waterefficient
toilets;
(5)
The dwelling must be in existence, and not substantially altered,
for a period of three years prior to the filing of the application for
special permit;
(6)
C.
§ 305-11.09 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.09
C:406
§ 305-11.10. Traffic impact study. [Amended 10-27-2014 STM by
Art. 19]
A detailed traffic impact analysis shall be submitted for any application for
a development which requires a special permit for a principal use within the
Required minimum lot size shall be, for property in Zones B-1 and
R-3, 10,000 square feet; in Zones B-2 and R-2, 20,000 square feet;
and in Zone R-1, 40,000 square feet;
(7)
Sufficient parking space shall be provided on the lot, including
at least one additional space to serve the accessory apartment.
Said additional space shall have access to the driveway serving the
principal dwelling;
(8)
The principal dwelling shall be occupied by the applicant/owner as
his or her principal residence;
(9)
(10)Compliance with the State Building Code.
Plan requirements. The applicant shall comply with § 305-10.10,
Special permits, of this bylaw.
In addition, the following information shall be furnished:
The existing and proposed square footage of each dwelling
unit;
(a)
(b) The existing and proposed floor layouts of each unit; and
(c) Any proposed changes to the exterior of the building.
(1)
(2) All plans should be prepared by a registered land surveyor.
(3) Requirements for open space should be maintained.
D.
Transfer of ownership of a dwelling with an accessory apartment.
The special permit for an accessory apartment in a single-family
dwelling shall terminate upon the sale of property or transfer of
title of the dwelling.
(1)
The new owner(s) shall be required to apply for a new approval
of a special permit for an accessory apartment and shall submit a
written request to the SPGA.
(2)
E.
Recertification of owner occupancy. Not later than January 31 of each
year following issuance of a special permit for an accessory apartment,
the owner of the premises must certify under the pains and penalties
of perjury on forms to be available at the office of the Building
Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer that the premises continue
to be occupied by the owner as his or her principal residence. Failure
to recertify in a timely manner shall result in the automatic termination
of the special permit.
F.
§ 305-11.09 CHARTER § 305-11.10
C:407
B-1, B-2 or I-1 Zoning District or which would have an anticipated average
peak hour trip generation in excess of 80 vehicle trip ends or an average
weekday generation in excess of 800 vehicle trip ends, except that the
requirement for traffic impact analysis may be waived where it is found by
the Board that a traffic study for the area impacted by the proposed project
has been completed in the past 12 months and is acceptable to assess the
impacts of the proposed project, or where it is determined by the Board that
the primary traffic impacts of the proposed development affect Route 139
and where the Town and/or MassHighway has engineered plans for traffic
mitigation that are in the planning or implementation stage, and where the
applicant is willing to contribute funds to a traffic mitigation fund in an
amount at least equal to the cost of a traffic impact analysis, as determined
by the Board upon consultation with at least the Building Commissioner/
Zoning Enforcement Officer, Board of Public Works, the Planning Board and
the applicant. Calculation of anticipated average peak hour trip generation
and average weekday generation shall be determined as follows:
Determination of traffic impact.
In determining traffic generation under this provision, the data
contained in the most recent edition of The Institute of
Transportation Engineers' publication "Trip Generation" shall be
used.
(1)
If a principal use is not listed in said publication, the special
permit granting authority (SPGA) may approve the use of trip
generation rates for another listed use that is similar, in terms of
traffic generation, to the proposed principal use.
(2)
If no such listed use is sufficiently similar, a traffic generation
estimate, along with the methodology used, prepared by a
registered professional engineer experienced and qualified in
traffic engineering, shall be submitted for approval by the SPGA.
(3)
A.
Preparation. The traffic impact analysis shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer experienced and qualified in traffic
engineering. Firms and individuals preparing traffic impact analyses
for submittal to the Board shall comply with any specific standards or
requirements for qualifications as the Board may adopt.
B.
Scope of traffic impact study. The traffic impact study shall include the
following information:
Existing traffic conditions. Average daily and peak hour volumes,
average and peak speeds, sight distances, accident data for the
previous three years, and levels of service (LOS) of intersections
and streets likely to be impacted by the proposed development.
Generally, such data shall be presented for all streets and
intersections adjacent to or within 1,000 feet of the project
boundaries and shall be no more than 12 months old at the date
of the application, unless other data are specifically approved by
the SPGA. Where a proposed development will have an impact on
(1)
C.
§ 305-11.10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.10
C:408
a critical intersection or intersections beyond 1,000 feet of the
project boundary, particularly intersections of arterial and collector
roadways which are integral to the circulation of the proposed
development, the Board may require that such intersections
beyond 1,000 feet of the project boundary be included in the
analysis of traffic conditions.
Projected traffic conditions for design year of occupancy.
Statement of design year of occupancy, average annual background
traffic growth, and impacts of proposed developments which have
already been approved or are pending before Town boards.
(2)
Projected impact of proposed development. Projected peak hour
and daily traffic generated by the development on roads and ways
in the vicinity of the development; sight lines at the intersections of
the proposed driveways and streets; existing and proposed traffic
controls in the vicinity of the proposed development; and projected
post-development traffic volumes and levels of service of
intersections and streets likely to be affected by the proposed
development [as defined in Subsection C(1) above].
(3)
Proposed mitigation. A plan to minimize traffic and safety impacts
through such means as physical design and layout concepts,
staggered employee work schedules, promoting use of public
transit or car pooling, or other appropriate means, and an interior
traffic and pedestrian circulation plan designed to minimize
conflicts and safety problems. Measures shall be proposed to
achieve the following post-development standards:
Level of service (LOS) at nearby intersections shall not be
degraded more than one level as a result of traffic generated
by the proposed development, nor shall any nearby
intersection be degraded below the Level of D.
(a)
Adjacent streets shall not exceed design capacity at the peak
hour as a result of traffic generated by the proposed
development.
(b)
Safety hazards shall not be created or added to as a result of
traffic generated by the proposed development.
(c)
(4)
Adequacy of mitigation. If the proposed mitigation is deemed by
the Board to be inadequate to achieve the standards set forward
in Subsection C(4) above, the applicant shall provide alternative
proposals to meet the standards, including reduction in the size
of the development; change in proposed uses on the site;
contributions to off-site street and intersection improvements; or
construction of off-site street and intersection improvements.
Where the alternative proposals submitted by the applicant are
inadequate, and where it is determined by the Board that the
primary traffic impacts of the development as proposed affect
Route 139 and where the Town and/or MassHighway has
(5)
§ 305-11.10 CHARTER § 305-11.10
C:409
§ 305-11.11. Curb cut permits.
engineered plans for traffic mitigation that are in the planning or
implementation stage, the applicant may be required as a condition
of special permit approval to contribute funds to a traffic mitigation
fund at least equal to $300 per parking space required to serve the
proposed use under this bylaw. For purposes of this standard:
"Level of service" (LOS) shall be determined according to
criteria set forth by the most recent edition of the manual of
the Transportation Research Board of the National Research
Council;
(a)
"Impacted" means intersections projected to receive at least
5% of the expected traffic generated by the proposed
development, either based upon the total anticipated peak
hour traffic generated by the proposed project or based upon
the total anticipated average daily traffic counts generated by
the proposed project; and
(b)
"Adequate" shall mean a level of service of "B" or better for
rural, scenic and residential streets and for all new streets and
intersections to be created in connection with the project, and
"D" or better for all other streets and intersections.
(c)
Administrative procedures. The special permit granting authority
(SPGA) shall adopt rules relative to the issuance of a special permit and
file a copy with the Town Clerk. The SPGA shall follow the procedural
requirements for special permits as set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 9. The
SPGA shall also impose, in addition to any applicable conditions
specified in this bylaw, such applicable conditions as it finds reasonably
appropriate to improve traffic flow or conditions, safety, or otherwise
serve the purposes of this bylaw. Such conditions shall be imposed in
writing and the applicant may be required to post a bond or other
surety for compliance with said conditions in an amount satisfactory to
the Board. After notice and public hearing, and after due consideration
of the reports and recommendations of other Town boards and
departments, the SPGA may grant such a permit.
D.
Applicability and use. All driveway openings for special permit uses
must be approved by the special permit granting authority (SPGA). The
SPGA shall solicit from and consider any comments received by the
Board of Public Works in approving or conditioning such a curb cut
permit.
A.
Required performance standards. The following standards shall guide
issuance of curb cut permits by the SPGA:
One curb cut shall be allowed per parcel. If frontage exceeds 600
feet, one additional curb cut may be permitted where it will aid
access to and circulation within the parcel. For the purpose of this
(1)
B.
§ 305-11.10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.11
C:410
provision, "parcel" shall mean the entire property subject to an
application and any other contiguous land in common ownership or
control on or after the date of this bylaw (as amended at the Annual
Town Meeting on April 29, 1999). Lots shall not be subdivided for
the purpose of increasing the number of permissible curb cuts.
Curb cuts shall be no closer than 75 feet to existing curb cuts and
75 feet to intersecting roadways.
(2)
Wherever possible, access shall be provided onto side streets to
avoid the need for a curb cut onto major roadways.
(3)
Joint or shared curb cuts with adjoining parcels are encouraged.
When it will facilitate such an arrangement, the SPGA may reduce
or eliminate the required side yard setback on the parcel. In such
cases, the applicant must submit proof of such an arrangement
such as reciprocal easements.
(4)
Curb cut widths shall be the minimum necessary for safe access
and egress. The maximum width of curb cuts shall be 30 feet.
Curb cuts shall be clearly defined with curbing. The special permit
granting authority may modify these width requirements where
necessary to promote safe access to or circulation within the
parcel.
(5)
Applicants proposing redevelopment or expansion of existing uses
shall correct existing access problems by better defining curb cuts
or eliminating excess curb cuts.
(6)
The SPGA may restrict curb cuts to right turn in/right turn out only
when, in the opinion of the SPGA, such restriction is necessary for
public safety and to minimize traffic congestion.
(7)
Where state curb cut approval is required, applicants are
encouraged to apply for such approval concurrently with local
approval in order to maximize coordination between local and state
review.
(8)
Administrative procedures.
The SPGA shall adopt rules and regulations relative to the issuance
of a curb cut permit and file a copy with the Town Clerk. The SPGA
shall follow the procedural requirements for special permits as set
forth in MGL c. 40A, § 9. The SPGA shall also impose, in addition
to any applicable conditions specified in this bylaw, such applicable
conditions as it finds reasonably appropriate to improve traffic flow
or conditions, safety, or otherwise serve the purpose of this bylaw.
Such conditions shall be imposed in writing, and the applicant may
be required to post a bond or other surety for compliance with said
conditions in an amount satisfactory to the Board.
(1)
C.
§ 305-11.11 CHARTER § 305-11.11
C:411
§ 305-11.12. Communications towers and wireless communications
facilities.
After notice and public hearing, and after due consideration of the
reports and recommendations of other Town boards/departments,
the SPGA may grant such a permit.
(2)
Purpose, applicability and use. The purpose of this bylaw is to establish
appropriate siting criteria and standards for communications towers
and facilities including but not limited to radio, television, and cellular
communications in order to minimize adverse visual impacts and
maintain the residential character of the Town, and preserve scenic
views to and from the Town's roadways and waterways. This bylaw is
intended to establish reasonable regulations while allowing adequate
service to residents, the traveling public and others within the Town
and to accommodate the need for the minimum possible number of such
facilities within the Town of Marshfield. The requirements of this bylaw
shall apply to all communications towers and wireless communication
facilities that require a special permit in accordance with § 305-5.04
of this bylaw, excluding in-kind or smaller replacement of existing
equipment.
A.
Required performance standards.
Any tower shall be set back from property lines a distance at least
equal to the height of the tower.
(1)
No towers may be constructed within areas subject to protection
under the inland/coastal wetlands bylaw (§§ 305-13.01 and
305-13.02).
(2)
(3) Any tower shall be at least 500 feet from any existing building.
Accessory structures housing support equipment for towers shall
not exceed 400 square feet in size and 15 feet in height and shall
be screened from view.
(4)
Clearing of natural vegetation should be limited to that which is
necessary for the construction, operation, and maintenance of the
tower.
(5)
Night lighting shall be prohibited unless required by federal
authorities and shall be the minimum necessary.
(6)
(7) One tower shall be permitted per lot.
(8) No tower shall be more than 150 feet above the natural grade.
Shared use of towers and co-location of communications devices
is encouraged. All towers constructed as principal uses shall be
designed to accommodate the maximum number of
communications facilities possible.
(9)
B.
§ 305-11.11 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.12
C:412
Wherever feasible, wireless communication facilities shall be
located on existing towers or other nonresidential structures,
minimizing construction of new towers.
(10)
Wireless communication facilities placed on existing buildings shall
be camouflaged or screened and designed to be harmonious and
architecturally compatible with the building. No facility shall
project more than five feet above the existing roofline of the
building. Any equipment associated with the facility shall be
located within the building.
(11)
Towers and facilities shall be painted a neutral, nonreflective color
designed to blend with the surrounding environment.
(12)
Administrative procedures. Site plan approval (pursuant to
§ 305-12.02) and special permit shall be granted by the Board of
Appeals in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 9. The Board of Appeals
shall adopt rules relative to the issuance of special permits, including
application fees, and file a copy with the Town Clerk.
C.
Criteria for review and approval.
The SPGA shall review all applications for communications towers
and shall find that the location of the tower or device is suitable
and that the size, height, and design is the minimum necessary for
that purpose; that the proposed tower or devices will not adversely
impact historic structures or scenic views; that there are no
feasible alternatives to the location of the proposed tower or
devices (including co-location) that would minimize their impact
and that the applicant has exercised good faith in permitting future
co-location of facilities at the site; and that the proposed tower
or device is in compliance with federal and state requirements
regarding aviation safety. The findings, including the basis for such
findings, of the Board shall be stated in the written decision of
approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application for
special permit, and shall require a four-fifths majority vote for
approval.
(1)
The Board shall also impose, in addition to any applicable
conditions specified in the bylaw, such applicable conditions as
it finds reasonably appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood or
otherwise service the purposes of this bylaw, including but not
limited to screening, buffering, lighting, fences, modification of the
exterior appearance of the structures, limitation upon the size,
method of access or other traffic features, parking, removal or
cessation of use, or other requirements. Such conditions shall be
imposed in writing and the applicant may be required to post
bond or other surety for compliance with said conditions in an
amount satisfactory to the Board. The special permit is granted
for a period of two years and shall lapse if substantial use or
construction has not commenced by such date, except for good
(2)
D.
§ 305-11.12 CHARTER § 305-11.12
C:413
§ 305-11.13. Adult entertainment.
cause shown, and provided further that such construction, once
begun, shall be actively and continuously pursued to completion
within a reasonable time. Any extension, addition of cells or
construction of new or replacement towers shall be subject to an
amendment of the special permit following the same procedure as
for an original grant of a special permit.
Authority to regulate. This section is enacted pursuant to MGL c.
40A, § 9A, and pursuant to the Town's authority under the Home Rule
Amendment to the Massachusetts Constitution to serve the compelling
Town interests of limiting the location of and preventing the clustering
and concentration of certain adult entertainment uses, as defined and
designated herein, in response to studies demonstrating their
deleterious effects.
A.
Purpose.
The purpose of this adult entertainment section of the Town of
Marshfield Zoning Bylaw is to address and mitigate the secondary
effects of adult entertainment establishments. Secondary effects
have been shown to include increased crime, adverse impacts on
public health, adverse impacts on the business climate, adverse
impacts on the property values of residential and commercial
property and adverse impacts on the quality of life. All of said
secondary impacts are adverse to the health, safety and general
welfare of the Town of Marshfield and its inhabitants.
(1)
The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor intent of
imposing a limitation on the content of any communicative matter
or materials, including sexually oriented matter or materials.
Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of this section to restrict
or deny access by adults to adult entertainment establishments
or to sexually oriented matter or materials that are protected by
the Constitution of the United States or of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, nor to restrict or deny rights that distributors
or exhibitors of such matter or materials may have to sell, rent,
distribute or exhibit such matter or materials. Neither is it the
purpose or intent of this section to legalize the sale, rental,
distribution or exhibition of obscene or other illegal matter or
materials.
(2)
B.
Regulation of adult entertainment uses.
Adult entertainment, as defined in this bylaw, shall be permitted
only in the "I" Zoning District, upon the issuance of a special
permit from the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall act on
applications according to the procedure specified in MGL c. 40A,
§ 9A.
(1)
C.
§ 305-11.12 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.13
C:414
No adult entertainment special permit shall be issued to any person
convicted of violating the provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63, or MGL c.
272, § 28.
(2)
Dimensional requirements.
The distances specified below shall be measured by a straight
line from the nearest property line of the premises on which the
proposed adult entertainment use is to be located to the nearest
boundary line of any of the residential zoning districts or to the
nearest property line of any of the other uses set forth below:
Any such proposed use shall be located a minimum of 700 feet
from any residential zoning district.
(a)
Any such proposed use shall be located a minimum of 700 feet
from any residential uses.
(b)
Any such proposed use shall be located a minimum of 700
feet from any public or private school, public library, day-care
facility or religious facility.
(c)
Any such proposed use shall be located a minimum of 700 feet
from any public or private playground, park or recreational
area, or youth center.
(d)
Any such proposed use shall be located a minimum of 700 feet
from any other adult entertainment use approved under the
provisions of this bylaw.
(e)
Any such proposed use shall be located a minimum of 700 feet
from any establishment licensed under the provisions of MGL
c. 138, § 12.
(f)
(1)
No more than one structure to be used for adult entertainment
shall be located on any one lot.
(2)
The maximum gross floor area of any structure to be used for adult
entertainment shall not exceed 20,000 square feet per acre.
(3)
D.
Expiration. A special permit to conduct an adult entertainment use shall
expire after a period of two calendar years from its date of issuance
and shall be automatically renewable for successive two-year periods
thereafter, provided that a written request for such renewal is made
to the special permit granting authority prior to said expiration and
that no objection to said renewal is made and sustained by the special
permit granting authority.
E.
Severability. The provisions of this section are severable, and in the
event that any provision of this section is determined to be invalid
for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and
effect.
F.
§ 305-11.13 CHARTER § 305-11.14
C:415
§ 305-11.14. Inclusionary zoning for affordable housing. [Added
April 2007 ATM; amended 4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 15]
Purpose. The purpose of this section of the bylaw is to promote the
development of housing that is affordable to low- and moderate-income
households, meet the requirements of the Local Initiative Program and
qualify for inclusion on the Subsidized Housing Inventory.
A.
Applicability.
The inclusionary zoning bylaw shall apply to the R-1 and R-2
Districts within the Town of Marshfield, except the Water Resource
Protection District.
(1)
The inclusionary zoning bylaw shall not apply to any development
undertaken by the Town of Marshfield for any municipal purposes.
(2)
The inclusionary zoning bylaw shall not apply to any development
carried out under MGL c. 40B, as amended.
(3)
B.
Voluntary provision of affordable units.
(1) The use of this section of this bylaw shall be voluntary.
The applicant for a special permit under this bylaw shall comply
with the provisions described in Subsection D and otherwise
comply with this section of this bylaw, and the Planning Board shall
require such compliance in the special permit.
(2)
C.
Provision of affordable units; bonuses and incentives.
Affordable units and density bonus. All development which occurs
as a result of this bylaw shall meet the affordable housing
requirements and shall be entitled to a density bonus as follows:
The number of affordable units and density bonus units shall equal
the number of as-of-right (AOR) units multiplied by 25% and
rounded up to the next even number divided by two. [Example:
A 9-unit AOR development will result in 9 AOR units plus 4 units
(0.25 x 9 units = 2.25 units rounded up to 4 units, 2 affordable
units and 2 density bonus units) or 13 units in total. A 31-unit AOR
development will result in 31 AOR units plus 8 units (0.25 x 31 units
= 7.5 units rounded up to 8 units, 4 affordable units and 4 density
bonus units) or 39 total units.]
(1)
The requirement for affordable units shall be met by one or a
combination of the following methods:
On-site development. Constructed or rehabilitated on the locus
subject to the special permit (see Subsection F); or
(a)
Fees in lieu of construction. The applicant may offer, and the
Planning Board, upon receiving a favorable recommendation
from the Housing Partnership, may approve fees in lieu of
(b)
(2)
D.
§ 305-11.14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.14
C:416
construction of affordable housing units as satisfying the
requirements of Subsection D of this bylaw. The applicant
shall make the payment of the fee in lieu of construction to
the Marshfield Housing Authority for the sole purpose of
converting non-affordable housing units to affordable housing
units in the Town of Marshfield. Fees in lieu of construction are
more fully addressed in Subsection G.
The applicant may offer, and the Planning Board may accept, a
combination of the Subsection D(2)(a) and (b) requirements,
provided that in no event shall the total number of affordable units
provided on site and the number of affordable units for which a fee
in lieu of construction is paid be less than the equivalent number or
value of affordable units required for the applicable development
by this bylaw.
(3)
All affordable units shall meet the requirements of the Local
Initiative Program for Local Action Units and be eligible for
inclusion on the Subsidized Housing Inventory.
(4)
Location of affordable lots. The location of affordable lots shall
be determined in consultation with the Planning Board during the
special permitting process.
(5)
Standards and dimensional regulations.
Applicability. Where the requirements of this section differ from
or conflict with the requirements in the Table of Dimensional and
Density Regulations found in Article VI of the Town's Zoning Bylaw,
the requirement of this section shall prevail for developments being
constructed under this section of the bylaw.
(1)
Minimum frontage. The minimum frontage may be reduced from
the frontage otherwise required in the zoning district; provided,
however, that no lot shall have less than 75 feet of frontage and
provided further that such frontage shall apply only to lots fronting
on proposed internal roadways.
(2)
Lot size. The Planning Board may allow reductions in the minimum
lot sizes listed in Article VI, § 305-6.02, Table of Dimensional and
Density Regulations, to allow for the creation of the affordable
and density bonus units, if the Planning Board finds that such
reductions will result in better design and improved protection of
natural and scenic resources; provided, however, that the average
lot size in a development shall not be less than 50% of the
applicable minimum lot size listed in Article VI, § 305-6.02.
(3)
Lot shape. All building lots must be able to contain a circle of a
minimum diameter of 75 feet from the front line to the rear building
line.
(4)
E.
§ 305-11.14 CHARTER § 305-11.14
C:417
Setbacks. The Planning Board may permit a reduction by up to 1/
2 of the setbacks otherwise listed in the Table of Dimensional and
Density Regulations in the Zoning Bylaw, if the Board finds after
receiving an opinion from the Conservation Commission that such
reduction will not affect natural resources, would result in better
design and improved protection of the natural and scenic resources
and will otherwise comply with the bylaw. Notwithstanding this
provision or the requirements of the Zoning Bylaw, every dwelling
fronting on the proposed roadways shall be set back a minimum
of 15 feet from the roadway right-of-way, and a minimum of 30
feet buffer setback from the outer perimeter of the land subject
to the application. This thirty-foot setback shall be maintained
in a naturally vegetated state or planted to create a screen and
buffer the development. Wherever feasible, construction of the
dwelling at the front setback line is encouraged. The applicant
shall provide a narrative describing any requested modifications of
setback requirements as specified in § 305-11.04E(4) of the Zoning
Bylaw and noting the proposed lots for which setback reductions
are being sought.
(5)
Provision of affordable housing units on site.
Location of affordable units. All affordable units shall be situated
within and dispersed throughout the development so as not to be in
less desirable locations than market-rate units in the development
and shall, on average, be no less accessible to public amenities,
such as open space, than the market-rate units. Affordable lots
shall not be smaller than the average lot within the development
and shall not have drainage or utilities easements on them.
(1)
Minimum design and construction standards for affordable units.
Affordable housing units within market-rate developments shall be
integrated with the rest of the development and shall be identical
to the market-rate units in size, design, appearance, construction,
building systems such as HVAC, electrical and plumbing, and
quality and types of materials used in all interior space including
bedrooms, kitchen, bathrooms, living rooms, studies, hallways,
closets, garages and basements and provided with identical
amenities and appliances such as, but not limited to, decks, central
vacuum cleaning systems, stoves, refrigerators, compactors,
disposals, dishwashers and landscape fencing, walls and plantings
unless otherwise approved in the special permit by the Planning
Board. No changes to these standards may be made by the
Planning Board without the approval of the Housing Partnership.
(2)
Timing of construction or provision of affordable units or lots.
Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board, affordable
housing units shall be provided coincident to the development
of market-rate units, but in no event shall the development of
affordable units be delayed beyond the schedule noted below:
(a)
(3)
F.
§ 305-11.14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.14
C:418
Market-Rate Unit % Affordable Housing Unit %
Up to 30% None required
30% plus 1 unit At least 10%
Up to 50% At least 30%
Up to 75% At least 50%
75% plus 1 unit At least 70%
Up to 90% 100%
Fractions of units shall not be
counted
Compliance with this requirement shall be monitored by the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer and the
auditing agency (see Subsection J), on the basis of building
permits issued and certificates of occupancy requested for
both the affordable housing units and market-rate units.
Certificates of occupancy for any market-rate housing units
or nonresidential space shall not be issued if the required
affordable housing units are not being provided in accordance
with this schedule.
(b)
Marketing plan for affordable units.
Applicants shall submit a marketing plan which describes the
number of affordable housing units, their approximate sales
price or rent level, the means for selecting buyers or tenants
of the affordable units, how the applicant will accommodate
local preference requirements and the method of affirmatively
marketing the affordable units (including the marketing of
such units) to minority households, in a manner that complies
with the LIP Guidelines. This requirement is further addressed
in Subsection I of this bylaw.
(a)
The marketing plan shall be developed by the applicant with
the assistance of the lottery agent and submitted to the
Housing Partnership. The Housing Partnership shall review the
marketing plan to determine its appropriateness in addressing
the affordable housing needs within the community and its
compliance with applicable federal and state statutes and
regulations, the LIP Guidelines and this bylaw. The Housing
Partnership may require modifications of the marketing plan
or, if it determines the plan to be satisfactory, may forward
it to DHCD with a favorable recommendation. Following the
approval of the marketing plan by DHCD, the Housing
Partnership shall notify the Planning Board and the lottery
agent. The special permit and building permits may be granted
prior to receiving DHCD approval so as to facilitate the
construction of the development; however, certificates of
occupancy, whether for affordable or market-rate units, shall
(b)
(4)
§ 305-11.14 CHARTER § 305-11.14
C:419
not be issued until such time as the marketing plan has been
approved by DHCD.
Applicants shall comply with the requirements of the lottery
agent and certify their acceptance and willingness to comply
with the lottery process or other requirements of the lottery
agent for the selection of qualified housing buyers or renters
for the affordable units. The lottery system and requirements
are further addressed in Subsection I of this bylaw.
(c)
Provision for fees in lieu of construction of affordable housing units.
Fees in lieu of construction of affordable housing units. An
applicant may propose to pay a fee in lieu of construction of
affordable housing units to the Marshfield Housing Authority. The
fee in lieu of construction shall be for the sole purpose of
converting non-affordable housing units to affordable housing units
in the Town as part of the Local Initiative Program and shall be held
in trust and in separate interest-bearing accounts by the Marshfield
Housing Authority for such purpose.
(1)
For each affordable unit for which a fee in lieu of construction
is paid, the cash payment per unit shall be equal to 65% of the
average price being asked for the market-rate units in the
applicable development.
(2)
The fee in lieu of construction shall not result in an increase in the
total number of market-rate units contained in the application for
the special permit approved by the Planning Board.
(3)
The Marshfield Housing Authority shall submit to the Housing
Partnership, annually and upon request, reports and other
documentation of the use of or its financial accounting for the fees
in lieu of construction.
(4)
The Marshfield Housing Authority shall hold all fees in lieu of
construction of affordable housing units paid to it and all
investment income and profit thereon received by it separately
from all other monies of the Marshfield Housing Authority. It shall
cause such fees, income and profit to be audited at least once a
year by an independent certified public accountant or independent
firm of certified public accountants experienced in auditing
accounts of governmental entities (which may be its regular
auditor if such regular auditor meets the foregoing criteria), such
audit to be completed no later than the general audit of the
Marshfield Housing Authority's financial statements for the
applicable fiscal year, and a copy of such audit shall be promptly
submitted to the Town Accountant, the Town Treasurer/Collector,
the Town Administrator, the Board of Selectmen, the Housing
Partnership, and the Planning Board. Such audit may be combined
with the general audit of the Marshfield Housing Authority as long
as all matters relating to such fees, income and profit are set
(5)
G.
§ 305-11.14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.14
C:420
forth separately from all other accounts of the Marshfield Housing
Authority. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
Schedule of fees in lieu of payments. Fees in lieu of construction
payments shall be made according to the schedule set forth in
Subsection F(3) above.
(6)
Preferences applicable to buyer/renter selection.
Local preference.
Local preference shall be given to local residents in the
selection of eligible applicants for 70% of the affordable units
in a development.
(a)
Verification of local residency may require several forms of
verification. The lottery agent shall make the determination
as to the types of documentation required for verification of
residency.
(b)
The application of local preference shall be in compliance with
all applicable fair housing laws and LIP Guidelines.
(c)
(1)
Minority preference.
Affirmative marketing goal. An affirmative marketing goal
established for the Town by the DHCD shall be made part of
the selection criteria for residents in all developments to which
this bylaw applies.
(a)
(2)
H.
Lottery selection of buyer/renter.
The Marshfield Housing Authority or its designee shall serve as the
lottery agent and shall assist in the development of a marketing
plan as provided in Subsection F(4) for each development to which
this bylaw applies. The marketing plan shall describe the buyer
selection process for the affordable units, including any lottery or
similar procedure for choosing among eligible purchasers, and will
provide for affirmative fair marketing of affordable housing units.
The marketing plan shall include local preference as provided in
Subsection F(4).
(1)
The lottery agent shall determine income and asset eligibility of
all applicants for affordable housing according to LIP Guidelines
and LIP Regulations, age restrictions, when applicable, and local
preference described in Subsection H when conducting its
marketing and lottery. There shall be no discrimination on the basis
of race, creed, color, sex, age, handicap, marital status, sexual
preference, national origin, or any other basis prohibited by law in
the selection of occupants for the affordable housing units.
(2)
Prior to marketing or otherwise making available for sale or rental
of any of the units, the applicant and the lottery agent must obtain
(3)
I.
§ 305-11.14 CHARTER § 305-11.14
C:421
DHCD's approval of the marketing plan. When submitted to the
Housing Partnership for approval, the marketing plan shall be
accompanied by a letter from the Board of Selectmen to the effect
that the Town will perform any aspects of the marketing plan which
are set forth therein as responsibilities of the Town.
The lottery agent shall be compensated by the applicant for its
services as lottery agent in the amount and in the manner
described in the approved marketing plan and schedule of fees
established in accordance with Subsection L of this bylaw.
(4)
Auditing agency.
The Marshfield Housing Authority or its designee shall serve as the
auditing agency for all developments approved under this bylaw
and shall represent the interest of the Town and the Local Initiative
Program. The auditing agency shall audit all applicable
developments to determine compliance with the affordability and
other requirements of the LIP, this bylaw, and to conditions relating
to affordability, special permit, regulatory agreement, and use
restrictions, for all applicable developments.
(1)
Initial sale. The auditing agency will review the initial sales data
and determine the compliance of the development with the
affordability requirements, as described in the LIP Guidelines and
LIP Regulations. The auditing agency shall also ensure the
applicant's compliance with the approved marketing plan and
lottery process. Upon completion of its review of initial sales data,
the auditing agency will deliver to the Housing Partnership a copy
of such data together with the auditing agency's determination of
whether the affordability requirements have been met.
(2)
Resale. The auditing agency shall audit resales of affordable units,
including appraisal and selling price, deeds, use restriction,
regulatory agreement and other applicable documents, for
compliance with LIP Guidelines and LIP Regulations. The auditing
agency shall evaluate the affordability of the unit and whether
the unit should remain affordable or funds should be recaptured
and turned over to the Town. Upon completion of its review of
resales information, the auditing agency will deliver to the Housing
Partnership a copy of its findings together with its
recommendations. The Housing Partnership shall make a
determination as whether the unit is to remain affordable or
whether the excess proceeds should be returned to the Town. If the
determination of the Housing Partnership is to retain the unit as
affordable, the auditing agency shall locate and select an eligible
buyer in compliance with the approved LIP Guidelines and LIP
Regulations, marketing plan and lottery process.
(3)
Annual report. The auditing agency shall prepare and deliver,
annually, an annual compliance report with respect to each
(4)
J.
§ 305-11.14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.14
C:422
development to which this bylaw pertains to the Housing
Partnership regarding the construction progress (where
applicable) of the applicant with respect to any affordable units to
be provided on site and any handicapped accessible units required
to be provided and compliance of the applicant with all matters to
be reviewed by the auditing agency as set forth in Subsection J(1)
through (3) above. The annual compliance report shall indicate the
extent of any noncompliance with such matters, describe efforts
being made by the applicant to remedy such noncompliance and,
if appropriate, recommend possible enforcement action against the
applicant. The auditing agency shall deliver the annual compliance
report within 120 days of the end of each calendar year.
The applicant and the Town shall submit any information,
documents or certifications requested by the auditing agency
which the auditing agency shall deem necessary or appropriate to
evidence the continuing compliance of the applicant and the Town
with the LIP and this bylaw.
(5)
The Marshfield Housing Authority shall be compensated by the
applicant for its services provided as auditing agency in the amount
and in the manner described in the approved marketing plan and
the schedule of fees as set forth in Subsection L of this bylaw.
(6)
Maximum incomes and selling prices; initial sale.
To ensure that only eligible households purchase affordable
housing units, potential buyers are required to submit all income
and asset documentation to the lottery agent, as requested by the
lottery agent, necessary and appropriate to determine whether the
annual income exceeds the maximum level as established by the
DHCD, and as may be revised from time to time.
(1)
The price of an affordable unit shall be determined in accordance
with the most current LIP Guidelines and LIP Regulations.
(2)
The occupants of an affordable unit shall provide promptly to the
auditing agency all documentation requested by the auditing
agency, for the determination of initial and continued eligibility and
any other matter regarding compliance with the LIP or this bylaw.
(3)
The method of determining the sale price for an affordable unit
shall be recorded on the deed as a use restriction on the resale of
the affordable unit.
(4)
The Town shall have the right of first refusal to either find a
qualified buyer for the affordable unit or to purchase the unit to
ensure that it remains affordable, should a qualified buyer not be
found. The right of first refusal shall be recorded on the deed as a
use restriction.
(5)
K.
L. Fees.
§ 305-11.14 CHARTER § 305-11.14
C:423
A schedule of fees shall be developed and maintained by the
Planning Board in consultation with the auditing agency, lottery
agent, Housing Partnership and Board of Selectmen.
(1)
Fees established by the Planning Board shall include, but not be
limited to, administrative fees, consultant fees, legal fees and any
additional fees the Planning Board may determine to be
appropriate for the issuance of the special permit and the
administration of this bylaw and the Local Initiative Program. Fees
established by the Planning Board shall be subject to a public
hearing prior to their adoption by the Planning Board.
(2)
The lottery agent and auditing agency shall establish a fee schedule
to defray the cost of implementing and auditing the lottery system
and the affordable units in consultation with the Planning Board,
Housing Partnership and Board of Selectmen. A copy of the fee
schedule shall be forwarded to the Planning Board.
(3)
Criteria for review and approval.
The Planning Board shall review all applications for inclusionary
zoning for affordable housing to determine compliance of the
proposal with the following criteria:
(a) Subsection A, Purpose;
(b) Subsection E, Standards and dimensional regulations;
Compatibility through design, architecture and buffering with
surrounding neighborhood;
(c)
(d) Acceptability of road layout and site design;
Preservation of important natural, historic and/or
archaeological resources;
(e)
(1)
The Board's findings, including the basis of such findings, shall be
stated in the written decision of approval, conditional approval or
denial of the special permit. The Board shall impose conditions in
its decision as needed to ensure compliance with the bylaw.
(2)
M.
Conflict with other bylaws. The provisions of this section of the bylaw
shall be considered supplemental to the other provisions of the Zoning
Bylaw. To the extent that any conflict exists between this section of the
bylaw and others, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
N.
Severability. If any provision of this bylaw is held invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the bylaw shall not be affected
thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections or parts of any section
or sections of this bylaw shall not affect the validity of the remainder of
the Town's Zoning Bylaw.
O.
§ 305-11.14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.15
C:424
§ 305-11.15. Wind energy conversion facilities (WECF). [Added
April 2010 ATM by Art. 20]
Purpose and applicability.
Wind energy is an abundant, renewable and nonpolluting energy
resource; its conversion into electricity will reduce our dependency
on nonrenewable energy resources that adversely impact our air
and water quality.
(1)
The purpose of this bylaw is to provide by special permit for the
construction and operation of wind energy conversion facilities
(WECF) or facility and to provide standards for the placement,
design, construction, monitoring, modification and removal of
WECF. These regulations are intended to protect public health
and safety and minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic
resources of the Town, while allowing wind energy technology to
exist. These regulations also provide adequate financial assurance
for the decommissioning of WECF.
(2)
This bylaw applies to utility-scale, building-mounted and smallscale
ground-mounted WECF proposed to be constructed after the
effective date of this bylaw. Any physical modifications made after
the effective date of this bylaw to existing WECF that materially
alter the type or increase the size of such WECF or other
equipment shall require a special permit.
(3)
A.
General requirements.
No WECF shall be erected, constructed, installed or modified, as
provided in this section, without first obtaining a special permit
from the Board of Appeals. The construction of a WECF shall
be permitted, subject to the issuance of a special permit, in
compliance with § 305-10.10, Special permits, § 305-12.02, Site
plan approval, and the requirements of § 305-5.04, Table of Use
Regulations. WECF must comply with all requirements set forth
in this bylaw. All such WECF shall be constructed and operated
in a manner that minimizes any adverse safety and environmental
impacts. No special permit shall be granted unless the special
permit granting authority, the Board of Appeals, makes findings in
writing that:
(a) The specific site is an appropriate location for such use;
There is not expected to be any serious hazard to pedestrians,
vehicles or abutting properties from the use;
(b)
Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the
proper operation of the use.
(c)
(1)
The special permit decision from the Board of Appeals may impose
reasonable conditions and safeguards that may require the
(2)
B.
§ 305-11.15 CHARTER § 305-11.15
C:425
applicant to implement measures to mitigate adverse impacts of
the WECF, if it is determined by the Board of Appeals that they are
likely to occur.
Wind monitoring or meteorological towers shall be permitted in
all zoning districts that allow for WECF, as listed in § 305-5.04,
Table of Use Regulations. Wind monitoring towers are subject to
the issuance of a building permit for a temporary structure and
are also subject to reasonable regulations concerning the height of
structures, lot area and setback requirements.
(3)
Compliance with all laws, bylaws and regulations. The construction
and operation of all WECF shall be in compliance with all applicable
local, state and federal laws and regulations, including but not limited
to all applicable safety, construction, environmental, electrical,
communications and aviation requirements.
C.
Proof of liability insurance. The applicant shall be required to provide
evidence of liability insurance in an amount and for a duration of time
sufficient to cover loss or damage to persons and structures occasioned
by the failure of the facility.
D.
Site control. At the time of an application for a special permit, the
applicant shall submit documentation of actual or prospective control
of the project site sufficient to allow for installation and use of the
proposed facility. Documentation shall also include proof of control over
setback areas and access roads if required.
E.
General siting standards.
Height. WECF shall be no higher than 300 feet in elevation above
the existing natural grade of the land. WECF may exceed 300 feet
if:
The applicant demonstrates by substantial evidence that such
height reflects industry standards for a similarly sited WECF;
(a)
The additional benefits of a higher tower outweigh any
increased adverse impacts;
(b)
The facility satisfies all other criteria for the granting of a
special permit under the provisions of this section;
(c)
The height of the facility is approved by the FAA and the MA
DOT Aeronautics Division if required.
(d)
(1)
Setbacks. WECF shall be set back a distance equal to the overall
blade tip height plus the required setback in the applicable zoning
district. The Board of Appeals may allow reduced setbacks for
municipally owned WECF if the abutting property is owned by
another Town entity and that entity/agency agrees to allow the
structure near property under its control. In no case will the
(2)
F.
§ 305-11.15 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.15
C:426
setback be less than the height of the facility to any existing
structure.
Setback waiver. The Board of Appeals may reduce the minimum
setback distance as appropriate based on site-specific
considerations if the project satisfies all other criteria for the
granting of a special permit under the provisions of this section.
(3)
Design standards.
Color and finish. The Board of Appeals shall have discretion over
the turbine color. A neutral, nonreflective exterior color designed
to blend with the surrounding environment is encouraged. Color
renderings of the proposed WECF shall be submitted to the Board
of Appeals for review and approval.
(1)
Lighting and signage.
Lighting. WECF shall be lighted only if required by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA). Lighting of other parts of the
WECF, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to
that required for safety and operational purposes and shall be
reasonably shielded from abutting properties.
(a)
Signage.
Signs on the WECF shall comply with the requirements of
the Town's sign regulations contained in Article VII of this
bylaw and shall be limited to:
Those necessary to identify the owner, provide a
twenty-four-hour emergency contact phone number,
and warn of any danger;
[a]
Educational signs providing information about the
facility and the benefits of renewable energy.
[b]
[1]
WECF shall not be used for displaying any advertising
except for identification of the manufacturer or operator of
the wind energy facility.
[2]
(b)
(2)
Utility services. All utility transmission lines from the WECF shall
be located underground. The Board of Appeals may waive this
requirement depending on soil conditions and topography of the
site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical
transformers, substations and disconnect devices for utility
interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility
provider.
(3)
Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to a WECF
shall be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and
height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks,
open space, parking and building coverage requirements. All such
(4)
G.
§ 305-11.15 CHARTER § 305-11.15
C:427
appurtenant structures, including but not limited to equipment
shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be
architecturally compatible with each other. Structures shall only be
used for housing of equipment for the subject property. Whenever
feasible, structures should be screened from view by a solid fence,
wall or evergreen vegetation and/or located in an underground
vault and joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
Support towers. Monopole towers are the preferred type of support
for the WECF.
(5)
Ground-mounted WECF are not permitted to host
telecommunication equipment.
(6)
Safety, aesthetic and environmental standards.
Emergency services. The applicant shall provide a copy of the
application package to the Department of Public Works and Fire
and Police Departments. The applicant shall coordinate with those
departments listed above in developing an emergency response
plan.
(1)
Unauthorized access. WECF and other appurtenant structures
shall be designed with a security barrier, structure, wall or fence at
least six feet in height to prevent unauthorized access. To prevent
access to the support tower by unauthorized persons, climbing
apparatus shall be no lower than 10 feet from the ground or by
placing secure shielding over the climbing apparatus.
(2)
Shadow/flicker. WECF shall be sited in a manner that minimizes
shadowing or flicker impacts. The applicant has the burden of
proving that this effect will not have significant adverse impact on
neighboring or adjacent uses through either siting or mitigation.
(3)
Noise.
The WECF and associated equipment shall conform to the
following requirements, whichever is more restrictive:
Article XII, Special Regulations, § 305-12.01J of this bylaw;
or
[1]
The provisions of the State Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) Division of Air Quality Noise Regulations
(310 CMR 7.10). A source of sound will be considered to
be violating these regulations if the source:
Increases the broadband sound level by more than 10
dB above ambient; or
[a]
Produces a "pure tone" condition, when an octave
band center frequency sound-pressure level exceeds
[b]
[2]
(a)
(4)
H.
§ 305-11.15 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.15
C:428
the two adjacent center frequency sound-pressure
levels by three decibels or more.
These criteria shall be measured at both the property line and
at the nearest inhabited residence.
(b)
Land clearing. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to
that which is necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance of the WECF. No site alteration, clearing activities or
grading shall take place on the site prior to the issuance of a special
permit, except for construction of a temporary wind monitoring
meteorological tower.
(5)
Monitoring and maintenance facility conditions. The applicant shall
maintain the WECF in good condition in compliance with
manufacturer's specifications, all State Electric Code requirements
and the provisions of this bylaw. Maintenance shall include, but not
be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security
measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable
to the Police and Fire Departments. The project owner shall be
responsible for the cost of maintaining the WECF and any access
road, unless accepted as a public way, and for the cost of repairing
any damage occurring to the access road as a result of construction
and operation.
(6)
Modifications. All material modifications to a WECF made after
issuance of the special permit shall require approval by the Board
of Appeals as provided in this section.
(7)
Abandonment or decommissioning.
Removal requirements.
Any WECF which has reached the end of its useful life or
has been abandoned shall be removed. When the WECF is
scheduled to be decommissioned, the applicant shall notify the
Town by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued
operations and plans for removal. The owner/operator shall
physically remove the WECF no more than 150 days after the
date that operations are discontinued. At the time of removal,
the WECF site shall be restored to the state it was in before the
facility was constructed. More specifically, decommissioning
shall consist of:
Physical removal of all WECF structures, equipment,
security barriers and transmission lines from the site;
[1]
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance
with local and state waste disposal regulations;
[2]
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion.
[3]
(a)
(1)
I.
§ 305-11.15 CHARTER § 305-11.15
C:429
The Board of Appeals may allow the owner to leave
landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order to
minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
(b)
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning, the facility shall be considered abandoned when
the facility fails to operate for more than one year without the
written consent of the Board of Appeals. If the applicant fails to
remove the WECF in accordance with the requirements of this
section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of
decommissioning, the Town shall have the authority to enter the
property and physically remove the facility.
(2)
Financial surety. The Board of Appeals shall require the applicant
for a utility-scale WECF to provide a form of surety that will be
available for use for the operating life of the WECF, either through
escrow account, bond or other acceptable form of surety. The
surety bond will be sufficient to cover the cost of removal in the
event the Town or its contractor must remove the facility, in an
amount and form determined to be reasonable by the Board of
Appeals. In no event shall the surety bond exceed more than 125%
of the estimated cost of removal. Such surety will not be required
for municipally or state-owned facilities. The applicant shall submit
a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal
prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a
mechanism for cost of living adjustment.
(3)
Term of special permit.
A special permit issued for a WECF shall be valid for 25
years, unless extended or renewed. The time period may be
extended or the permit renewed by the Board of Appeals upon
satisfactory operation of the facility. Request for renewal must
be submitted at least 180 days prior to expiration of the special
permit. Submitting a renewal request shall allow for continued
operation of the facility until the Board of Appeals acts. At the
end of the term (including extensions and renewals), the WECF
shall be removed as required by this section.
(a)
The applicant or facility owner shall maintain a phone number
and identify a responsible person for the public to contact with
inquiries and complaints throughout the life of the project.
(b)
(4)
Application process and requirements.
General. The application for a WECF shall be filed in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Board of Appeals concerning
special permits, Article X, Administration and Enforcement,
§ 305-10.10, and Article XII, Special Regulations, § 305-12.02, Site
plan approval. All applications for special permits shall be filed by
the applicant with the Town Clerk pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 9.
(1)
J.
§ 305-11.15 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.15
C:430
Required information. The applicant shall provide the Board of
Appeals with 16 copies of the application. All plans and maps
shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in Massachusetts. The following information
shall be included in the application:
Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant,
as well as all co-applicants and property owners;
(a)
The name, contact information and signature of any agents
representing the applicant;
(b)
(c) Documentation of the legal right to use the WECF property.
(2)
Siting and design. The applicant shall provide the Board of Appeals
with a description of the property which shall include a location
map from a copy of a portion of the most recent USGS Quadrangle
Map, at a scale of 1:25,000, showing the proposed WECF site and
the area within a two-mile radius from the proposed WECF.
(3)
Site plan. Applicants shall submit a detailed site plan, stamped
by a Massachusetts licensed professional engineer, showing the
proposed WECF property and the following site features:
Property lines for the site parcel and adjacent parcels within
300 feet;
(a)
Outline of all existing buildings, identifying their use (e.g.,
residence, garage, etc.) on the subject property and all
abutting properties;
(b)
Location of all existing and proposed access roads, public and
private, on the site and adjacent parcels within 300 feet and
proposed roads or driveways either temporary or permanent;
(c)
Existing areas of tree cover, including the predominant height
of trees, on the site parcel and adjacent parcels;
(d)
Proposed location and design of WECF, including all turbines,
ground equipment, appurtenant structures, transmission
infrastructure, access and fencing, etc.;
(e)
Location of all vantage points referenced below in Subsection
J(5);
(f)
Location of all resource areas, wetlands, natural heritage and
endangered species estimated and priority habitat areas,
migratory bird flyways, and prominent and natural and
historical site features;
(g)
(h) All proposed grading shown in two-foot contour intervals;
All proposed lighting shall be shown on the site plan. All
lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on abutting
(i)
(4)
§ 305-11.15 CHARTER § 305-11.15
C:431
properties and be directed downward with full cutoff fixtures
to reduce light pollution, except as required by the FAA and/or
MA DOT Aeronautics Division;
Drainage calculations for the stormwater management system
for all proposed impervious surfaces;
(j)
(k) Zoning district;
(l) Existing site topography at two-foot contour intervals.
Visual simulations.
Photo simulations. The Board of Appeals shall select between
three and six sight lines, including from the nearest building
with a view of the WECF, for pre- and post-construction view
representations. Sites for the view representations shall be
selected from populated areas or public ways within a two-mile
radius of the WECF. Computer-generated photo simulations
shall have the following requirements:
Photo simulations shall be in color and shall include actual
pre-construction photographs and accurate postconstruction
simulations of the height and breadth of the
WECF;
[1]
All view representations shall include existing and
proposed vantage points, distances and angles, WECF
structures, buildings and tree coverage;
[2]
A description shall be provided of the technical procedures
used in producing the photo simulations' vantage points,
distances and angles. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art.
12]
[3]
(a)
Balloon test. The applicant shall conduct a balloon test to help
visualize the height of the proposed WECF. A large, brightly
colored balloon that can be seen from a distance shall be raised
to the same height as the highest point of the blade of the
proposed WECF. The time and date of the balloon test shall be
determined at the first public hearing and advertised by the
applicant in a newspaper of general circulation in Marshfield.
A second date for the test shall be provided in the event of poor
weather/visibility. Balloon tests shall be scheduled between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. All balloon tests shall be
conducted during daylight hours and clear weather conditions.
(b)
(5)
Landscape plan. A landscape plan shall be provided that shows the
location of all existing and proposed plantings. The landscape plan
shall specify the size, type and location of all proposed plantings.
The WECF shall be screened from adjacent properties by one or a
combination of the following:
(6)
§ 305-11.15 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.15
C:432
(a) A minimum six-foot-high evergreen vegetative buffer;
(b) A six-foot-high solid fence; or
(c) A six-foot-high wall.
Operation and maintenance plan. The applicant shall submit a
plan for maintaining access roads and the stormwater management
system, as well as general procedures for operational maintenance
of the WECF in accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
(7)
Compliance documents. The applicant shall provide the following
information as part of the special permit application:
A description of financial status of the owner of the proposed
WECF;
(a)
(b) Proof of liability insurance;
Certification of structure height approval from the FAA and
from the MA DOT Aeronautics Division if required by
applicable federal regulations;
(c)
A statement certified by an acoustical engineer that
demonstrates compliance with Subsection H(4) of this bylaw
and provides the existing ambient sound levels and maximum
projected noise levels from the WECF;
(d)
Design plans of the WECF foundation and manufacturer's
design plans for the structure, stamped by a Massachusetts
licensed professional engineer;
(e)
One- or three-line electrical diagram detailing the WECF
components and electrical interconnection methods, including
all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent
devices;
(f)
Documentation of the WECF manufacturer and model, rotor
diameter, tower height and tower type.
(g)
(8)
Independent consultants. Upon submission of an application for a
special permit, the Board of Appeals will be authorized to hire outside
consultants, as needed, to advise it on technical issues related to the
WECF application, pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G. The applicant will be
required to pay this consultant's fees.
K.
Building-mounted wind energy conversion facilities.
Building-mounted WECF are allowed subject to a building permit
and a special permit issued by the Board of Appeals as an accessory
use. Applications for a building-mounted WECF shall comply with
the requirements of Article X, § 305-10.10, Special permits, of this
bylaw.
(1)
L.
§ 305-11.15 CHARTER § 305-11.15
C:433
Turbine size. The blade tip of a building-mounted WECF shall be no
lower than 15 feet from the ground elevation and no higher than 20
feet above the ridge line of the roof.
(2)
Noise. The WECF shall comply with the noise regulations listed in
Subsection H(4) of this bylaw.
(3)
(4) Number allowed. One WECF is allowed per building.
Additional submission requirements. Applicants shall submit
architectural elevation drawings of the building showing the
proposed WECF. Detailed manufacturer's specifications for the
WECF shall be submitted.
(5)
Shadow/flicker. Building-mounted WECF shall comply with
Subsection H(3), Shadow/flicker, of this bylaw.
(6)
Discontinuance. WECF that are not functionally operating for more
than one year or have been determined to be a safety hazard
by the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
be removed within 30 days of an order from the Building
Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer to remove the WECF.
(7)
Setbacks. Building-mounted WECF shall be set back from the
property line a distance equal to the length of the turbine blades
plus the minimum setback required in the applicable zoning
district.
(8)
Small-scale ground-mounted wind energy conversion facilities.
Small-scale ground-mounted WECF are allowed as an accessory
use subject to a building permit and a special permit issued by the
Board of Appeals. Applications for a small-scale ground-mounted
WECF shall comply with the requirements of Article X, § 305-10.10,
Special permits, and Article XII, Special Regulations, § 305-12.02,
Site plan approval, of this bylaw.
(1)
Turbine size. The blade tip of the WECF shall be no lower than 15
feet from the existing ground elevation. The maximum height of a
small-scale WECF is 150 feet above the existing ground elevation.
(2)
Noise. The WECF shall comply with the noise regulations listed in
Subsection H(4) of this bylaw.
(3)
Additional submission requirements. Applicants shall submit an
elevation drawing of the proposed WECF that illustrates the
ground-mounted WECF on the property in relation to existing
buildings, landscaping and other prominent site features. Detailed
manufacturer's specifications for the WECF shall be submitted.
(4)
Shadow/flicker. Ground-mounted WECF shall comply with
Subsection H(3), Shadow/flicker, of this bylaw. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
(5)
M.
§ 305-11.15 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-11.15
C:434
Discontinuance. Ground-mounted WECF that are not functionally
operating for more than one year or have been determined to be
a safety hazard by the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer shall be removed within 30 days of an order from the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer to remove the
WECF.
(6)
Location. Ground-mounted turbines are not permitted within the
front setback area of the lot, facing a public or private way.
(7)
Setbacks. Ground-mounted WECF shall comply with the setback
requirements for the zoning district, as required in Article VI,
Dimensional and Density Regulations, § 305-6.02. The setback
distance shall be measured from the tip of the blade to the lot line.
(8)
Security. All ground-mounted WECF shall comply with the
requirements of Subsection H(2) of this bylaw.
(9)
§ 305-11.15 CHARTER § 305-11.15
C:435

ARTICLE XII
Special Regulations
§ 305-12.01. Environmental performance standards. [Amended
4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
Any use permitted by right or special permit in any district shall not
be conducted in a manner as to emit any dangerous, noxious, injurious,
or otherwise objectionable fire, explosion, radioactivity or other hazard;
noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor or other form of environmental pollution;
electrical or other disturbance; glare; liquid or solid wastes; conditions
conducive to the breeding of insects or rodents; or other substance,
conditions or element in an amount as to affect adversely the surrounding
environment. The following standards shall apply:
Emissions shall be completely and effectively confined within the
building, or so regulated as to prevent any nuisance, hazard, or other
disturbance from being perceptible (without the use of instruments) at
any lot line of the premises on which the use is located.
A.
All activities and all storage of flammable and explosive materials at any
point shall be provided with adequate safety devices against fire and
explosion and adequate fire-fighting and fire-suppression devices and
equipment.
B.
No activities that emit dangerous radioactivity, at any point, and no
electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation, at any point, of
any equipment, other than that of the creator of such disturbance, shall
be permitted.
C.
No emission of visible smoke of a shade equal to or darker than No. 1 on
the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines
shall be permitted for a period or aggregate period of time in excess
of six minutes during any one hour, provided that at no time during
said six minutes shall the shade, density or appearance be equal to or
greater than No. 2 of the Chart.
D.
No emission which can cause any damage to health or animals or
vegetation or which can cause excessive soiling at any point shall be
permitted.
E.
No emission which contains particle matter shall exceed federal
standards of the Environmental Protection Agency.
F.
No facility regardless of its size shall discharge more than 40 pounds
per hour of dust and fumes to the atmosphere.
G.
No discharge, at any point, into a private sewerage system, stream,
the ground, or a municipal sewage disposal system of any material in
such a way, or of such a nature or temperature, as may contaminate
any running stream, water supply, or water body, or otherwise cause
the emission of dangerous or objectionable elements and accumulation
H.
§ 305-12.01 CHARTER § 305-12.01
C:437
of wastes conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects, shall be
permitted.
No activity shall be permitted which causes or creates a vibration, at
any point on any lot line, with a displacement and respective frequency
listed below.
Maximum Permitted Steady State Vibration Displacement
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Displacement
(inches)
10 and below 0.0008
10 to 20 0.0005
20 to 30 0.0003
30 to 40 0.0002
40 to 50 0.0001
50 to 60 0.0001
60 and over 0.0001
Maximum Permitted Impact Vibration Displacement
Frequency
(cycles per second)
Displacement
(inches)
10 and below 0.0016
10 to 20 0.0010
20 to 30 0.0006
30 to 40 0.0004
40 to 50 0.0002
50 to 60 0.0002
60 and over 0.0002
I.
Maximum permissible sound-pressure levels for noise radiated
continuously from a facility between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. at any lot
line shall be as follows:
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Sound Pressure Level
(decibel re 0.0002 dyne/cm2)
20 to 75 69
75 to 150 54
150 to 300 47
300 to 600 41
600 to 1,200 37
1,200 to 2,400 34
J.
§ 305-12.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.01
C:438
§ 305-12.02. Site plan approval.
Site plan review shall be used to evaluate the impacts of a proposed project.
Any request for a permit for construction, additions, exterior alteration,
relocation, or change in use of nonresidential use permitted by right or
by special permit in any district shall not be granted until a site plan for
such use has been submitted to and approved by the Board, except that the
Board may waive the requirement for site plan approval where the proposed
alteration or change in use is found to be minor.
Frequency Band
(cycles per second)
Sound Pressure Level
(decibel re 0.0002 dyne/cm2)
2,400 to 4,800 31
4,800 to 10,000 28
If this sound is not smooth and continuous, one of the following
corrections should be added to each of the actual decibel levels
given:
(a) Daytime operation only: +5.
(b) Noise source operates less than 20% of any hour period: +5.
(1)
No emission of odorous gases or odoriferous matter in such quantities
as to be offensive shall be permitted. Any process which may involve
the creation and/or emission of any odors shall be provided with a
secondary safeguard system. No objectionable odor greater than that
caused by 0.001202 ounce per thousand cubic feet of hydrogen sulfide
or any "Odor Threshold" as defined in Table III in Chapter 5 of Air
Pollution Abatement Manual, copyright 1951, by Manufacturing
Chemists Association, Inc., of Washington, D.C., shall be permitted.
K.
No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or from hightemperature
processes such as welding, shall be permitted when it is
determined that it will be hazardous or obnoxious.
L.
In the event of a conflict between the above performance standards and
state standards, the standards of a duly organized regional authority, or
local standards, the standards which are more stringent shall govern.
M.
All applicants for site plan review shall fully comply with the submission
requirements set forth in the Town of Marshfield Board of Appeals
rules and regulations except where said rules and regulations are
waived by the Board. Except as provided in § 305-10.09E hereof, any
person desiring approval of a site plan under this section shall submit
nine copies of said plan, with application for approval thereof, directly
to the Board. The Board shall, within 10 days after receipt thereof,
transmit one copy of such plan to the Planning Board, which said
Board may, in its discretion, investigate the case and report in writing
its recommendation to the Board. Applicants are encouraged to meet
A.
§ 305-12.01 CHARTER § 305-12.02
C:439
informally with the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer
prior to making a formal submission of plans to discuss site plan
requirements and consider possible waivers. The Board may provide a
set of guidelines to assist applicants in meeting site plan, architectural
and landscaping objectives.
Consultant review. If in the opinion of the Board the project requires
review by a consultant the applicant will be responsible for consultant
review fees as may be required by the Board of Appeals rules and
regulations and as governed by MGL c. 44, § 53G.
B.
A traffic study may be required by the Board as more fully described in
§ 305-11.10.
C.
The Board shall not take final action on such plan until it has received
a report thereon from the Planning Board, or until said Planning Board
has allowed 35 days to elapse after receipt of such plan without
submission of a report thereon.
D.
In exercising its jurisdiction under this section, the Board shall conform
to all procedural requirements applicable to the Board when deciding
requests for special permits as set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 9, and Article
X of this bylaw. [Amended 2009 ATM]
E.
Review criteria/required performance standards. In considering a site
plan under this section, the Board shall assure, to a degree consistent
with a reasonable use of the site for the purposes permitted or
permissible by the regulations of the district in which located:
Protection of adjoining premises against detrimental or offensive
uses on the site, including compliance with all dimensional
requirements set forth in this bylaw, and provision of adequate
landscaping, including the screening of adjacent residential uses,
provision of street trees, landscape islands in the parking lot and a
landscaped buffer along the street frontage.
(1)
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement
within the site, and in relation to adjacent streets, property, or
improvements, including compliance with § 305-11.10 where
required.
(2)
Adequacy of the methods of disposal for sewage, refuse and other
wastes resulting from the uses permitted or permissible on the site.
(3)
Adequacy of the proposed drainage system within and adjacent
to the site to manage all increased runoff resulting from the
development on site, and adequacy of the soil erosion plan and
any plan for protection of steep slopes, both during and after
construction. Site plan review shall also include review of an
operations and maintenance plan for the approved drainage system
to be certified by a registered professional engineer.
(4)
F.
§ 305-12.02 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.02
C:440
Compliance with §§ 305-8.07 and 305-8.08 of this bylaw, including
adequacy of space for the off-street loading and unloading of
vehicles, goods, products, materials, and equipment incidental to
the normal operation of the establishment.
(5)
Adequacy of lighting, including compliance with § 305-8.09 of this
bylaw, such that all lighting and other sources of illumination,
whether interior or exterior, and all intense light emanating from
operations or equipment shall be shielded from direct view at
normal eye level from adjacent properties.
(6)
Building sites shall minimize any material or significant adverse
impacts on steep slopes, floodplains, scenic views, grade changes
and wetlands.
(7)
In the B-1 Zoning District, the development shall be reasonably
consistent with respect to setbacks, placement of parking,
landscaping and entrances and exits with surrounding buildings
and development. If there is more than one building on the site, the
buildings shall relate harmoniously to each other in architectural
style, site location and building exits and entrances.
(8)
Where a proposal is within the jurisdiction of the Water Resource
Protection District (WRPD), compliance with § 305-13.03F,
Performance and design standards for all activities. [Added April
2011 ATM]
(9)
Conformance with all appropriate provisions of the Zoning Bylaw
except where variance from such provision is applied for and
approved by the Board. All permits issued under this bylaw shall
be conditioned upon receipt of all other required permits, including
Board of Health; Conservation Commission if necessary; all
required permits set out in § 305-10.10, Article XI, Article XIII and
Article XV; and others as required.
(10)
Design objectives. The following objectives, in addition to any standards
prescribed elsewhere in this bylaw, shall be utilized by the Board during
its site plan review. These objectives are intended to provide specific
guidelines for the Board and the applicant.
Architectural details. Architectural details of new buildings and
additions, textures of wall and roof materials should be harmonious
with the building's overall architectural style and should preserve
and enhance the character of the surrounding area.
(1)
Building articulation. Giving emphasis to architectural elements
(including windows, balconies, porches, entries, etc.) that create
a complementary pattern or rhythm, dividing large buildings into
smaller identifiable pieces.
(2)
Building form and features. The mass, proportion and scale of the
building, roof shape, roof pitch, and proportions and relationships
(3)
G.
§ 305-12.02 CHARTER § 305-12.02
C:441
between doors and windows should be harmonious among
themselves and with those of the surrounding area.
Building location. Proposed buildings and structures shall be
integrated as much as possible within the existing building
locations, landscape and terrain. The building's location shall be
orientated parallel or perpendicular to the street. Where the
minimum setback cannot be maintained by the building, the
applicant shall provide adequate spatial definitions through the
use of walls, fences and/or other elements which will maintain the
street line.
(4)
Building design. The design of proposed buildings, structures and
additions shall complement, whenever feasible, the general
setback, roofline, roof pitch, arrangement of openings, color,
exterior materials, proportion and scale of existing buildings in the
vicinity.
(5)
Spatial definition. Define various areas both public and private
with walks, plantings, walls, fences and other elements that are in
keeping with the overall architectural design.
(6)
Special features. Exposed machinery, utility structures and areas
for parking, loading, storage, service and disposal shall be
screened from adjoining properties and streets.
(7)
Lighting. Lighting should match the architectural style of the
building and comply with the Zoning Bylaw, § 305-8.09.
(8)
Pedestrian furnishings. Benches, bollards, lighting, street trees,
refuse containers, flowers boxes, and canopies shall be provided
and shall be consistent with the character of the development.
(9)
Protection of historic character. When renovating an historic
building, character-defining exterior elements of the historic
building shall be preserved. Signage should be compatible with the
historic character of the building.
(10)
The Board shall have the power to modify or amend its approval of
a site plan on application of the owner, lessee or mortgagee of the
premises, or upon its own motion if such power is reserved by the Board
in its original approval. All of the provisions of this section shall, where
apt, be applicable to such modification or amendment.
H.
The site plan submitted to the Board shall show, among other things
as may be required by the Board in the proper administration of this
section, all existing and proposed buildings, structures, parking areas,
loading areas, driveway openings, driveways, walkways, access and
egress points, service areas, recreation areas and other open spaces,
including dimensions and all elevations; easements within the lot;
existing and proposed on-site wells, water supply systems, storm
drainage systems, utilities, sites for enclosed refuse containers and
I.
§ 305-12.02 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.02
C:442
location and capacity of septic systems; wetlands, streams, bodies of
water, and drainage swales; the location and description of all existing
and proposed topographic features on the lot and adjoining areas
within 50 feet of said lot, including two-foot contours, walks, fences,
walls, planting areas, and greenbelts; and the amount(s) in square
feet of proposed building(s), impervious surface area and open space
(natural and landscaped) of the lot. The Board may request additional
information or data it judges to be necessary to render its decision.
Compliance and enforcement.
The final approved site plan will be valid for two years and not
contingent on continued ownership. Failure to actively begin
construction within that time will require a new submittal.
Construction, once commenced, shall be prosecuted diligently to
conclusion. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
(1)
No building permit shall be issued by the Building Commissioner/
Zoning Enforcement Officer for any development subject to this
section and no construction or site preparation shall be started
until a decision of the Board approving a site plan has been filed
with the Town Clerk and all other required permits have been
received and filed with the Town Clerk.
(2)
The Board may require submittal of an as-built plan, certified by
a registered professional land surveyor and engineer, to the Board
and Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer before the
issuance of a permanent certificate of occupancy. The as-built plan
shall attest to a development's conformity to its approved site
plan by indicating landscaping, buildings, drainage flow, number of
parking stalls, and limits of parking areas and drives. No activity
subject to site plan approval shall be conducted on the site unless,
in the opinion of the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer, the development or approved phase thereof has been
substantially completed according to the approved site plan, and
unless the proposed activity was reviewed by the Board pursuant
to the site plan approval procedure. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM
by Art. 12]
(3)
The owner(s) and/or developer(s) of any lot, and all successors in
interest, shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaped
open space and buffers. Landscaping shall be maintained in good
condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance
and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Screening shall
be provided for storage areas, loading docks, dumpsters, rooftop
equipment, utility buildings and similar features.
(4)
A permanent landscaping irrigation system, sufficient in the
Board's determination, shall be provided by the installation of a
sprinkler system and/or hose bibs placed at appropriate locations.
(5)
J.
§ 305-12.02 CHARTER § 305-12.02
C:443
§ 305-12.03. Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations. [Added April 2011 ATM]
Whenever possible, "gray" or reused water, or wells, shall be used
as the water source for the irrigation system.
Maintenance bond. The Board may require a bond to ensure that
required landscape plantings are maintained and survive for up to
two growing seasons following completion of planting.
(6)
Any changes in the approved site plan or in the activity to be
conducted on the site shall be submitted to the Board for review
and approval.
(7)
Purpose.
The purpose of this bylaw is to promote the creation of new largescale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations by providing
standards for the placement, design, construction, operation,
monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that
address public safety and minimize impacts on scenic, natural and
historic resources and to provide adequate financial assurance for
the eventual decommissioning of such installations.
(1)
The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the
construction, operation, and/or repair of large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installations.
(2)
A.
Applicability. This section applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations proposed to be constructed after the effective
date of this bylaw. These regulations also pertain to physical
modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of
installations or related equipment.
B.
General requirements for all large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations. The following requirements apply to all largescale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations to be sited in the
I-1 Zoning District:
Compliance with all other laws and regulations. The construction
and operation of all large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and
federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable
safety, construction, electrical and communications requirements.
All buildings and fixtures forming part of a large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed in
accordance with the State Building Code.
(1)
Building permit and building inspection. No large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed,
installed or modified as provided in this section without first
obtaining a building permit.
(2)
C.
§ 305-12.02 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.03
C:444
Site plan review.
Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
with 250 KW or larger rated nameplate capacity shall undergo
a site plan review in accordance with the requirements of
§ 305-12.02, Site plan approval, prior to construction,
installation or modification as provided in this section. In
addition to compliance with the requirements of § 305-12.02,
Site plan approval, the following additional information shall
be provided at the time of submission of the application:
Drawings of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall be stamped by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed
layout of the system and any potential shading from
nearby structures;
[1]
One- or three-line electrical diagram detailing the solar
photovoltaic installation, associated components, and
electrical interconnection methods, with all National
Electrical Code compliant disconnects and over-current
devices;
[2]
Documentation of the major system components to be
used, including the PV panels, mounting system, and
inverter;
[3]
Name, address, and contact information for proposed
system installer;
[4]
[5] An operation and maintenance plan;
[6] Proof of liability insurance.
(a)
The Board may waive documentary requirements as it deems
appropriate.
(b)
The by-right site plan approval process administered by the
Board of Appeals for large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall be completed within one year of
the date of submission of a complete application package. All
other locally required permits for large-scale ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installation shall also be issued within one
year of the date of submission of a complete application
package.
(c)
(3)
Independent consultants. Upon submission of the site plan
application, the Board will be authorized to hire outside
consultants, as needed, to advise it on technical issues related
to the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
(4)
§ 305-12.03 CHARTER § 305-12.03
C:445
application, pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G. The applicant will be
required to pay the consultant's fees.
Site control. The applicant shall submit documentation of actual or
prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to allow
for construction and operation of the proposed large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation.
(5)
Operation and maintenance plan. The applicant shall submit a
plan for the operation and maintenance of the large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation, which shall include
measures for maintaining safe access to the installation,
stormwater management, as well as general procedures for
operational maintenance of the installation.
(6)
Utility notification. No large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall be constructed until evidence has
been given to the Board that the utility company that operates
the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been
informed of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation owner's or operator's intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from
this requirement.
(7)
Setbacks. The setbacks for large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations shall comply with the setbacks required
in § 305-6.02 for the I-1 Zoning District.
(8)
Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to large-scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be subject to
reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of
structures, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building
coverage requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including
but not limited to equipment shelters, storage facilities,
transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible
with each other. Structures should be screened from view by an
evergreen buffer of vegetation and/or a six-foot-high solid fence to
avoid adverse visual impacts.
(9)
Lighting. Lighting of large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall comply with § 305-8.09. Lighting of
other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall
be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes
and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where
feasible, lighting of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall be directed downward and shall
incorporate full cutoff fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(10)
Signage.
Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation shall comply with § 305-7.05. A sign shall be
(a)
(11)
§ 305-12.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.03
C:446
provided that identifies the owner and provides a twenty-fourhour
emergency contact phone number.
Solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying
any advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the large-scale ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installation.
(b)
Utility connections. All utility connections from the large-scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be located
underground. In the event that site constraints make it cost
prohibitive due to soil conditions and/or topography of the site, or
any requirements of the utility provider, the Board may wave this
requirement. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections
may be above ground if required by the utility provider.
(12)
Safety and environmental standards.
Emergency services. The facility's owner or operator shall provide
a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic and site plan
to the Fire Chief. The facility's owner or operator shall cooperate
with public safety officials in developing an emergency response
plan. All means of shutting down the large-scale ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked. The owner
or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries
throughout the life of the installation.
(1)
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to only what is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the facility.
(2)
D.
Monitoring and maintenance.
Maintenance. The facility's owner or operator shall maintain the
facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security
measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable
to the Fire Chief. The owner or operator shall be responsible for
the cost of maintaining the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as
a public way.
(1)
Modifications. All material modifications to a large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation made after issuance of the
building permit shall require approval of the Board.
(2)
E.
Abandonment or decommissioning.
Removal requirements. Any large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its useful
life or has been abandoned, as described in Subsection F(2), shall
be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the
(1)
F.
§ 305-12.03 CHARTER § 305-12.03
C:447
§ 305-12.04. Accessory photovoltaic installations over parking lots.
[Added 10-15-2018 STM by Art. 2138]
installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued
operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Board by
certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and
plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security
barriers and transmission lines from the site.
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(b)
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Board may allow the owner or operator
to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in
order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
(c)
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall
be considered abandoned when it fails to operate for more than
one year without the written consent of the Board. If the owner
or operator of the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation fails to remove the installation in accordance with the
requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or
the proposed date of decommissioning, the Town may enter the
property and physically remove the installation.
(2)
Financial surety. Applicants shall provide a form of surety, either
through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of
removing the entire large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installation in the event the Town has to intervene by removing
the large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation and
remediating the landscape. The applicant shall submit a surety
bond in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the
Board, but in no event to exceed more than 125% of the cost
of removal. Such surety will not be required for municipally or
state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall submit a fully
inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared
by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The amount shall include a
mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
(3)
Purpose - The purpose of this bylaw is to provide standards for the
placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification
A.
38.Editor's Note: This article also provided for the redesignation of former § 12.04, Medical
marijuana facilities, as § 12.05, and former § 12.05, Recreational marijuana retailers, as
§ 12.06.
§ 305-12.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.04
C:448
and removal of accessory photovoltaic over parking lots installations
that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and
historic resources and to provide adequate financial assurance for the
eventual decommissioning of such installations. The provisions set forth
in this section shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or repair
of said solar photovoltaic installations.
Applicability - This section applies to photovoltaic installations that
require a special permit or by-right with site plan review in the Table
of Use, Accessory uses (see § 305-5.04). By-right with site plan review
applications shall submit an application to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Special permit applications shall be subject to approval by the Planning
Board acting as the special permit granting authority (SPGA).
B.
General requirements - The following requirements shall apply to solar
photovoltaic installations.
Compliance with all other laws and regulations - The construction
and operation of all solar photovoltaic installations shall be
consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements,
including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction,
electrical and communications requirements. All buildings and
fixtures forming part of a photovoltaic installation shall be
constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.
(1)
Building permit and building inspection - No solar photovoltaic
installation shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided
in this section without obtaining a building permit.
(2)
Special permit and/or site plan review - Photovoltaic installations
shall be reviewed and approved by either the Planning Board under
a special permit or the Board of Appeals under site plan review
prior to applying for a building permit. To determine whether a
facility will require a special permit or site plan review, please
review Accessory Use Number 27 in § 305-5.04, Table of Use
Regulations. Submittal to either Board shall be in accordance with
the requirements of § 12.02, Site plan approval. In addition, to
comply with the requirements of § 12.02, Site plan approval, the
following information shall be provided at the time of submission of
an application to either Board.
Drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation shall be
stamped by a registered professional engineer licensed to
practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the
proposed layout of the system and any potential shading from
nearby structures;
(a)
One- or three-line electrical diagrams detailing the solar
photovoltaic installation, associated components, and
electrical interconnection methods, with all National Electrical
Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices;
(b)
(3)
C.
§ 305-12.04 CHARTER § 305-12.04
C:449
Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter;
(c)
An operation and maintenance plan which shall include
measures for maintaining safe access to the installation,
stormwater controls, as well as general procedures for
operational maintenance of the installation.
(d)
Information on noise (inverter) and reflectivity/glare of solar
panels and identify potential impacts to abutters.
(e)
Confirmation prepared and signed by a registered professional
engineer that the photovoltaic facility complies with all
applicable federal and state standards;
(f)
A written report prepared and signed by a registered
professional engineer, explaining how the photovoltaic facility
will be connected to the "power grid" and the technical,
economic and other reasons for the proposed location and
design.
(g)
Proposed changes to the site, existing and proposed grading,
vegetation clearing, planting, noise barriers, security, exterior
lighting, screening and structures;
(h)
Soil information, depth to groundwater and distance to
municipal wells;
(i)
Description of existing wildlife habitat (noting any cold
waterways or other unique features) within a 1/2 mile radius
and a proposed habitat enhancement plan;
(j)
Name, address, and contact information for proposed system
installer;
(k)
Proof of liability insurance.
The Board may waive documentary requirements as it deems
appropriate.
(l)
Independent consultants - Upon submission of the site plan
application, the Board will be authorized to hire outside
consultants, as needed, to advise them on technical issues related
to the photovoltaic installation application, pursuant to Chapter 44
Section 53G of Massachusetts General Laws. The applicant will be
required to pay the consultant's fees.
(4)
Site control - The applicant shall submit documentation of actual
or prospective access and control of the project site sufficient to
allow for construction and operation of the proposed photovoltaic
installation.
(5)
§ 305-12.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.04
C:450
Operation and maintenance plan - The applicant shall submit a plan
for the operation and maintenance of the photovoltaic installation,
which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the
installation, stormwater management, as well as general
procedures for operational maintenance of the installation.
(6)
Utility notification - No photovoltaic installation shall be
constructed until evidence has been given to the Board that the
utility company that operates the electrical grid where the
installation is to be located has been informed of the solar
photovoltaic installation owner or operator's intent to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall
be exempt from this requirement.
(7)
Safety and environmental standards.
Emergency services - The owner or operator shall provide a copy
of the project summary, electrical schematic and site plan to the
Fire Chief. The facility's owner or operator shall cooperate with
public safety officials in developing an emergency response plan.
All means of shutting down the large-scale ground mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked. The owner or
operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries
throughout the life of the installation.
(1)
Parking lot mounted and medium scale photovoltaic facility setback
- Parking lot mounted and medium scale photovoltaic facilities shall
meet the minimum setback for the applicable zoning district as
provided in the Table of Dimensional and Density Requirements,
§ 305-6.10.
(2)
Solar energy system, parking lot mounted and medium scale
transformers and/or inverters shall meet the front, side and rear
setbacks. Said transformers and/or inverters shall be enclosed in a
sound barrier. Said sound barrier proposal shall include a letter of
assurance of the sound reduction rating, signed and stamped by a
registered professional civil engineer.
(3)
Hazardous materials - Solar modular panels shall not contain
hazardous materials. A letter of assurance on the materials
contained within the solar panels from the manufacturer and by
a registered professional civil engineer shall be provided to the
Board.
(4)
Appurtenant structures - All appurtenant structures, including but
not limited to equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers,
and substations shall be architecturally compatible with each other
and shall be screened from the view of persons not on the parcel.
(5)
Solar fields shall be properly visually buffered from residential
properties. Buffering may be provided by use of landscaping and/or
fencing.
(6)
D.
§ 305-12.04 CHARTER § 305-12.04
C:451
The owner, operator, or his successors in interest shall remove any
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation which has reached
the end of its useful life or has been abandoned. The owner or
operator shall physically remove the installation no more than
150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner
or operator shall notify the permit granting authority (Planning
Board/Zoning Board) by certified mail of the proposed date of
discontinued operations and plans for removal.
(7)
Lighting - Lighting of photovoltaic installations shall comply with
§ 305-8.09. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as
appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety
and operational purposes and shall be reasonably shielded from
abutting properties. Where feasible, lighting of the photovoltaic
installation shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full
cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(8)
Signage - Signs on photovoltaic installation shall comply with
§ 305-7.05. A sign shall be provided that identifies the owner and
provides a twenty-four-hour emergency contact phone number.
Solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying
any advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the photovoltaic installation.
(9)
Utility connections - All utility connections from the photovoltaic
installation shall be located underground. In the event that site
constraints make it cost prohibitive due to soil conditions and/or
topography of the site, or any requirements of the utility provider,
the Board may waive this requirement. Electrical transformers for
utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the
utility provider.
(10)
Monitoring and maintenance.
Maintenance - The facility's owner or operator shall maintain the
facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be
limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security
measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable
to the Fire Chief. The owner or operator shall be responsible for
the cost of maintaining the photovoltaic installation and any access
road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
(1)
Modifications - All material modifications to a photovoltaic
installation made after issuance of the building permit shall require
approval of the Board.
(2)
E.
Abandonment or decommissioning.
Removal requirements - Any photovoltaic installation which has
reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall
be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the
installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued
(1)
F.
§ 305-12.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.04
C:452
operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Board by
certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and
plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all photovoltaic installations, structures,
equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the
site.
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(b)
Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Board may allow the owner or operator
to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in
order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
(c)
Abandonment - Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
the photovoltaic installation shall be considered abandoned when
it fails to operate for more than one year without the written
consent of the Board. If the owner or operator of the photovoltaic
installation fails to remove the installation in accordance with the
requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or
the proposed date of decommissioning, the Town may enter the
property and physically remove the installation.
(2)
Financial surety - Applicants shall provide a form of surety, either
through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost
of removing the entire photovoltaic installation in the event the
Town has to intervene by removing the photovoltaic installation
and remediating the property. The applicant shall submit a surety
bond in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the
Board, but in no event to exceed more than 125% of the cost
of removal. Such surety will not be required for municipality- or
state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall submit a fully
inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal and
prepared by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The amount shall include a
mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
(3)
Standards for review and approval. The Planning Board shall consider,
in addition to the requirements above, the following specific criteria:
The Board finds in writing that each of the review standards set
forth above has been met, that the location of the solar photovoltaic
facility is suitable and that the size and design are the minimum
necessary for that purpose.
(1)
The SPGA shall also impose, in addition to any applicable
conditions specified in this section, such conditions as it finds
reasonably appropriate to safeguard the neighborhood or
otherwise serve the purposes of this section, including, but not
(2)
G.
§ 305-12.04 CHARTER § 305-12.04
C:453
§ 305-12.05. Medical marijuana facilities. [Added 4-29-2014 ATM by
Art. 15]
limited to: screening, lighting, fences, modification of the exterior
appearance of the structures, limitation upon size, method of
access or traffic features, parking, removal upon cessation of use
or other requirements. Such conditions shall be imposed in writing
and the applicant may be required to post bond or other surety for
compliance with said conditions in an amount satisfactory to the
SPGA.
Modification: Any proposed changes in the approved special permit
shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review and approval.
H.
Approval time frame: The special permit is granted for a period of
two years and shall lapse if substantial use or construction has not
been commenced by such date except for good cause shown, and
provided that said construction, once begun, shall be actively and
continuously pursued to completion within a reasonable time. Good
cause and reasonable time shall be determined by a vote of the SPGA.
I.
Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Planning Board
under this section may appeal to the Superior Court, the Land Court
or the District Court pursuant to Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts
General Laws.
J.
Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw is:
To provide for the establishment of medical marijuana facilities in
locations appropriate for the use and to regulate the use under
strict conditions in accordance with the passage of the Citizens
Initiative Petition No. 11-11 (Question No. 3 on the November 2012
state ballot) and 105 CMR 725.100.
(1)
To minimize the adverse impacts of medical marijuana facilities on
adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools and other
places where children congregate, local historic districts, and other
land uses potentially incompatible with said facilities.
(2)
To regulate the siting, design, placement, security, safety,
monitoring, modification, and removal of medical marijuana
facilities.
(3)
A.
Applicability. No medical marijuana facility shall be established except
in compliance with the provisions of § 305-12.04. Nothing in this bylaw
shall be construed to supersede any state or federal laws or regulations
governing the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs. The commercial
cultivation, production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or
wholesale trade, distribution or dispensing of marijuana for medical use
is prohibited unless permitted as a medical marijuana facility under
§ 305-12.04 of this bylaw.
B.
§ 305-12.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.05
C:454
General requirements and conditions for all medical marijuana
facilities.
All non-exempt medical marijuana facilities shall be contained
within a building or structure.
(1)
No medical marijuana facilities shall have a gross floor area of less
than 2,500 square feet or in excess of 20,000 square feet.
(2)
Medical marijuana facilities shall not be located in buildings that
contain any medical doctor's offices or the offices of any other
professional practitioner authorized to prescribe the use of medical
marijuana.
(3)
The hours of operation of medical marijuana facilities shall be
set by the special permit granting authority, the Board of Appeals
(BA), but in no event shall said facilities be open and/or operating
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(4)
No medical marijuana facility shall be located on the same lot or
a lot which abuts the Marshfield Boys & Girls Club property, any
public or private school building, day-care facility or any public
playground, recreation facility, athletic field or other park where
children congregate, or any residential zoning district and the
PMUD Overlay District.
(5)
No smoking, burning or consumption of any product containing
marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the
premises of a medical marijuana facility.
(6)
Medical marijuana facilities shall not be located inside a building
containing residential units, including transient housing such as
motels and dormitories, or inside a trailer, recreational vehicle, or
movable or stationary mobile vehicle.
(7)
Notwithstanding any provisions of Article VII of this bylaw, signage
for all medical marijuana facilities shall include the following
language: "Registration card issued by the MA Department of
Public Health required." The required text shall be a minimum of
two inches in height. The sign shall be located in a visible location
near the main entrance to the facility. Exterior signs shall identify
the name of the establishment but shall not contain any other
advertising information.
(8)
Medical marijuana facilities shall provide the Marshfield Police
Department, Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer
and the BA with the names, phone numbers and e-mail addresses
of all management staff and keyholders to whom one can provide
notice if there are operating problems associated with the
establishment and update that list whenever there is any change in
management staff or keyholders.
(9)
C.
§ 305-12.05 CHARTER § 305-12.05
C:455
Special permit requirements.
Medical marijuana facilities shall only be allowed by special permit
issued by the Marshfield Board of Appeals in accordance with MGL
c. 40A, § 9, and § 305-10.10 of this bylaw, subject to the following
statements, regulations, requirements, conditions and limitations.
(1)
A special permit for a medical marijuana facility shall be limited to
one or more of the following uses that shall be determined by the
BA:
Cultivation of marijuana for medical use (horticulture), except
that sites protected under MGL c. 40A, § 3, shall not require a
special permit;
(a)
Processing and packaging of marijuana for medical use,
including marijuana that is in the form of smoking materials,
food products, oils, aerosols, ointments, and other products;
(b)
Retail sale or distribution of marijuana for medical use to
qualifying patients.
(c)
(2)
In addition to the application requirements established by the
Board of Appeals by rule and elsewhere in this bylaw, a special
permit application for a medical marijuana facility shall include the
following:
The name and address of each owner of the establishment and
property owner.
(a)
Copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the
applicant by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of
its agencies for the establishment.
(b)
Evidence of the applicant's right to use the site for the
establishment, such as a deed or lease.
(c)
If the applicant is a business organization, a statement under
oath disclosing all of its owners, shareholders, partners,
members, managers, directors, officers, or other similarly
situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of
the above are entities rather than persons, the applicant must
disclose the names and addresses of all individuals associated
with that entity.
(d)
A certified abutters list of all parties in interest entitled to
notice of the hearing for the special permit application, taken
from the most recent tax list of the Town and certified by the
Town Assessor.
(e)
Proposed security measures for the medical marijuana facility,
including lighting, fencing, surveillance cameras, gates and
alarms, etc., to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the
(f)
(3)
D.
§ 305-12.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.05
C:456
premises from theft. The security measures shall be reviewed
and approved by the Police Department.
The facility shall provide service to qualified patients by
appointment only.
(g)
(h) The facility shall provide free delivery to all qualified patients.
No products shall be displayed in the facility's windows or be
visible from any street or parking lot.
(i)
(j) All employees shall be 18 years of age or older.
Mandatory findings. In addition to the findings required under
§ 305-10.10, the Board of Appeals shall not issue a special permit
for a medical marijuana facility unless it finds that:
The establishment is designed to minimize any adverse visual
or economic impacts on abutters and other parties in interest,
as defined in MGL c. 40A, § 11;
(a)
The applicant clearly demonstrates that it will meet all the
permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and is in compliance with all
applicable state laws and regulations; and
(b)
The applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and
requirements of § 305-12.04.
(c)
(4)
Annual reporting. All medical marijuana facilities permitted under
this bylaw shall as a condition of its special permit file an annual
report with the BA, Police Chief and the Town Clerk no later than
January 31 of each year. The annual report shall include a copy of
all current applicable state licenses for the establishment and/or its
owners and demonstrate continued compliance with the conditions
of the special permit. In the event that the annual report is not
received by January 31 or if the report is incomplete, the owners of
the medical marijuana facility will be required to appear before the
BA to provide the required information.
(5)
A special permit granted under this section shall have a term
limited to the duration of the applicant's ownership or lease of the
premises as a medical marijuana facility. A special permit may be
transferred only with the approval of the BA in the form of an
amendment to the special permit with all information required in
§ 305-12.04.
(6)
Abandonment or discontinuance of use.
The Board of Appeals shall require the applicant to post a bond
prior to the issuance of a building permit to cover costs for the
removal of the medical marijuana facility in the event the Town
must remove the facility. The value of the bond shall be based
(1)
E.
§ 305-12.05 CHARTER § 305-12.05
C:457
§ 305-12.06. Recreational marijuana retailer. [Added 4-23-2018
ATM by Art. 17]
upon the ability to completely remove all the items noted in this
Subsection E and properly clean the facility at prevailing wages.
The value of the bond shall be developed based upon the applicant
providing the Board of Appeals with three written bids to meet the
noted requirements. An incentive factor of 1.5 shall be applied to
all bonds to ensure compliance and adequate funds for the Town
to remove the improvement in compliance with law at prevailing
wages.
A special permit shall lapse if not exercised within one year of
issuance.
(2)
A medical marijuana facility shall be required to remove all
materials, plants, equipment and other paraphernalia:
(a) Prior to surrendering its state-issued licenses or permits; or
Within six months of ceasing operations, whichever comes
first.
(b)
(3)
Severability. If any provision of this section or the application of any
such provision to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, the
remainder of this section, to the extent it can be given effect, or the
application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other than
those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and to
this end the provisions of this section are severable.
F.
Purpose.
To provide for the placement of recreational marijuana retailers
in appropriate places under conditions in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 94G.
(1)
To minimize the adverse impacts of a recreational marijuana
retailer on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools,
other places where children congregate and other sensitive land
uses.
(2)
To regulate the siting, design, placement, security, safety,
monitoring, modification and discontinuance of a recreational
marijuana retailer.
(3)
A.
Applicability.
No recreational marijuana retailer shall be established except in
compliance with the provisions of 305 Attachment 1 (Table of Use
Regulations) and this § 305-12.05, Recreational marijuana retailer.
(1)
Nothing in this section shall be construed to supersede federal or
state laws governing the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs.
(2)
B.
§ 305-12.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.06
C:458
If any provision of this section or the application of any such
provision to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, the
remainder of this section, to the extent it can be given effect, or the
application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other
than those held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and to this
end the provisions of this section are severable.
(3)
General requirements.
All recreational marijuana retailers shall be contained within a
secure building or structure.
(1)
The hours of operation of the recreational marijuana retailer shall
be set by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2)
No recreational marijuana retailer shall be located within 500 feet
of a property boundary line of any lot in use as a private or public
school, college, licensed day-care facility, library, park, playground,
recreational or athletic fields or the Boy's and Girl's Club or similar
place where children typically congregate. The distance shall be
measured in a straight line from property boundary line to property
boundary line.
(3)
No smoking, burning or consumption of any product containing
marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the
premises.
(4)
No recreational marijuana retailer shall be located inside a building
containing residential units, including transient housing such as
motels and dormitories, or inside a movable or mobile structure
such as a car, van, truck, trailer cargo container.
(5)
Recreational marijuana retailers shall not have drive-through
service.
(6)
No signage shall be permitted that contains designs or symbols
that depict or display in any way marijuana products, equipment or
plants, or other similar materials.
(7)
No outside displays or storage of marijuana, related supplies or
promotional materials are allowed.
(8)
All recreational marijuana retailers shall be ventilated in such a
manner that no:
Pesticides, insecticides, or other chemicals or products used
in cultivation or processing are dispersed into the outside
atmosphere.
(a)
Odor from marijuana can be detected by a person with a
normal sense of smell at the exterior of the building.
(b)
(9)
C.
D. Special permit requirements.
§ 305-12.06 CHARTER § 305-12.06
C:459
A recreational marijuana retailer shall only be allowed by special
permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with MGL
c. 40A, § 9, the Marshfield Zoning Bylaws and subject to the
following regulations, requirements and conditions.
(1)
No special permit shall be issued without a site plan approval
(§§ 305-3.05 through 305-12.02) by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
At a minimum, said site plan shall meet all dimensional, parking,
landscaping and signage requirements.
(2)
The special permit shall limit the recreational marijuana retailer to
one or more of the following uses:
(a) Marijuana retailer.
(b) Marijuana product manufacturer.
Marijuana transportation or distribution facility as conditioned
by the Zoning Board of Appeals with review by the Police
Department.
(c)
(3)
In addition, an application for a recreational marijuana retailer
shall include the following:
Name and address with contact phone number and email of
owner/applicant of the facility.
(a)
Copies of all approved required licenses and permits (to said
same owner of the facility) by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Cannabis Control Commission and any of its
other agencies for the facility.
(b)
Evidence of the applicant's right to use the site as a
recreational marijuana retailer facility by means of a purchase
and sales agreement, deed, owners authorization or lease.
(c)
Proposed security measures for the recreational marijuana
retailer facility, including lighting, fencing, gates, alarms,
surveillance cameras, etc., to ensure the safety of persons
and products from theft. A letter from the Marshfield Police
Chief, or designee, acknowledging review and approval of the
recreational marijuana retailer facility and its security is
required. To extent allowed by law, all such documents
submitted by the applicant to the Police Chief shall be
confidential.
(d)
All application requirements for site plan approval as specified
in §§ 305-3.05 through 305-12.02 unless waived by the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(e)
Provide the Police Department with the names, phone numbers
and email addresses of all management staff and keyholders to
whom one can provide notice if there are operating problems
(f)
(4)
§ 305-12.06 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-12.06
C:460
associated with the establishment and update that list
whenever there is any change in management staff or
keyholders.
Findings. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not issue a special permit
for a recreational marijuana retailer unless it finds the following:
The establishment is designed to minimize any adverse impacts on
abutters and other parties of interest, as defined in MGL c. 40A,
§ 11.
(1)
The establishment demonstrates that it will meet all the permitting
requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts and will comply with all applicable state and local
laws and regulations.
(2)
The applicant has satisfied all of the conditions, findings and
requirements set forth herein.
(3)
E.
Transfer of special permit. A special permit granted under this section
shall have a term limited to the duration of the applicant's ownership
of the recreational marijuana retail facility. A special permit may be
transferred only by the approval of the special permit granting
authority after a public hearing and supported by all updated
information required herein.
F.
Abandonment or discontinuance of use. A special permit shall lapse
if not exercised within one year of issuance. A recreational marijuana
retailer facility shall be required to remove all materials, plants,
equipment and other paraphernalia within three months of ceasing
operations.
G.
§ 305-12.06 CHARTER § 305-12.06
C:461

ARTICLE XIII
Superimposed Districts
§ 305-13.01. Inland Wetlands District.
Purpose of district. The purpose of this district is:
To preserve and protect the streams and other watercourses and
their adjoining lands in the Town of Marshfield.
(1)
To protect the health and safety of persons and property against
the hazards of flooding and contamination.
(2)
To preserve and maintain the groundwater table for water supply
purposes.
(3)
To protect the community against the detrimental use and
development of lands adjoining such watercourses.
(4)
To conserve the watershed areas of the Town of Marshfield for the
health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(5)
A.
Definition of district. The Inland Wetlands District is superimposed over
any other district established by this bylaw. Except as noted below, all
lands in Marshfield which have been identified by the Soil Conservation
Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture as being characterized
by poorly drained and very poorly drained mineral soils and very poorly
drained soils formed by inorganic deposits and having a water table at
or near the surface seven to nine months of the year are included in the
district. Where these soils fall within the Coastal Wetlands District, the
area shall be considered as in the Coastal Wetlands District. A parcel of
land with respect to which a building or use permit is sought shall not
be subject to the provisions of this Article XIII if:
It is partially outside the Inland Wetlands or Coastal Wetlands
Districts; and
(1)
The contiguous portion outside the boundaries of such districts is
equal to at least 80% of the minimum area requirements of Article
VI; and
(2)
The proposed building or use will take place on the portion of such
parcel which is outside such Inland or Coastal Wetlands Districts.
(3)
B.
Permitted use. Municipal use, such as waterworks, pumping stations,
essential services and parks, is permitted under this section. Land in
the Inland Wetlands District may be used for any purpose otherwise
permitted in the underlying district except that:
No structure intended for human occupancy or use on a permanent
basis having water and sewage facilities and no other building,
wall, dam or structure (except flagpoles, signs and the like)
intended for permanent use shall be erected, constructed, altered,
(1)
C.
§ 305-13.01 CHARTER § 305-13.01
C:463
enlarged, or otherwise created or moved for any purpose unless
a special permit from the Board is issued. However, without a
special permit, a structure existing at the time this bylaw becomes
effective may be reconstructed or repaired after a fire or other
casualty and a dwelling or buildings accessory to a dwelling
existing at the time this bylaw becomes effective may be altered or
enlarged provided no other provisions of these bylaws are violated.
Dumping, filling, excavating or transferring of any earth material
within the district is prohibited unless a special permit from the
Board is issued. However, this subsection does not prohibit
ordinary gardening activities in lawn or garden areas which are
used for such purposes at the time this bylaw becomes effective.
(2)
No ponds or pools shall be created or other changes in
watercourses, for swimming, fishing or other recreational uses,
agricultural uses, scenic features or drainage improvements or any
other uses, unless a special permit from the Board is issued.
(3)
Permit and procedure.
Any person(s) desiring such a permit shall submit an application
to the Board of Appeals which shall comply with the conditions
and submittal requirements as listed in the following subsections.
(Such conditions shall include, where applicable, approval by the
Board of Selectmen, the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection, and the Massachusetts Department of
Transportation under MGL c. 131, acts relating to the protection of
inland wetlands of the commonwealth.)
(1)
The application procedure shall be the same as for special permit.
Copies of the application for special permit to the Board with
accompanying plans shall also be sent to the Building
Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer, Board of Health,
Conservation Commission and the Planning Board for their
recommendations to the Board, as to their approval, disapproval or
appropriate recommendations.
(2)
D.
Required submittals.
Submission of a location plan at a scale of one inch equals 1,000
feet showing the lot(s) to be developed, lot(s) lines within which
the development is proposed, and tie-in to the nearest road
intersection.
(1)
A site plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet shall be
prepared by a registered land surveyor or registered professional
civil engineer. The site plan shall be submitted to the Board and
shall show at least the following:
The location, boundaries, and dimension of each lot in
question.
(a)
(2)
E.
§ 305-13.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.01
C:464
(b) Two-foot contours of the existing and proposed land surface.
The locations of existing and proposed structures,
watercourses, and drainage easements, means of access,
drainage, and sewage disposal facilities.
(c)
(d) The elevation of the basement and first floor.
(e) The area and location of leaching fields.
Development conditions. For the development of land within the Inland
Wetlands District, the following conditions shall apply:
(1) The lot(s) shall be served by a public water system.
If the lot(s) is to be served by public sewerage system, the following
conditions shall apply:
A minimum of six test borings to a minimum depth of eight
feet shall be taken, three of which shall be within the area of
the proposed structure and three within 25 feet of the outside
walls of the structure, but not closer than 10 feet. A report by
a soil scientist or qualified engineer shall accompany the test
data.
(a)
The floor level of areas to be occupied by human beings as
living or working space shall be four feet above the seasonal
high-water table and not subject to periodic flooding.
(b)
If the basement floor level is below the seasonal high-water
table and affords the possibility of human occupancy at some
future date, although not originally intended, adequate
perimeter drainage and foundation shall be installed to
withstand the effect of pressure and seepage. Furnace and
utilities are to be protected from the effects of leaching.
(c)
Safe and adequate means of vehicular and pedestrian passage
shall be provided in the event of flooding of the lot(s) or
adjacent lot(s) caused by either the overspill from water bodies
or high runoff.
(d)
(2)
If the lot(s) is to be served by an on-lot septic system, the following
conditions including those listed previously shall apply:
The leaching area designed for use as well as a reserved area
for future expansion or total future use shall be plotted with
dimensions on the site plan.
(a)
A minimum of two percolation tests per leaching area shall
be performed. The maximum groundwater table shall be
determined during the last two weeks of March or the first
three weeks of April. At least two deep observation pits shall
be dug to determine soil profiles. The observation pits may be
(b)
(3)
F.
§ 305-13.01 CHARTER § 305-13.01
C:465
§ 305-13.02. Coastal Wetlands District.
dug during other times of the year and shall be accompanied
by a detailed report compiled by a soil scientist or qualified
engineer.
The leaching areas shall not be constructed in areas where the
maximum groundwater elevation is less than four feet below
the bottom of the leaching area.
(c)
The developer shall show that the proposed development will not
endanger health or safety, including safety of gas, electricity, fuel
and other utilities from breaking, leaking, short circuiting,
grounding, igniting or electrocuting; obstruct or divert flood flow;
substantially reduce natural floodwater storage capacity; destroy
valuable habitat for wildlife; or increase stormwater runoff velocity
so that water levels on other land are substantially raised or the
danger from flooding increased.
(4)
Board of Appeals procedure.
The Board of Appeals shall not take final action on an application
for a special permit hereunder until it has received a report thereon
from the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer, the
Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, and the Planning
Board, or until 30 days have elapsed after receipt of such plan
without the submission of a report. The Board of Appeals shall give
due consideration to all reports and, where its decision differs from
the recommendations received, shall state the reasons therefor in
writing.
(1)
The Board may, as a condition of approval, require that effective
notice be given to prospective purchasers, by signs or otherwise,
of past flooding of said premises, and the steps undertaken by the
petitioner or his successor in title to alleviate the effects of the
same.
(2)
G.
Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the Board, the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer, the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, and the
Planning Board have received a certified plan showing the foundation
and floor elevations, grading of the premises, elevations of the various
elements that make up the sewage disposal system, and that all
requirements of all permits are satisfied.
H.
Areas and yard regulations. A lot, a portion of which is in the Inland
Wetlands District, meets minimum area regulations under Article VI of
this bylaw provided that not more than 20% of the lot area which is
required to meet the minimum requirements of the zoning district is
within the Inland Wetlands District.
I.
A. Purpose of district. The purpose of this district is to promote:
§ 305-13.01 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.02
C:466
The health and safety of the occupants of lands subject to seasonal
or periodic tidal flooding.
(1)
The preservation of the salt marshes and tidal flats and their
attendant public benefit.
(2)
The safety and purity of water; control and containment of sewage;
safety of gas, electric, fuel and other utilities from breaking,
leaking, short circuiting, grounding, igniting, electrocuting or any
other dangers due to flooding.
(3)
Definition of district. The Coastal Wetlands District is superimposed
over any other districts established by the bylaw. All lands in Marshfield
covered by water of the average lunar monthly high tides and all other
lands which have been identified in the report, "Soil Survey, Plymouth
County, Massachusetts" issued July 1969 by the Soil Conservation
Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture as being tidal marsh and
thereby subject to tidal flooding are included in this district.
B.
Permitted uses. Municipal uses such as wastewater treatment facilities,
waterworks, pumping stations, a maritime service and safety facility,
essential services, and parks are permitted in this district. Land in
the Coastal Wetlands District may be used for any purpose otherwise
permitted in the underlying district except that: [Amended 4-24-2017
STM by Art. 2]
No structure intended for human occupancy or use on a permanent
basis having water or sewerage facilities, and no other building,
wall, dam, or structure (except flagpoles, signs and the like)
intended for permanent use shall be erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged or otherwise created or moved for any purpose except for
piers, boathouses, walkways, and similar facilities as which may be
granted by a special permit from the Board. However, without a
special permit, a structure existing at the time this bylaw becomes
effective may be reconstructed or repaired after a fire or other
casualty and a dwelling or building accessory to a dwelling existing
at the time this bylaw becomes effective may be altered or enlarged
provided no other provisions of these bylaws are violated.
(1)
Dumping, filling, excavating, or transferring of any earth material
within the district is prohibited. However, this subsection does
not prohibit ordinary gardening activities in lawn or garden areas
which are used for such purposes at the time this bylaw becomes
effective.
(2)
No ponds or pools shall be created or other changes in
watercourses, for swimming, fishing, or other recreational uses,
marine agricultural uses, scenic features or drainage
improvements or any other uses, unless a special permit from the
Board is issued.
(3)
C.
§ 305-13.02 CHARTER § 305-13.02
C:467
No use shall be permitted to develop in such a manner as will
adversely affect the natural character of the area.
(4)
Permit and procedure. Any person(s) desiring such a permit shall
submit an application to the Board which shall comply with the
conditions and submittal requirements as listed in the following
subsections. (Such conditions shall include, where applicable, approval
by the Board of Selectmen, the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection and the Massachusetts Department of
Transportation under MGL c. 130, acts relating to the protection of
coastal wetlands of the commonwealth.) The application procedure
shall be the same as for special permits. Copies of the application for
special permit to the Board of Appeals with accompanying plans shall
also be sent to the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer,
Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, and the Planning Board
for their recommendations to the Board as to their approval,
disapproval or appropriate recommendations.
D.
Required submittals.
Submission of a location plan at a scale of one inch equals 1,000
feet showing the lot(s) to be developed, lot lines within which
the development is proposed and tie-in to the nearest road
intersection.
(1)
A site plan at a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet shall be
prepared by a registered land surveyor or a registered professional
engineer. The site plan shall be submitted to the Board and shall
show at least the following:
The location, boundaries, and dimension of each lot in
question.
(a)
(b) Two-foot contours of the existing and proposed land surface.
The location of existing and proposed structures, watercourses
and drainage easements, means of access and drainage.
(c)
(2)
E.
Board of Appeals procedure.
The Board shall not take final action on an application for a special
permit hereunder until it has received a report thereon from the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer, the Board of
Health, the Conservation Commission, and the Planning Board
or until 30 days have elapsed after receipt of such plan without
submission of a report. The Board shall give due consideration
to all reports and, where its decision differs from the
recommendations received, shall state the reasons therefor in
writing.
(1)
The Board may, as a condition of approval, require that effective
notice be given to prospective purchasers, by signs or otherwise,
(2)
F.
§ 305-13.02 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.02
C:468
§ 305-13.03. Water Resource Protection District (WRPD). [Amended
April 2011 ATM]
of past flooding of said premises and the steps undertaken by the
petitioner or his successor in title to alleviate the effects of the
same.
Certificate of occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the Board, the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer, the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, and the
Planning Board have received a certified plan showing the foundation
and floor elevations, elevations of the completed construction, and that
all requirements of all permits are satisfied.
G.
Areas and yard regulations. A lot, a portion of which is in the Coastal
Wetlands District, meets minimum area regulations under Article VI of
this bylaw provided that not more than 20% of the lot area which is
required to meet the minimum requirements of the zoning district is
within the Coastal Wetlands District.
H.
Purpose of district. The purpose of this overlay district is to prevent
contamination of and preserve the quantity and quality of ground and
surface water which provides existing or potential water supply for the
Town's residents, institutions, and businesses.
A.
Scope of authority. This overlay district shall apply to all new
construction, reconstruction, or expansion of existing buildings and
new or expanded uses. Uses prohibited in the underlying zoning
districts shall be prohibited in the WRPD.
B.
Establishment and delineation of the WRPD.
The WRPD includes the Zone II protection areas as shown on the
Zoning Map of the Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts, as defined
in § 305-3.03 of the Zoning Bylaw (Zoning Map). The WRPD is
superimposed over any other district established by this bylaw. In
cases of conflicting use regulations, the more restrictive zoning
requirements shall apply.
(1)
The boundaries of this district may be modified upon acceptance
of approved Zone II conformance with wellhead protection
requirements of the Massachusetts Drinking Water Regulations,
310 CMR 22.21, and through a Zoning Map amendment approved
through Town Meeting.
(2)
C.
Split lots and determination of applicability.
Where the boundary line of the WRPD divides a lot or parcel,
the requirements established by this bylaw shall apply only to the
portion of the lot or parcel located within the WRPD. The boundary
shall be shown on a site plan as required by this bylaw or through
site plan review and shall be acceptable to the reviewing authority
(1)
D.
§ 305-13.02 CHARTER § 305-13.03
C:469
in accordance with all applicable provisions from the Zoning Bylaw
and associated Planning Board rules and regulations.
The applicant shall demonstrate, through the use of site plans,
that development activity outside of the boundary shall not be
connected to land within the boundary through post-development
grading, stormwater infrastructure, wastewater infrastructure or
other potential connections that could lead to the contamination
of groundwater within the WRPD. Where development practices
create a hydrologic connection across the WRPD boundary, the
applicant shall demonstrate that any water moving into or away
from the WRPD is accounted for in any of the required pollutant
loading calculations and meets all of the standards associated with
the WRPD. Where a special permit may be required, the Planning
Board may impose such conditions as are reasonably required to
ensure that these standards are met.
(2)
If an applicant questions the accuracy of Town's Zoning Map as
referenced in Subsection C(1) above, the applicant may challenge
the extent to which his/her property is subject to the WRPD
provisions in advance of submitting an application for development
to the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer, Board
of Appeals, or the Planning Board. Said challenge shall be made
through a request for a determination of applicability to the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer. A request for
a determination of applicability shall be made in writing to the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall
include the following information at a minimum:
Site plan clearly depicting the parcel boundary and boundaries
of adjacent parcels and rights-of-way;
(a)
(b) Survey benchmarks;
(c) Stamp from a Massachusetts registered surveyor;
(d) Name and address of property owner(s);
Property address and map and lot number from the most
recent Assessor's records;
(e)
(f) Locations of surface water and wetland flags;
(g) Location of WRPD boundary;
(h) North arrow;
(i) Scale (minimum of one inch equals 40 feet).
(3)
Upon receipt of a request for a determination of applicability, the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer may make this
determination in consultation with the Town Engineer and any
other applicable agent of the Town of Marshfield.
(4)
§ 305-13.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.03
C:470
The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to determine the
extent to which the property is subject to the jurisdiction of this
bylaw. At the request of the applicant the Town may engage a
professional engineer or State of Massachusetts registered land
surveyor to determine more accurately the boundaries of the
district with respect to individual parcels of land and may charge
the applicant for all or part of the cost of the investigation.
(5)
The Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer shall file
his/her written determination with the Planning Board and the
Board of Appeals. Any application for a determination of
applicability and associated materials shall not substitute for
materials required as part of site plan review, a building permit
application, or any application for a special permit. Any
determination made by the Building Commissioner/Zoning
Enforcement Officer as part of a determination of applicability shall
be considered by other reviewing agencies in their deliberations of
separate applications but shall not constitute approval or denial of
said applications.
(6)
Use regulations.
Exempt uses. The following specific uses of land shall be exempt
from provisions associated with the WRPD. Where municipal
services are exempted herein [Subsection E(1)(e), (f) and (g)],
the Department of Public Works or Town Engineer shall provide
notice to the Planning Board of these activities within 14 days of
beginning work along with any available engineered plans.
Storage of liquid petroleum products of any kind incidental to:
Normal household quantities as defined in Article II,
Definitions, of the Zoning Bylaw and outdoor maintenance
or the heating of a structure;
[1]
Waste oil retention facilities approved by the Board of
Health or required by MGL c. 21, § 52A; or
[2]
Emergency generators required by statute, rule or
regulation;
[3]
(a)
Non-sanitary wastewater treatment facilities approved by the
DEP exclusively designed for the treatment of contaminated
ground or surface water and operating in compliance with 314
CMR 5.05(3) or (13);
(b)
The replacement or repair of an existing non-sanitary
wastewater treatment facility that will not result in a design
capacity greater than the design capacity of the existing nonsanitary
wastewater treatment facility;
(c)
(1)
E.
§ 305-13.03 CHARTER § 305-13.03
C:471
The installation of new wells, the laying of waterlines, and
repair and replacement of pipe and appurtenances;
(d)
Drainage repair, replacement, and expansion of existing
drainage structures and pipe. All drainage repair, replacement,
and expansion shall follow DEP stormwater management best
management practices as applicable;
(e)
Minor road repair and overlay including total reconstruction or
expansion;
(f)
Street improvements pursuant to the Planning Board's street
improvement policy; and
(g)
The laying of sewer line and repair, replacement or expansion
of existing structures and pipe.
(h)
Prohibited uses. In addition to any prohibitions found in § 305-5.04,
Table of Use Regulations, the following specific uses of land shall
be prohibited within the WRPD:
Petroleum, fuel oil, and heating oil bulk stations and terminals,
not including liquefied petroleum gas.
(a)
Facilities that generate, treat, store or dispose of hazardous
waste that are subject to MGL c. 21C and 310 CMR 30.00,
except for the following:
Very small quantity generators as defined under 310 CMR
30.000;
[1]
Household hazardous waste centers and events under 310
CMR 30.390;
[2]
[3] Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A;
Non-sanitary wastewater treatment facilities approved by
DEP for the treatment of contaminated waters.
[4]
(b)
Storage of sodium chloride, calcium chloride, chemically
treated abrasives or other chemicals used for the removal of
snow or ice on roads.
(c)
Stockpiling and disposal of snow or ice containing sodium
chloride, calcium chloride, chemically treated abrasives or
other chemicals used for the removal of snow or ice on roads
which has been removed from highways and streets located
outside of the WRPD.
(d)
(e) Landfills and/or open dumps as defined in 310 CMR 19.006.
Automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in MGL c.
140B, § 1.
(f)
(2)
§ 305-13.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.03
C:472
Landfills receiving only wastewater and/or septage residuals
including those approved by the DEP pursuant to MGL c. 21,
§§ 26 through 53, MGL c. 111, § 17, MGL c. 83, §§ 6 and 7, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
(g)
Animal feedlots exceeding 10 animals per acre, except as may
be protected under MGL c. 40A, § 3.
(h)
Any new development or expansion of existing development
that will result in more than 30% of a site becoming impervious
within a residential district or more than 60% of a site within
a commercial or industrial district becoming impervious unless
specifically exempted under Subsection E(1), Exempt uses.
(i)
Discharge to the ground of non-sanitary wastewater including
industrial and commercial process wastewater, unless
specifically exempt in Subsection E(1), Exempt uses.
(j)
By-right uses. The following uses are allowed by right within the
WRPD provided all necessary permits, orders, or approvals
required by local, state or federal laws are obtained and subject
to Subsection E(2), Prohibited uses, and Subsection E(4), Special
permit uses, of this bylaw:
(a) Conservation of soil, water, plants, and wildlife;
Outdoor recreation, nature study, boating, fishing, and hunting
where otherwise legally permitted;
(b)
(c) Foot, bicycle and/or horse paths and bridges;
Normal operation and maintenance of existing water bodies
and dams, splash boards, and other water control, supply and
conservation devices;
(d)
Maintenance, repair, and enlargement of any existing
structure;
(e)
(f) Single-family residential development;
Farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry,
harvesting, and grazing;
(g)
Construction, maintenance, repair, and enlargement of
drinking water supply related facilities such as, but not limited
to, wells, pipelines, treatment plants, aqueducts, and tunnels;
and
(h)
Any use allowed by right in § 305-5.04, Table of Use
Regulations, that is not otherwise prohibited or requires a
special permit in the WRPD.
(i)
(3)
Special permit uses. In addition to § 305-5.04, Table of Use
Regulations, the following uses shall require a special permit from
(4)
§ 305-13.03 CHARTER § 305-13.03
C:473
the Planning Board, as the special permit granting authority
(SPGA):
Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that do not conform
to the WRPD.
(a)
Activities that involve toxic or hazardous materials in
quantities greater than those associated with normal
household quantities except as may be prohibited under
Subsection E(2), Prohibited uses.
(b)
Any increase in size or new on-site septic system or sanitary
wastewater treatment plant with an individual or combined
flow of 2,000 gallons per day or greater.
(c)
Any streets, including new subdivision streets and bridges,
which will be built to serve five lots or more unless specifically
exempted under Subsection E(1), Exempt uses.
(d)
Underground storage tanks not including those that may be
used to temporarily store wastewater effluent in a system
approved by the Board of Health or those used to temporarily
store stormwater as part of a management system compliant
with Subsection F(8) of this bylaw.
(e)
Reoccupation and special permits.
Existing residential, commercial, industrial, and/or community
facilities where a change in use is proposed may not require a
special permit provided that a WRPD reoccupation certificate
signed by the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement
Officer indicates that a special permit is not required pursuant
to the Planning Board rules and regulations associated with
this bylaw.39
(a)
Eligibility for a WRPD reoccupation certificate is contingent
upon following conditions:
Any proposed use that is allowed by right pursuant to
Subsection E(3) shall be eligible.
[1]
Where the previous use required a special permit and the
proposed use also requires a special permit, the triggers
for special permits must be the same pursuant to
Subsection E(4) in order to be eligible.
[2]
(b)
(5)
Performance and design standards for all activities. Where applicable,
the following performance and design standards shall apply to any
activity that may be allowed by right or through a special permit in the
WRPD:
F.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 417, Water Resource Protection District.
§ 305-13.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.03
C:474
Construction activities. Erosion and sediment control measures
shall be taken to ensure that exposed earth and debris are not
displaced by stormwater runoff or other conditions in accordance
with the requirements for site plan review or the rules and
regulations associated with a WRPD special permit.
(1)
Safeguards. Provision shall be made to adequately protect against
toxic or hazardous materials discharge or loss through corrosion,
accidental damage, spillage, or vandalism. Such measures may
include provision for spill control in the vicinity of chemical or
fuel delivery points, secure storage areas for toxic or hazardous
materials, and indoor storage provisions for corrodible or
dissolvable materials. Any proposed indoor or outdoor storage of
liquid petroleum products shall be in covered and secure
container(s) in an area that has a containment system. Said
containment system shall be designed and operated to hold the
larger of the following two volumes:
Ten percent of the cumulative storage capacity of all
containers; or
(a)
One hundred ten percent of the single largest container's
storage capacity.
(b)
(2)
Pesticides, fertilizer and manure. Storage of pesticides, as defined
in MGL c. 132B, of commercial fertilizers and soil conditioners,
as defined in MGL c. 128, § 64, and animal manure shall only
be permitted within a structure with an impermeable cover and
liner designed to prevent the generation of contaminated runoff or
leachate.
(3)
Disposal. No disposal of hazardous wastes within WRPD shall
occur. All provisions of MGL c. 21C (the Massachusetts Hazardous
Waste Management Act) shall be adequately satisfied.
(4)
Fill. Fill material used in the WRPD shall contain no solid waste,
toxic or hazardous materials, or hazardous waste. Adequate
documentation shall be provided to ensure proper condition of the
fill. Where a special permit is required, the SPGA may require soils
testing by a certified laboratory at the applicant's expense as part
of the application process or during construction.
(5)
Separation from groundwater. Permanent removal or regrading of
the existing soil cover shall be prohibited where these activities
shall result in a finished grade elevation less than five feet above
the historical high groundwater level.
Excavations for building foundations, roads or utility work or
the installation of stormwater BMPs shall be exempt from this
requirement.
(a)
(b) The high groundwater elevation may be determined by:
(6)
§ 305-13.03 CHARTER § 305-13.03
C:475
Soil color using the Munsell system, the abundance, size
and contrast of redoximorphic features, if present;
[1]
Observation of actual water table during times of annual
high water table; or
[2]
Use of USGS wells for correlating comparisons in water
tables during times when the water table is not at the
annual high range.
[3]
Groundwater elevations depicted on plans shall be stamped by
a Massachusetts registered professional engineer.
(c)
Where these requirements would severely limit the
development potential of a particular parcel, an applicant may
propose permanent removal or regrading of the existing soil
cover to a finished grade which is less than five feet above
the historical high groundwater elevation through a full WRPD
special permit application.
(d)
Wastewater. Wastewater flow in the WRPD shall not exceed 440
gallons per 40,000 square feet for the use of conventional on-site
wastewater disposal. This flow may increase to 550 gallons per
40,000 square feet through the use of a DEP-approved innovative
and alternative septic system provided the Board of Health also
approves the use of the system.
(7)
Stormwater management. Stormwater runoff from impervious
surfaces shall be recharged on site in accordance with the
standards and guidelines included in the latest version of the
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards unless in
conducting application review it is determined that recharge either
is unfeasible because of site conditions or is undesirable because of
uncontrollable risks to water quality from such recharge.
(8)
Performance and design standards for special permit applications. In
addition to those performance and design standards in listed in
Subsection F, the following performance and design standards shall
apply to any activity that may be allowed through a special permit in
the WRPD as applicable:
Nitrogen loading. All applicants required to obtain a special permit
in accordance with § 305-5.04, Table of Use Regulations, and
Subsection E(4), Special permit uses, and all applicants for any
permit for any use or structure to be located on land which is within
the WRPD and which is shown on a definitive subdivision plan, filed
on or after April 22, 1996, shall demonstrate by written report to
the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the concentration of
nitrate-nitrogen resulting from wastewater disposal, animal waste,
runoff and fertilizer application, when diluted by rainwater
recharge on the lot or subject property as a whole, shall not exceed
five milligrams per liter (mg/l). Nitrogen loading, for the purpose
(1)
G.
§ 305-13.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.03
C:476
of this requirement, shall be calculated in accordance with the
Planning Board rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
Subsection H, Administrative procedures.
Emergency response plan (ERP). For industrial and commercial
uses, an emergency response plan to prevent contamination of soil
or water in the event of accidental spills or the release of toxic
or hazardous materials shall be submitted to the SPGA, if deemed
necessary, for approval prior to granting of a special permit.
Recommendations from the Fire Department on said plan shall be
sought. At a minimum, the ERP shall include:
A clear outline of communication protocol among facility
personnel and emergency response agencies;
(a)
Twenty-four-hour contact information for a designated
emergency response coordinator (typically the owner or
facility manager), who can respond to the site within one hour
of notification; multiple emergency response coordinators are
recommended;
(b)
Twenty-four-hour emergency contact information for local
Police Department, Fire Department, and Board of Health;
(c)
Twenty-four-hour emergency contact information for
notification of the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection;
(d)
Twenty-four-hour emergency contact information for the
facility's designated hazardous waste transporter, if the facility
is a licensed hazardous waste or regulated waste generator;
(e)
A list of the hazardous products or hazardous wastes present at
the facility, including volume and location of any aboveground
or underground storage containers;
(f)
(g) Inventory of all cleanup supplies; and
A facility map showing hazardous waste accumulation areas,
aboveground or underground storage containers, sinks and
drains, emergency exits, fire extinguisher locations, and
locations of spill cleanup supplies. The facility map shall be
posted in the building and shall include emergency contact
numbers.
(h)
(2)
Monitoring. Periodic monitoring shall be required when the site
location and land use activities in the area indicate a significant
risk of contamination to the water supply as determined by the
SPGA based upon recommendations of the Department of Public
Works, Board of Health, and Conservation Commission. Such
monitoring may include analysis of water for chemical constituents
determined by the SPGA to be appropriate and the installation
(3)
§ 305-13.03 CHARTER § 305-13.03
C:477
§ 305-13.04. Stormwater Management Overlay District. [Added
April 2006 ATM; amended 4-27-2015 ATM by Art. 17]
of groundwater monitoring wells constructed and located by a
registered professional engineer with expertise in hydrology, or by
directly testing effluent. All testing and engineering costs will be
borne by the applicant for special permit or owner of the property.
Wastewater flows that exceed 2,000 gallons per day (gpd). For
those uses that require a special permit pursuant to Subsection
E(4)(d), applicants shall meet one of the following standards using
the procedures outlined in the Planning Board's regulations:
Where a previously developed site is being redeveloped,
applicants shall demonstrate that there is no net increase in
the concentration of nitrogen when nitrogen loading analyses
are performed for both the previous and proposed use; or
(a)
For new development that cannot meet the five mg/l on-site
standard for average nitrogen concentration or where the
standard under Subsection G(4)(a) cannot be achieved for
redevelopment, an aggregation of flows analysis shall be
provided pursuant to the WRPD rules and regulations
demonstrating the use of credit land will result in compliance
with the five mg/l standard.
(b)
(4)
Administrative procedures. The Planning Board, as the SPGA, shall
adopt rules and regulations relative to its role in governing activities
within the WRPD, which may be amended from time to time and filed
with the Town Clerk.40 Where a special permit application is being
considered, the Board shall follow the procedural requirements for
special permits as set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 9.
H.
Review criteria. Decisions by the SPGA to approve, deny or approve
with conditions any application for a special permit in the WRPD shall
use the following criteria:
The proposal shall be in harmony with the purpose and intent of
this bylaw and will promote the purposes of the WRPD.
(1)
The proposal shall meet the performance and design standards of
Subsection F, Performance and design standards for all activities,
and Subsection G, Performance and design standards for special
permit applications, as applicable.
(2)
I.
Purpose. The purpose of the Stormwater Management Overlay District
is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety,
environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum
requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of
increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source
A.
40.Editor's Note: See Ch. 417, Water Resource Protection District.
§ 305-13.03 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.04
C:478
pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. These
objectives will be met by regulating new construction, construction of
impervious surfaces, the removal of natural vegetation, especially large
trees, and the excavation and alteration of land, in order to minimize
erosion, sedimentation, flooding, water pollution, and other adverse
impacts of development within the overlay district or any adjacent low
lying areas.
Scope of authority. The Stormwater Management Overlay District is
established as an overlay district and shall be superimposed on other
zoning districts established by this bylaw. All regulations of the
Marshfield Zoning Bylaw applicable to the underlying districts shall
remain in effect, except that where the Stormwater Management
Overlay District imposes additional regulations, such regulations shall
prevail.
B.
District boundaries. The boundaries of the Stormwater Management
Overlay District are delineated on the Official Zoning Map.
C.
Applicability. The following types of development within the
Stormwater Management Overlay District are subject to review by the
Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer. Notwithstanding
other provisions of this bylaw, no land development within the
Stormwater Management Overlay District shall be permitted and no
building permit shall be issued until the provisions of the Stormwater
Management Overlay District regulations have been met. Development
activities subject to the Stormwater Management Overlay District
design standards include the following:
(1) The construction of a new dwelling or principal structure.
Any substantial alteration or addition to any dwelling or other
structure, if such action enlarges the footprint of the structure by
more than 200 square feet.
(2)
The removal, filling, excavation or alteration of earthen materials
if such alteration changes preexisting topography and drainage
characteristics of the property in a manner that may adversely
impact abutting property owners.
(3)
The removal or destruction of more than five mature trees having
a diameter of six inches or greater, measured four feet from the
ground surface. This limitation on cutting of mature trees does
not apply to trees that are to be removed for construction of a
street, dwelling, driveway, walkway, septic disposal system, or a
retaining wall. Other trees may be removed if in the opinion of the
Tree Warden the trees are dead, dying or are diseased trees that
represent a safety hazard to public health or property.
(4)
Any activity that increases the impervious coverage on any lot
that causes additional volumes of runoff to discharge on abutting
(5)
D.
§ 305-13.04 CHARTER § 305-13.04
C:479
properties that may cause flooding and adversely impact abutting
property owners.
Development performance standards. All new construction, substantial
alterations, excavation, filling, grading or tree cutting described above
in Subsection D shall comply with the following development standards:
For lots ranging in size from 5,000 to 7,499 square feet, the
following development limitations shall apply:
(a) Building area shall not exceed 16% of the land area of any lot.
Impervious surfaces shall not exceed 25% of the land area of
any lot.
(b)
A minimum of 15% of the lot shall remain undisturbed with
existing natural vegetation.
(c)
(1)
For lots ranging in size from 7,500 to 9,999 square feet, the
following development limitations shall apply:
(a) Building area shall not exceed 15% of the land area of any lot.
Impervious surfaces shall not exceed 22% of the land area of
any lot.
(b)
A minimum of 25% of the lot shall remain undisturbed with
existing natural vegetation.
(c)
(2)
For lots ranging in size from 10,000 square feet to 19,999 square
feet in area the following development limitations shall apply:
(a) Building area shall not exceed 15% of any lot area.
(b) Impervious surfaces shall not exceed 20% of the lot area.
A minimum of 35% of the lot area shall remain undisturbed
with existing natural vegetation.
(c)
(3)
In the Stormwater Management Overlay District, the removal of
native vegetation, especially large trees having a diameter of six
inches or greater, measured four feet from the ground surface,
shall be minimized. Trees may only be removed for construction of
streets, structures, driveways, retaining walls, walkways, utilities
and septic systems. Selective clearing of not more than five trees
for lawns shall be designated on the site plan.
(4)
To the maximum extent feasible, post-development runoff shall not
exceed pre-development runoff. All roof runoff shall be retained
and recharged on site in dry wells or infiltration basins covered by
natural vegetation which shall be designed to accommodate a oneinch
rainfall within a twenty-four-hour period.
(5)
E.
§ 305-13.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.04
C:480
§ 305-13.05. Brant Rock Village Overlay District. [Added 5-5-2014
ATM by Art. 17]
Sediment and erosion control measures as required by the Building
Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer or designee shall be
employed to minimize the impacts during and after construction.
(6)
Permit procedures and requirements. Any activity listed above in
Subsection D requires copies of plans to be submitted to the Planning
Board, Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works, and
Board of Health for review and recommendations. Said boards shall
have 21 days to provide comments to the Building Commissioner/
Zoning Enforcement Officer. If no comments are received within the
21 days, the Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer may
proceed with the issuance of the building permit.
F.
Purpose. The purpose of the Brant Rock Village Overlay (BRVO) District
is to protect and enhance the public health, safety, environment and
general welfare by establishing minimum requirements for new
development and redevelopment of existing properties and uses located
in the BRVO District. New development and redevelopment within the
BRVO District are intended to reduce the impacts from actual and
projected coastal flooding. In addition, these regulations are intended
to promote certain types of mixed-use buildings, as defined in Article
II, Definitions, to provide for commercial uses on the first floor and
residential uses on the second floor. The Village of Brant Rock has
a historical development pattern that contains both commercial and
residential uses within a single building and other geographical areas
which are substantially residential. Many of the existing buildings have
these preexisting nonconforming uses. The BRVO will authorize certain
mixed uses within a single building provided such buildings can be
designed and constructed in a manner that preserves and respects
the historic New England architecture of the Brant Rock Village and
reduces damage caused by chronic flooding that is prevalent in the
BRVO District.
A.
Scope of authority. The Brant Rock Village Overlay District (BRVO) is
hereby established as an overlay district and shall be superimposed
over the existing Business Waterfront (B-4) Zoning District. All
regulations of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw applicable to the underlying
districts shall remain in effect, except that where the Brant Rock Village
Overlay District allows for mixed-use buildings, these regulations shall
prevail.
B.
District boundaries. The boundaries of the Brant Rock Village Overlay
District are delineated on the Official Zoning Map. The overlay district
boundaries shall follow the boundaries of the existing Business
Waterfront (B-4) Zoning District in the Brant Rock Village area.
C.
D. Applicability.
§ 305-13.04 CHARTER § 305-13.05
C:481
BRVO provides a development alternative for property owners
within the overlay district if they are floodproofing a structure
at or above the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) one-hundred-year storm event
established base flood elevation (BFE).
(1)
Any new building construction, reconstruction or additions to
structures within the BRVO that include floodproofing at or above
the BFE have the option to build a mixed-use building with
commercial uses allowed on the first floor and residential uses
allowed on the second floor. Mixed-use buildings shall be subject to
the following BRVO regulations.
(2)
Allowed uses.
(1) All uses permitted in the B-4 District.
Residential use of 2 1/2 stories by special permit issued by the
Board of Appeals subject to the building height requirements in
Subsection G below.
(2)
E.
Design requirements.
Floodproofing. All of the building shall be elevated above the FEMA
FIRM base flood elevation (BFE). Providing a BFE higher than the
minimum required by FEMA, to plan for projected sea level rise,
is encouraged. Moisture- and rot-resistant breakaway panels shall
be provided to screen the building's pilings or piers in the area
between the natural ground elevation and the first floor. These
breakaway elements should be consistent with the rest of the
building's design elements.
(1)
Outside boardwalk. All buildings shall provide an outdoor
boardwalk, farmer's porch or similar structure, elevated above the
BFE, set back from the street or sidewalk. The boardwalk or porch
on the first floor shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide measured from
the inside edge of the top of the stairs to the outermost wall of the
commercial first floor building.
(2)
F.
Intensity and dimensional regulations. All new buildings, redeveloped
buildings, or additions for proposed mixed use shall comply with the
following intensity and dimensional regulations:
Setbacks.
Front. A ten-foot setback is required. No setback from the front
property line is required for stairs or ramps leading above the
BFE or any boardwalk or porch located above the BFE.
(a)
Side. No side line setbacks are required for buildings providing
the ability to have a continuous boardwalk to abutting
buildings. Adjoining property owners are encouraged to
connect boardwalks and porches to create a continuous
(b)
(1)
G.
§ 305-13.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.05
C:482
elevated pedestrian walkway within the BRVO. For buildings
that do not provide the ability to connect to abutting buildings,
a five-foot setback is required. Driveways are allowed within
the setback.
Rear. A fifteen-foot building setback is required. Parking
spaces and maneuvering lanes are allowed within the setback.
(c)
Density. Residential dwelling units on the second story are allowed
by special permit at a density of up to three dwelling units per
10,000 square feet of underlying land area.
(2)
Lot size. The minimum lot size for a mixed-use building is 10,000
square feet.
(3)
Building height. The maximum building height is 2.5 stories or 35
feet measured above the FEMA FIRM base flood elevation.
(4)
Architecture. New buildings, additions and reconstruction where mixed
uses are proposed shall be designed to incorporate the design elements
in the following design sketch:
H.
Mixed use.
Buildings shall be designed to reflect the traditional New England
coastal village architecture found within the region. The mass,
proportion, and scale of the building, roof shape, roof pitch,
proportions and relationships between doors and windows should
be harmonious among themselves.
(1)
Architectural details of new construction and proposed
reconstruction as well as any additions to existing buildings should
be harmonious with the building's overall architectural style and
should preserve and enhance the historic character of Marshfield.
(2)
Wherever possible, the building's location shall be oriented parallel
to Ocean Street and Dyke Road, unless there is a compelling reason
to do otherwise that will enhance the proposed project. Building
facades in excess of 30 feet wide shall incorporate recesses and
projections, of a minimum of two feet in depth, to break up the
building's mass. The building roofline should include variations
in pitch and height and include dormers, turrets and decks. All
building materials shall be moisture and rot resistant in
consideration of the coastal weather conditions.
(3)
I.
§ 305-13.05 CHARTER § 305-13.05
C:483
Landscaping. Landscape plantings shall be comprised of native plant
species that have adapted to coastal site conditions such as wind, salt
spray, flooding and burial. Plantings that provide a variation of seasonal
colors are encouraged in elevated planters at both the boardwalk and
sidewalk levels.
J.
Parking. Parking shall be provided as required in Article VIII, Off-
Street Parking and Loading and Lighting Regulations. In the BRVO one
parking space for each bedroom in all residential units is required.
Existing public parking spaces located within 300 feet of the street
frontage for the property may be counted toward meeting the minimum
parking requirements for commercial uses, by special permit pursuant
to § 305-8.05 of the bylaw.
K.
L. Signs. All commercial signs shall comply with Article VII, Signs.
Accessibility. All commercial units and boardwalks shall comply with
the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the
State Architectural Access Board.
M.
Affordable housing. Mixed-use buildings shall provide affordable
housing for low- or moderate-income individuals as defined in Article
II, Definitions. The construction of all residential housing shall include
affordable housing in compliance with § 305-11.14, Inclusionary zoning
for affordable housing. The number of affordable units required shall
be in accordance with the requirements of § 305-11.14D, Provision of
affordable units; bonuses and incentives. If the residential units are for
rent, the provisions of § 305-11.14D(2)(b), Fees in lieu of construction,
are not applicable.
N.
§ 305-13.05 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-13.05
C:484
ARTICLE XIV
Amendment, Severability and Effective Date
§ 305-14.01. Amendment. [Amended 4-24-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
This bylaw may be amended from time to time in accordance with Section 5
of the Zoning Enabling Act. During the amendment procedure, subdivision
plans in process of review by the Planning Board under the Subdivision
Control Law shall be subject to the provisions of the Zoning Enabling Act.41
§ 305-14.02. Severability.
The invalidity, unconstitutionality, or illegality of any provision of this bylaw
or boundary shown on the Zoning Map shall not have any effect upon the
validity, constitutionality, or legality or any other provision or boundary.
§ 305-14.03. Effective date.
This bylaw shall take effect upon the date resulting from the procedure
provided for in MGL c. 40, § 32.
41.Editor's Note: For the Zoning Enabling Act see MGL c. 40A. For the Subdivision Control
Law see MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG.
§ 305-14.01 CHARTER § 305-14.03
C:485

ARTICLE XV
Floodplain Zoning
[Amended April 2006 ATM; April 2012 ATM; 4-27-2015 ATM by Art.
16; 10-24-2016 STM by Art. 5]
§ 305-15.01. Purpose.
The purposes of this bylaw are to: protect human life and health and
minimize danger to emergency response officials in the event of flooding,
minimize expenditure of public money for flood-control projects and
emergency response and cleanup, reduce damage to public and private
property and utilities resulting from flooding waters and debris, and ensure
that the Town of Marshfield qualifies for participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program.
§ 305-15.02. Applicability.
This bylaw applies as an overlay district to all areas of special flood hazard
located within the jurisdiction of the Town of Marshfield and designated as
Zone A, AE, AH, AO, or VE on the Plymouth County Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The
map panels of the Plymouth County FIRM that are wholly or partially within
the Town of Marshfield are panel numbers 25023C0116J, 25023C0117K,
25023C0118J, 25023C0119K, 25023C0136K, 25023C0137K, 25023C0138K,
25023C0139K, 25023C0143K, 25023C0207J, 25023C0226K, 25023C0227K,
25023C0228K, 25023C0229K, 25023C0231K, 25023C0232K,
25023C0233K, 25023C0234K, 25023C0237K, and 25023C0241K. All panels
ending with the suffix J shall have the effective date of July 17, 2012. All
panels ending with the suffix K shall have an effective date of November
4, 2016. This area shall be known as the Floodplain District. The exact
boundaries of the district may be defined by the base flood elevations shown
on the FIRM and further defined by the FEMA Plymouth County Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) booklet dated November 4, 2016. The FIRM and FIS
booklet are incorporated herein by reference. In the event any provisions of
this bylaw are in conflict with requirements for any other districts, the more
restrictive regulation shall take precedence.
§ 305-15.03. Floodplain permit required.
Permits for development and uses of land within the Floodplain District
shall be required for the following: (Such applications shall be obtained
prior to or in conjunction with building permits if necessary.)
A. New construction of residential and nonresidential structures.
B. Substantial improvement (as defined) of any existing structure.
C. Expansion of the footprint of any existing structure.
D. Alteration of topography (as defined).
§ 305-15.01 CHARTER § 305-15.04
C:487
§ 305-15.04. Application for floodplain permit.
Applications for floodplain permits shall be made to the Building
Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer except where indicated below.
Applications shall contain:
§ 305-15.05. Standards for areas of special flood hazard.
All permits granted under § 305-15.03 above shall be subject to the
following provisions:
Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including
basements or cellars) of all existing and proposed structures.
A.
Elevation in relation to mean sea level of existing and proposed
floodproofing.
B.
Signed statement by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the requirements of this bylaw have been met. (Note: The abovereferenced
requirements may be met through submission of a FEMA
elevation certificate.)
C.
Plans for any breakaway walls to be used to enclose space below the
base flood elevation (in V Zones).
D.
Description of topographic alterations including existing and proposed
grades and a delineation of the special flood hazard area boundary line.
E.
Site plan certified by a registered land surveyor showing all existing
and proposed natural and constructed features on the property. The
site plan shall include a notation of the special flood hazard area
designation for all existing and proposed structures.
F.
Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other
developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser,
within Zone A, where such data is not provided on the FIRM.
G.
All development and redevelopment, whether permitted by right or
by special permit, shall be in accordance with the standards of the
Massachusetts State Building Code, the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL
c. 131, § 40) and regulations (310 CMR 10.00, 310 CMR 13.00, and
310 CMR 12.00), septic system regulations (310 CMR 15, Title 5),
and all other applicable federal, state and local requirements. Any
variance from the provisions and requirements of the above-referenced
state regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required
variance procedures of these state regulations.
A.
No alteration of topography shall be permitted where it may result in
increased runoff or drainage to the detriment of other property owners
or the Town.
B.
Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect for all
floodproofing measures shall be required.
C.
§ 305-15.04 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-15.05
C:488
§ 305-15.06. Additional requirements in Velocity (V) Zones.
If proposed construction or alteration of topography is located within a V
Zone on the FIRM maps, all floodplain permits granted under § 305-15.03
above shall be subject to the following additional requirements:
§ 305-15.07. Floodways.
All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements to existing structures, and other development, are prohibited
in the floodway as designated on the Marshfield FIRM maps. Along
watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best
available federal, state, local, or other floodway data shall be used to
determine the extent of the floodway.
§ 305-15.08. Administration.
The Building Commissioner/Zoning Enforcement Officer shall administer
this bylaw as follows:
Storage of fuel oil or toxic or hazardous materials below the base flood
elevation shall be floodproofed.
D.
Within Zones AH and AO, adequate drainage paths must be provided
around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from
proposed structures.
E.
All new construction within V Zones shall be located landward of the
reach of mean high tide.
A.
Man-made alteration of coastal dunes within V Zones is prohibited
where such alteration could result in increased flood damage.
B.
Review proposed construction and alteration of topography within the
Floodplain District to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state and local governmental agencies
from which approval is required and ensure that the requirements of
this bylaw have been met.
A.
Maintain records of the elevation of the lowest floor (in relation to
NGVD), including basement, of all new or substantially improved
structures. In addition, maintain records as to whether or not such
structures contain a basement.
B.
If a structure has been floodproofed, maintain records of the elevation
of the lowest floor and the elevation to which the structure was
floodproofed, including the required engineering certification.
C.
Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions
of this bylaw.
D.
§ 305-15.05 CHARTER § 305-15.08
C:489
§ 305-15.09. Special permits.
Provide notice to the following of any alterations or relocation of a
watercourse and ensure that such activity does not diminish the floodcarrying
capacity of such watercourse:
(1) Adjacent communities.
NFIP State Coordinator.
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
(2)
NFIP Program Specialist.
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
(3)
E.
The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit modifying the
performance standards in §§ 305-15.05 and 305-15.06 for the following:
Nonresidential structures such as boathouses, boat yards, and
structures designed for education and research, the nature of
which requires their location within the Floodplain District.
(1)
Restoration and reconstruction of structures listed in the National
or State Register of Historic Places.
(2)
A.
Special permits shall only be issued upon a determination by the Board
of Appeals that:
Failure to grant the special permit would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(1)
The granting of a special permit will not result in increased flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, or conflict with existing bylaws.
(2)
The relief granted is the minimum necessary considering the flood
hazard.
(3)
All subdivision proposals are designed to assure that such
proposals minimize flood damage, all public utilities and facilities
are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage,
and adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(4)
B.
§ 305-15.08 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-15.09
C:490
Any applicant to whom a special permit is granted shall be given
written notice that the proposed development may result in increased
risk to life and property and increased flood insurance premium rates.
C.
The Board of Appeals, as the special permit granting authority (SPGA),
may adopt rules and regulations relative to the issuance of such special
permits and file a copy with the Town Clerk. The Board shall follow the
procedural requirements for special permits as set forth in MGL c. 40A,
§ 9.
D.
§ 305-15.09 CHARTER § 305-15.09
C:491
Chapter 400
GENERAL PROVISIONS, PLANNING BOARD
§ 305-15.09 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-15.09
C:492
ARTICLE I
Approval of Codification
[The codification of the rules and regulations of the Planning Board
as Division 4 (Chapters 405 through 420) of the Town Code was
approved by the Planning Board 7-24-2017.]
CHARTER § 305-15.09
C:493
Chapter 405
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 246.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 294 and Ch.
505.
Zoning — See Ch. 305.
§ 305-15.09 MARSHFIELD CODE § 305-15.09
C:494
ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 405-1. Authority.
Under the authority vested in the Marshfield Planning Board, or its legally
constituted successor, by MGL c. 41, §§ 81O, 81Q and 81FF, as amended,
said Board hereby adopts these rules and regulations governing the
subdivision of land in the Town of Marshfield. Furthermore, the Marshfield
Planning Board hereby adopts regulations for the construction of ways
and the installation of municipal services with respect to ways serving
lots shown on any subdivision plan, including those plans that predate
the Subdivision Control Law. Such rules and regulations shall supersede
and replace any previously adopted Subdivision Control Law rules and
regulations and may be amended in accordance with the provisions of MGL
c. 41, § 81Q.
§ 405-2. Purpose.
The Subdivision Control Law has been enacted for the purpose of protecting
the safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town by
regulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions, providing
access to the several lots therein, but which have not become public ways,
and ensuring sanitary conditions in subdivisions and, in proper cases, parks
and open areas. The powers of the Board under the Subdivision Control
Law shall be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate
access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and
convenient for travel; for lessening congestion in such ways and in the
adjacent public ways; for reducing danger to life and limb in the operation
of motor vehicles; for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic and
other emergencies; for ensuring compliance with the applicable zoning
ordinances or bylaws; for securing adequate provision for water, sewerage,
drainage, and other requirements where necessary, in a subdivision; and for
coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other and with the public
ways in the Town and with the ways in neighboring subdivisions.
§ 405-3. Approved definitive plan required.
No person shall make a subdivision of land within the Town, or proceed
with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision or the construction
of ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and
until a definitive plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and
approved by the Board as hereinafter provided.
A.
After the approval of such plan, the location and width of ways shown
thereon shall not be changed without the approval of the Board, but the
number, shape and size of the lots shown on the plan so approved may
be changed without action by the Board, provided every lot so changed
still has frontage on a public way or a way shown on a plan approved
B.
§ 405-1 CHARTER § 405-3
C:495
by the Board and such frontage and the size of the lots comply with
applicable zoning bylaws of the Town of Marshfield.
§ 405-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-3
C:496
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 405-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AASHTO — American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials. Referring to policies concerning geometric design of highways and
streets, highway materials, and methods of sampling and testing adopted by
the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ABUTTER — The owner of land located within 300 feet of any bound of the
subdivision including land on the opposite side of a street.
ACCESS — A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian
entrance or exit to a property.
ACCESS CONNECTION — Any driveway, street, curb cut, turnout or other
means of providing for the movement of vehicles to or from the public/
private roadway network.
ACI — Manual of concrete practice published by the American Concrete
Institute.
AGENT — A duly authorized designee of the Planning Board.
AGRICULTURE — The normal maintenance or improvement of land in
agricultural or aquaculture use as defined by the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act and its implementing regulations.42
APPLICANT — An owner, his agent or representative or assigns, who has
an application before the Planning Board. The owner in equity, an agent,
representative, or his assigns may act for an owner, provided written
evidence of such fact is submitted.
AQUIFER — Geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that
contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable potable water.
AQUIFER PROTECTION — The Water Resource Protection District is the
designated Aquifer Protection District in the Town of Marshfield as shown
on the Zoning Map and development within, which is governed by the
provisions of § 305-13.03 of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw.
AREA OF SINGLE ACCESS — A permanent or temporary dead-end street or
series of dead-end streets intersecting with each other in such a way as to
provide sole access to and from an existing street for not more than eight
dwellings total. This category is meant to include but not be limited to culde-
sac, loop, hammerhead turnaround, and other dead-end street types.
AS-BUILT PLAN — Construction or engineering plans prepared by an
engineer after the completion of construction in such a manner as to
accurately identify and depict the location of all on-site improvements,
42.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 405-4 CHARTER § 405-4
C:497
including but not limited to all structures, parking facilities, components
of the stormwater management system, monuments, curbs, gutters, and
sidewalks.
ASTM — Standard specifications published by the American Society for
Testing and Materials.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC — The total traffic volume during a given time
period (in whole days greater than one day and less than one year) divided
by the number of days in that period.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Industry standards and
mitigation measures utilized by the project engineer to create a drainage
system designed with maximum measures for flood control and enhanced
water quality discharge from a site.
BIKEWAY — A way designed to be used principally or exclusively by a
bicycle or similar nonmotorized vehicle.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Marshfield.
CONSERVATION COMMISSION — The Marshfield Conservation
Commission.
CONSULTANT REVIEW AND FEE — Review done when specific conditions
arise from the land or the nature of the proposal that necessitate the
assistance of a planning, engineering, traffic, soils, hydrologic or other
consultant to assist the Planning Board in analyzing a project and ensuring
compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances, bylaws and regulations. The
fee refers to the reasonable cost of these consultants to be borne by the
applicants.
CROSS ACCESS — A service drive providing vehicular and pedestrian
access between two or more contiguous sites so the driver need not enter
the public street system.
DEAD END — See definition of "area of single access" above.
DEFINITIVE PLAN — The plan of a subdivision as submitted (with
appropriate application) to the Board for approval, to be recorded in the
Registry of Deeds or filed with the Recorder of the Land Court when
approved by the Board, and such plan when approved and recorded or filed.
The requirements and content of the definitive plan shall be as specified
hereinafter.
DEPARTMENT SPECIFICATIONS — The Standard Specifications for
Highways and Bridges of the Massachusetts Highway Department, dated
1973, including all revisions thereto.
DEPARTMENT'S STANDARDS — The Construction Standards of 1977 of the
Massachusetts Highway Department, as most recently amended.
DETENTION FACILITY — A detention basin or alternative structure
designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface
runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
§ 405-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-4
C:498
DIRECTIONAL MEDIAN OPENING — An opening in a restrictive median
which provides for the specific movements and physically restricts other
movements.
DRAINAGE BASIN — A man-made area surrounded by an embankment to
temporarily hold stormwater over a storm event, to allow settling of solids
and prevent downstream flooding.
DRAINAGE FACILITIES/SYSTEMS — Proposed systems for collection,
storage and discharge of stormwater.
DRAINAGE LOT — An individual lot with a minimum 20 feet of frontage,
containing drainage basin and related structures.
EASEMENT — A right acquired by public authority or other person to use
or control property for a utility or other designated public purpose.
EMERGENCY ACCESS — A secondary means of ingress to/egress from a
development, residential, commercial or industrial, which provides yearround,
twenty-four-hour-per-day access open to all residents, visitors,
employees, patrons, and services of the development, and which provides
standard construction quality as to materials, depths and thicknesses
prescribed in Article IV of these regulations.
ENGINEER — A registered professional civil engineer in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts experienced in the phases of civil
engineering related to subdivision planning and design.
FLOODPLAIN/FLOODWAY — Areas subject to flooding under a onehundred-
year storm event as shown on the Federal Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM) as most recently amended.
FOOTCANDLES (FC) — A unit of measuring the amount of illumination
equal to one lumen per square foot on a surface.
FOOTCANDLES, HORIZONTAL — The amount of illumination equal to one
lumen per square foot on a horizontal surface.
FOOTCANDLES, INITIAL — The amount of illumination (measured by
footcandles) given off by a luminary at the time of installation.
FRONTAGE — For the purpose of these regulations, physical access, or the
demonstrated feasibility of safe physical access, to a property from a street
designed for such purposes, i.e., collector and minor residential streets,
excluding wetlands, ledge, and areas of slope in excess of 10%.
GENERAL LAWS — The General Laws of the commonwealth with all
additions thereto and amendments thereof. In case of a rearrangement of
the General Laws, any citation of particular sections of the General Laws
shall be applicable to the corresponding sections in the new codification.
GIS — Geographic Information Systems Mapping.
HANDICAP ACCESSIBILITY — The regulations and standards promulgated
under the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act and the Massachusetts
Architectural Access Board.43
§ 405-4 CHARTER § 405-4
C:499
HOT SPOT — A stormwater hot spot is an area where land use or activities
generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in
excess of those typically found in stormwater. Infiltration basins should
never receive runoff from stormwater hot spots, unless the stormwater has
already been fully treated by another stormwater treatment practice. This
is due to potential groundwater contamination.
IMPERVIOUS COVER — Those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate
rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.).
INFILTRATION — The flow of water from the ground surface down into the
soil.
INFILTRATION FACILITY — Any structure or device designed to infiltrate
retained water to the ground. These facilities may be above grade or below
grade.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Any activity that changes the volume or
peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface, including
grading, digging, cuffing, scraping, excavating of soil, placement of fill
materials, paving construction, substantial removal of vegetation, and any
activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any
natural or man-made watercourse.
LAND SURVEYOR — A person who is a registered land surveyor in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
LAYOUT — The full strip of land designated as a way or street as
distinguished from the roadway. A way.
LOT — An area of land in one ownership, with definite boundaries, used, or
available for use, as the site of one or more buildings.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A land development design approach to
managing stormwater runoff. Low-impact development (LID) emphasizes
conservation and use of on-site natural features to protect water quality.
This approach implements engineered small-scale hydrologic controls to
replicate the pre-development hydrologic regime of watersheds through
infiltrating, filtering, and storing.
MASSACHUSETTS STORM-WATER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK — The
most recent edition promulgated by MassDEP of the Massachusetts Stormwater
Handbook.
MASSDEP — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
or its successor.
MGL CHAPTER 41 — Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 41 (§§ 81K to
81GG) and any acts in amendment thereof, also commonly known as the
"Subdivision Control Law."
MHD — Massachusetts Highway Division (District No. 5) of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT).
43.Editor's Note: The definition of "high water" which immediately followed this definition
was repealed 7-24-2017.
§ 405-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-4
C:500
MODIFICATION — Any change to the Planning Board's approval that shall
require review, as either a minor or major modification, and which may be
subject to a public hearing.
MUNICIPAL SERVICE — Public utilities furnished by the Town of
Marshfield such as water, sewerage, gas and electricity.
MUNICIPAL SERVICES — Sewers, pump stations, surface water drainage
systems, water pipes, gas pipes, streets, sidewalks, electric lines, telephone
lines, fire alarm facilities, and their respective appurtenances.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM (MS4) — The system of conveyances
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any
road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain,
pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or
altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure, that
together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the
Town of Marshfield.
MUTCD — The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Millennium
Edition. An AASHTO guide on the safe design of roadways.
MYLAR — The original plans prepared on a thin polyester film material
capable of reproduction and acceptable for recording at the Registry of
Deeds.
NAVD 88 — North America Vertical Datum of 1988.
NGVD — National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from any source other than
any discernible, confined, and discrete conduit or waterway, and shall
include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, mining,
construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources.
OWNER — As applied to real estate, the person (as hereinafter defined)
holding the ultimate fee simple title to a parcel, tract or lot of land, as shown
by the record in the appropriate land registration office, registry of deeds,
or registry of probate.
PERSON — An individual or two or more individuals, or a group or
association of individuals, a trust, a partnership, or a corporation having
common or undivided interests in a tract of land.
PLANNING BOARD ENGINEER — A Massachusetts registered professional
civil engineer so designated by the Board to act as its agent in that capacity.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A plan of a proposed subdivision or a resubdivision
of land prepared in accordance with Article III under procedure, to facilitate
proper preparation of a definitive plan.
PRINT — A contact print, dark line on white background.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER/LAND SURVEYOR — Individuals licensed and
registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as professional
engineers or land surveyors who are experienced with subdivision planning
and design. For the purposes of these rules and regulations, the licensees
§ 405-4 CHARTER § 405-4
C:501
must hold current and unexpired licenses. The Planning Board reserves the
right to verify the status of any licensee's license in order to promote health,
safety and welfare of the public.
RDG — Roadside Design Guide, latest edition. An AASHTO guide on the safe
design of roadways.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of water to aquifers.
RECORDED — Recorded in the Plymouth County Registry of Deeds, except
that, as affecting registered land, it shall mean filed with the Recorder of
the Land Court.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration, or improvement
exceeding one acre in area where existing land use is high-density
commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential.
REGISTERED MAIL — Registered or certified mail.
REGISTRY OF DEEDS — The Registry of Deeds of the County of Plymouth,
including when appropriate the Plymouth County Registry District of Land
Court.
RESCISSION — An action of the Planning Board, through a public hearing
process, to make null and void a prior approval or action of the Planning
Board.
RESOURCE AREA — Any area protected under the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act, Massachusetts Rivers Act, or Marshfield Conservation
Commission regulations.
RETENTION FACILITY — A man-made basin, depression, dike, and/or
related structure for the purpose of detaining or impounding stormwater
on a site, but which has no free-flowing outlet, e.g., a pipe or weir, to
allow stormwater from small storm events to be discharged to a natural
watercourse or wetland. Leaching pits, or similar ground discharge
structures, shall not constitute an outlet in the meaning of this definition.
ROADWAY — That portion of a way, which is designed and prepared for
vehicular travel. The "traveled way".
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan showing the
control of soil erosion and sedimentation on or from a development site and
is required to be submitted as part of these rules and regulations.
SPECIAL ACCOUNT — An account established in accordance with MGL c.
44, § 53G, which allows the Planning Board to engage consultants to review
plans regulated by these regulations.
STANDARD FOR DIGITAL SUBMISSION TO MUNICIPALITIES — A
standard for the digital submission of plans to municipalities issued by
the Executive Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs (EOEA) Office
of Geographic and Environmental Information (MassGIS), detailed in a
document titled "Standard for Digital Plan Submittals to Municipalities,
Version 2.0" dated October 2007.
§ 405-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-4
C:502
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS — Massachusetts Highway Department
Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, latest edition.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land disturbing activity associated
with a development, including but not limited to land preparation such
as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways;
excavation for basements, footings, piers, or foundations; erection of
temporary forms; and installation of accessory buildings such as garages.
STORM EVENT — A natural storm event and/or computer model of such an
event that depicts storm or rainfall behavior.
STORMWATER — A term used to describe water that originates during
precipitation events. It may also be used to apply to water that originates
with snowmelt or runoff water from overwatering that enters the
stormwater system. Stormwater that does not soak into the ground
becomes surface runoff, which either flows into surface waterways or is
channeled into stormwater management systems such as storm drains.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan showing the management
of stormwater on or from a development site and is required to be submitted
as part of these rules and regulations.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS — The most recent edition
promulgated by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection, or its successor, of the Stormwater Management Standards. An
overview of the standards may be found in Chapter 1 of the Massachusetts
Stormwater Management Handbook, available online at: www.mass.gov/
dep/water/laws/policies.htm#storm.
STORMWATER OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN — The applicant's
proposed plan for regular inspection and cleaning of proposed drainage
structures and/or systems to ensure BMPs in accord with federal, state and
local regulations.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water resulting from precipitation that flows
overland.
STORMWATER TREATMENT PRACTICES — Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means
of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs
to stormwater runoff and water bodies.
STREAMS AND OTHER WATERCOURSES — As defined in MGL c. 131,
§ 40, the Wetlands Protection Act.
STREET —
EXPRESSWAY (FREEWAY) — A divided, limited access highway used
exclusively for inter-local and interstate travel, and providing gradeseparated
intersections. Example: Route 3.
A.
ARTERIAL (PRIMARY OR MAJOR) STREET — A street which, in the
opinion of the Board, is being used or will be used as a thoroughfare
between different portions of the Town. Arterials interconnect the
B.
§ 405-4 CHARTER § 405-4
C:503
STREET DETERMINATION — An official petition before the Planning Board
that requests the Planning Board for an opinion, as provided for in the
Marshfield Zoning Bylaw, Article II, Definitions, "street," that provides a
determination with respect to the adequacy of an existing road (roadway
surface in existence prior to January 1, 2010) having sufficient width,
suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of
vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon
or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve
such land and buildings erected or to be erected thereon.
STREET IMPROVEMENT — An official application and construction plan
submitted to the Planning Board that specifies the proposed design and
construction requirements for construction of:
principal traffic generators within the Town as well as important rural
routes. Residential development should be served from a side street,
and a detailed traffic analysis should be made to determine how best
to serve the commercial property, whether from service roads, special
entrances, or side streets. Examples: Route 139 (Plain Street, Careswell
Street and Ocean Street); Route 3A (Main and Moraine Streets), Union,
Furnace, and Acorn Street.
SECONDARY (MAJOR COLLECTOR) STREET — A street intercepting
several minor collector streets or which will be the principal access to
a business or industrial subdivision and which, in the opinion of the
Board, may carry traffic from such collector streets to a major street
or community facility. Examples: Pine, Oak, Ferry, Summer, Elm, So.
River, Church, Clay Pit, School, Prospect, Forest, Highland, Spring, Old
Ocean, Mt. Skirgo, Winslow, Parsonage, Webster, Canal, and Enterprise
Drive.
C.
RESIDENTIAL STREETS —
TYPE "A" — Serving five or fewer houses; typically a dead-end
street, with no chance of being extended into adjoining
undeveloped land; R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts; one sidewalk
required.
(1)
TYPE "B" — Serving eight or fewer houses; typically a dead-end
street; R-3 Zoning District; one sidewalk required.
(2)
TYPE "C" — Serving fewer than 25 houses; two sidewalks required;
all zoning districts.
(3)
TYPE "D" — Serving 25 or more houses; includes the principal
access street for circulation within a large residential subdivision,
or one which is planned to be extended to serve adjoining
undeveloped land; two sidewalks required; all zoning districts.
(4)
D.
A. Roads that have not been built within existing paper right-of-way(s);
Unimproved roads that have not been paved and/or do not have
stormwater management infrastructure; and
B.
§ 405-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-4
C:504
STREET IMPROVEMENT PLAN — In cases where a preexisting
grandfathered lot as provided for in MGL c. 40A, § 6, fronts on an
unconstructed paper street (not covered under the definition of
"subdivision" below) an applicant may file with the Planning Board a street
improvement plan under the same process (including a public hearing) as a
definitive subdivision as provided for in § 405-7, Street determination/street
improvement plan, in the Marshfield Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
STREET LAYOUT — The portion of land proposed within a subdivision
designated as the way or street beyond the visible paved traveled roadway.
Layout shall include all sidewalks, grass strips and reserved areas as shown
on the approved definitive plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract of land into two or more lots, and
shall include resubdivision, and shall relate to the process of subdivision or
the land or territory subdivided. The division of a tract of land into two or
more lots shall not constitute a subdivision if, at the time it was made, every
lot within said tract had frontage, in compliance with the Zoning Bylaw, on:
SUBDIVISION CONTROL — The power of regulating the subdivision of land
granted by the Subdivision Control Law.
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW — Sections 81K through 81GG, inclusive, of
MGL c. 41 as now in force, and any acts in amendment thereof, or successor
standard/document. This document can be found athttp://www.mass.gov/
mgis.
SUBDIVISION INSPECTOR — An inspector engaged by the Planning Board
for on-site inspection and recommendations during construction of the
subdivision to be paid by the developer for services rendered.
SURETY — A form of performance that is posted by the developer/applicant
prior to the start of work to guarantee completion of approved work and, if
Lots shown on a subdivision plan that predates the adoption of the
Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41.
C.
A public way as laid out by the Selectmen or a way which the Town
Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way;
A.
A way shown on a plan previously approved and endorsed under
subdivision control; or
B.
A way in existence on January 23, 1956, having, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate
construction to provide for the needs of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
and municipal services in relation to the proposed use of the land
abutting thereon or served. Conveyance or other instruments adding
to, taking away from, or changing the size and shape of lots in such
a manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the required
frontage, or the division of a tract of land on which two or more
buildings were standing on January 23, 1956, into separate lots, on
each of which one such building remains standing, shall not constitute
a subdivision.
C.
§ 405-4 CHARTER § 405-4
C:505
defaulted by the developer/applicant, shall be used by the Town to complete
said work. The Planning Board's consulting engineer recommends all surety
amounts as requested by the Planning Board.
SURVEYOR — Any person who is registered by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts to perform land surveying services.
SWALE — A man-made depression usually narrow and shallow in width,
elongated, to provide for the movement of stormwater to a point of
discharge.
TRAVELED WAY — That portion of a way which is designed and prepared
for vehicular travel. The roadway.
TREE CUTTING AND PLANTING PLAN — A plan to accompany definitive
subdivision plans which shall be designed to protect large or significant
trees, promote public safety, and enhance the privacy of the residents and
neighbors of the subdivision.
VITAL ACCESS — A way shall be said to provide vital access to a lot if safe,
practical access can be gained from the way to the buildable portions of the
lot, as contemplated by MGL c. 41, § 81M. An unconstructed street or paper
street shall not be said to provide vital access to a lot for the purposes of
obtaining approval not required (ANR) endorsement.
WALKWAY — A way designed for use by pedestrians, not necessarily
parallel to a street.
WATERCOURSE — Any body of water, including but not limited to lakes,
ponds, rivers and streams.
WATERWAY — A channel, either natural or man-made, that directs surface
runoff to a watercourse or to the public storm drain.
WAY — The full strip of land designated as a way or street as distinguished
from the roadway. The layout.
WETLAND BYLAW — Marshfield Wetlands Protection Bylaw, Chapter 294,
as amended.
ZONING BYLAW and ZONING MAP — Marshfield Zoning Bylaw, as
amended; Marshfield Zoning Map, as amended.44
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 305, Zoning.
§ 405-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-4
C:506
ARTICLE III
Procedure for Submission and Approval of Plans
§ 405-5. Plan believed not to require approval.
Any person wishing to cause to be recorded a plan of land who believes
that his plan does not require approval under the Subdivision Control
Law may submit his plan, together with a filing fee as provided in
Chapter 420, Fee Schedule, and seven contact prints of said plan for
the Board's use, accompanied by the necessary evidence to show that
the plan does not require approval. Said person shall file with the Town
Clerk and the Board by delivery or by registered or certified mail,
postage prepaid, an application (Form A).45 [Amended 7-24-2017]
A.
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval under
the Subdivision Control Law, it shall without a public hearing and
within 21 days of submission cause to be endorsed thereon the words:
"Approval Under the Subdivision Control Law Not Required." Said plan
shall be certified by the Board and returned. If the Board determines
that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision Control Law,
it shall within 21 days of submission of said plan give written notice to
the Town Clerk and the person submitting the plan.
B.
In determining whether a way in existence when the Subdivision
Control Law became effective in the Town is adequate to qualify a
plan as not constituting a subdivision, the Board shall take into
consideration the following factors, among others:
Whether the right-of-way is at least 24 feet wide as required by the
Zoning Bylaw;
(1)
Whether the existing horizontal and vertical alignment of the
roadway provides safe visibility; and
(2)
Whether the roadway is at least 20 feet wide and paved, with
adequate provisions for drainage.
(3)
C.
Said plan shall include the following:
The following statement: "Planning Board endorsement of this plan
indicates only that the plan is not a subdivision under MGL c.
41, § 81L, and does not indicate that the lot is buildable, or that
it meets zoning, health, conservation or general bylaw
requirements."
(1)
Title, date, scale, legend, North arrow, locus map, existing
buildings and structures, existing septic systems, stone walls,
easements, and wetlands as delineated under the Zoning Bylaw
and/or MGL c. 131, § 40, and the Town of Marshfield Wetland
Bylaw. Base flood elevation data, as shown on the Flood Insurance
(2)
D.
45.Editor's Note: Form A is available at the Planning Board office.
§ 405-5 CHARTER § 405-5
C:507
§ 405-6. Preliminary plan.
Applicants are encouraged to meet with the Board for pre-preliminary
discussions with conceptual subdivision plans. The purpose of such
discussions is to identify potential problems or concerns prior to the
applicant expending funds for the filing of preliminary or definitive plans.
Rate Map, as most recently revised, published by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, shall be provided. The scale of
said plan shall be one inch equals 40 feet or such other scale as
shall be deemed appropriate by the Planning Board to show the
property and the above-required information conveniently. Plans
shall be in accordance with MGL c. 36, § 13A, as amended.
Applications which are found to be incomplete shall be returned
to the applicant without the endorsement of the Board with the
finding that insufficient information has been provided to
determine whether or not the plan constitutes a subdivision in the
meaning of MGL c. 41, § 81L. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(3) The entire parcel(s) subject to the application.
General. A preliminary plan of a subdivision may be submitted by the
applicant for discussion, approval, conditional approval, or disapproval
by the Board. An applicant shall demonstrate ownership of the fee
interest on the land in question or else document that (s)he is acting as
the duly authorized agent of said owner by means of a notarized letter
so stating. Eight copies of the plan shall be submitted to the Board and
written notice of such submission made to the Town Clerk by delivery,
or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid.
Fees; administrative/staff review.
Every preliminary plan shall be subject to the filing fee as
provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule. [Amended
7-24-2017]
(a)
Any change deemed to be significant by the Planning Board,
such as a new roadway location or connection, shall require
a new submission and filing fee as required above. The Board
may, at its discretion, waive filing fees where changes to plans
are required through circumstances beyond the control or
design responsibility of the applicant.
(b)
(1)
Fees; consultant review/special accounts.
Every preliminary plan shall be required to file the minimum
review fee to establish an individual special account as
provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule. [Amended
7-24-2017]
(a)
Where specific conditions arising from the land or the nature
of the proposal necessitate the assistance of a planning,
(b)
(2)
A.
§ 405-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-6
C:508
engineering, traffic, soils, hydrologic or other consultant, the
Planning Board may engage such consultant services to assist
the Board in analyzing a project to ensure compliance with all
relevant laws, ordinances, bylaws and regulations. The Board
may require that applicants pay a review fee consisting of the
reasonable costs incurred by the Board for the employment
of outside consultants engaged by the Board to assist in the
review of the application.
Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall
be deposited with the Town Treasurer/Collector who shall
establish a special account for this purpose. Expenditures from
this special account may be made at the direction of the Board
without further appropriation. Expenditures from this special
account shall be made only in connection with the review of a
specific project or projects for which a review fee has been or
will be collected from the applicant. Failure of an applicant to
pay a review fee shall be grounds for denial of the application
or permit. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(c)
Review fees may only be spent for services rendered in
connection with the specific project from which they were
collected. Accrued interest may also be spent for this purpose.
At the completion of the Board's review of a project, any excess
amount in the account, including interest, attributable to a
specific project shall be repaid to the applicant or the
applicant's successor in interest. A final report of said account
shall be made available to the applicant or the applicant's
successor in interest. For the purpose of this regulation, any
person or entity claiming to be an applicant's successor in
interest shall provide the Board with documentation
establishing such succession in interest.
(d)
Any applicant may take an administrative appeal from the
selection of the outside consultant to the Board of Selectmen,
provided that such appeal is taken within 14 days of
notification of the Board's appointment of the consultant. The
grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that
the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not
possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum
qualifications shall consist either of an educational degree in,
or related to, the field at issue or three or more years of
practice in the field at issue or a closely related field. The
required time limit for action upon an application by the Board
shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal.
In the event that the Board of Selectmen makes no decision
within one month following the filing of the appeal, the
selection made by the Board shall stand.
(e)
Contents. The preliminary plan so titled shall be drawn at a scale of
one inch to each 40 feet. Said preliminary plan should show sufficient
B.
§ 405-6 CHARTER § 405-6
C:509
information about the subdivision to form a clear basis for discussion
of its problems and for the preparation of the definitive plan. The
necessary information should include all pertinent data on nearby
property which would have an effect on, or be affected by, the
subdivision. The plan shall be prepared by an engineer and land
surveyor, registered in Massachusetts, shall be clearly and legibly
drawn in black India ink upon tracing cloth or Mylar, and shall bear a
certification signed by the land surveyor on the title sheet stating that
the plan is derived from an actual survey made on the ground according
to Planning Board and state standards. All surveying shall conform to
the requirements of the Land Court, Class A, as set forth in the manual
of said Court, from time to time current. Plans shall conform to MGL c.
36, § 13A, and shall be 24 inches wide and 36 inches long. If multiple
sheets are required, they shall be numbered consecutively in the upper
right-hand corner and they shall be accompanied by an index sheet
showing the entire subdivision. The index sheet shall contain a key plan
at one inch equals 100 feet or as approved by the Board, indicating the
location of each street. The plan shall contain the following:
Name of subdivision, date, bar scale, name of applicant, engineer,
North point, bench marks, and map locus, an identification of the
appropriate zoning district, including but not limited to wetlands as
delineated under MGL c. 131 and the Town of Marshfield Wetland
Bylaw, and any possible exceptions or conflicts with the Zoning
Bylaw. All plans shall note that design and construction are to
conform to the rules and regulations of the Board. A title block
must appear on each page and suitable space provided to record
the action of the Board and the signatures of the Board members
on the first page thereof.
(1)
Names of all abutters as they appear on the most recent tax list
and approximate intersecting boundary lines of abutting lands.
All contiguous property owned by the applicant shall be included
in the plan regardless of whether or not a substantial portion of
the applicant's remaining land remains undivided. Such remaining
area shall be considered as a single lot, requiring approval as a
resubdivision before further division of the remaining area occurs.
(2)
Lines of existing and proposed streets, ways, lots, easements, and
public or common areas within the subdivision.
(3)
Sufficient data to determine the minimum lot areas and zoning
dimensional compliance of lots within or affected by the
subdivision.
(4)
Location of all permanent monuments as defined in Article IV,
Design Standards and Required Improvements, properly identified
as to whether existing or proposed.
(5)
A sketch plan showing tracts of land, ownership, and topography at
no less than two-foot contour and the location, names and present
(6)
§ 405-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-6
C:510
widths of the secondary streets bounding, approaching or within
reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
Size and location of existing and proposed storm drains, water
main locations, and utilities within and adjacent to the subdivision
(refer to design standards herein).
(7)
Location of and distance from sources of private and the nearest
public water supply in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the Board of Health.
(8)
Major site features such as existing easements, stone walls, fences,
buildings, other structures, historic structures, vistas, areas of
unique vegetation, existing septic systems, wooded areas, rock
ridges and rock outcroppings, swamps, marshes, water bodies,
wetlands as cited in § 405-5D(2), and existing topography as
required. During discussion of the preliminary plan, the complete
information required for the definitive plan will be developed.
(9)
Base flood elevation data, as shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map, as most recently revised, published the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(10)
Street numbers and names; referral to Historical Commission, Police
Department and Fire Department.
All proposed ways are to be referred to in all preliminary plans
by approximate street numbers in relation to existing public ways
(e.g., 1100 Careswell Street instead of "Marsh Hill"). Said numbers
are to be obtained from the office of the Town Engineer for
preliminary plan purposes. Multiple streets within a proposed
subdivision shall be referred to in a preliminary plan as Road A, B,
C, etc.
(1)
Upon submission of a formal preliminary plan (Form B),46 the
Planning Board shall refer the plan forthwith to the Historical
Commission, which shall make a recommendation to the Board
within 30 days of the referral date as to proposed street names.
If, in the Commission's view, the subject property has significant
historical association, which merits preservation, it shall forward
recommendations to the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall
consider the significance of such associations as provided by the
Commission in its final selection of street names. The applicant may
provide suggestions to the Commission and directly to the Planning
Board.
(2)
After the elapsing of 30 days from the date of referral to the
Historical Commission, the Planning Board shall forward all
recommendations acceptable to it to the Police and Fire
Departments for their comment. Within the allowed forty-five-day
(3)
C.
46.Editor's Note: Form B is available at the Planning Board office.
§ 405-6 CHARTER § 405-6
C:511
§ 405-7. Street determination/street improvement plan.
[Preexisting private/paper street(s) and all roads or streets in pre-1956
recorded subdivisions.]
review period for preliminary plan action, the Planning Board shall
render its decision on street names as a part of its decision on the
application.
The Board shall strive to select brief names for convenience and
clarity, limiting length of names to one word, unless exceptional
historic significance is shown.
(4)
Hence forward, whether followed by a definitive plan or further
preliminary plans, the Town Engineer shall refer an applicant on
the same parcel to the approved street name(s), unless in his
judgment new access or intervening circumstances warrant
reconsideration. In that event, reference can again be made to the
procedure under this section.
(5)
Approval or disapproval. The Board shall, within 45 days after
submission, give such preliminary plan its approval, with or without
modification, or shall disapprove such plan, stating its reasons. The
Town Clerk shall be notified of the Board's decision in writing. Such
approval is valid for seven months and does not constitute approval of a
subdivision but does facilitate the procedure in securing final approval
of the definitive plan.
D.
Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to set forth the procedures
and standards by which a lot owner may determine whether one or
more lots have frontage on a way that meets the definition of "street" in
the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw.
This process is called a "street determination" and it prescribes the
requirements for construction of:
Roads that have not been built, within existing paper rights-ofway;
(a)
Unimproved roads that have not been paved and do not have
stormwater management infrastructure; and
(b)
Lots shown on a subdivision plan that predates the adoption of
the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41.
(c)
(1)
These regulations for improvements to private ways are intended
to reduce the likelihood of drainage and erosion problems and
ensure that improvements, when completed, result in a positive
street determination.
(2)
A.
Authority. A building permit may not be issued by the Building
Commissioner for new construction unless the lot on which the building
is to be constructed has frontage on a "street" as defined in the
B.
§ 405-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-7
C:512
Marshfield Zoning Bylaws. For private streets not approved under the
Subdivision Control Law, the Planning Board must make a
determination as to the adequacy of the way in accordance with this
definition. A "street" as defined in the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw Article
II is: "A way, over 24 feet in right-of-way width, which: A. Is a public
way laid out by a governmental entity or public authority pursuant
to Massachusetts General Laws or is shown as a public way on an
official map adopted by the Town pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 81E, or
has been accepted by the Town as a public way; or B. Is shown on a
plan approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Rules
and Regulations of Marshfield and MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG; or C.
has, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable
grades and adequate construction to provide the needs of vehicular
traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or
served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve
such land and buildings erected or to be erected thereon." [Amended
7-24-2017]
Application for a street determination.
Submittal requirements. Applicants for street determinations shall
submit the following items to the Planning Board:
A written request for a street determination signed by the
individual seeking the determination.
(a)
The name(s) of the street(s) for which a determination is being
sought.
(b)
The Assessor's parcel number for the lot(s) for which a
determination is being sought.
(c)
An Assessor's map or other locus map which shows adjacent
streets and is sufficient to locate the street(s) and parcel(s).
(d)
An administrative filing fee as provided in Chapter 420, Fee
Schedule. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(e)
(1)
Planning Board procedure. Upon receipt of a completed request
for a street determination, the Planning Board will schedule the
request for its next available meeting.
(2)
Review standards.
If the way is not a public way or a subdivision way, the Planning
Board will consider the following criteria in determining
whether a private way is of "sufficient width, suitable grades,
and adequate construction":
The roadway surface must be a minimum width of 20 feet
of bituminous concrete;
[1]
[2] The roadway surface was created prior to January 1, 2010;
(a)
(3)
C.
§ 405-7 CHARTER § 405-7
C:513
[3] The adequacy of or need for drainage along the roadway;
The adequacy of municipal services along the roadway
(includes water and wastewater);
[4]
[5] The number of existing and potential lots on the way;
The minimum requirement for a twenty-four-foot right-ofway
in the Zoning Bylaw;
[6]
[7] The slope of the roadway.
The Board's decision shall be based on the conditions that exist
at the time the street determination is requested.
(b)
Decision. The Planning Board will vote to issue a positive or a
negative street determination within 90 days of receipt of a
completed request. The Board's decision will be issued in writing,
with reasons set forth, and a copy shall be provided to the Building
Commissioner. [Amended 7-24-2017]
Positive street determination. Upon issuance of a positive
street determination, applicants may be issued a building
permit (assuming all other requirements of zoning are met).
(a)
Negative street determination. The Building Department will
not issue building permits when a negative street
determination is made. In such cases, roadway improvements
must be made prior to reconsideration by the Planning Board.
Such improvements fall into two categories:
Applicants seeking to create new lots on private ways/
paper streets must file a subdivision plan pursuant to the
Subdivision Control Law and the Marshfield Subdivision
Rules and Regulations.
[1]
Applicants seeking to develop existing lots must file a
subdivision plan meeting the minimum standards and
procedures outlined below.
[2]
(b)
(4)
Improvements to private ways and paper streets. Where the Planning
Board determines that the negative street determination is the second
category {Subsection C(4)(b)[2], existing lots of record on a paper
street} applicants shall provide the following information:
Contents. The street improvement plan, so titled, shall be drawn
at a scale of one inch to each 40 feet. Said street improvement
plan should show sufficient information about the proposed
improvements. The necessary information should include all
pertinent data on nearby property, which would have an effect
on, or be affected by, the proposed improvements. The plan shall
be prepared by an engineer and/or land surveyor, registered in
Massachusetts, shall be clearly and legibly drawn and shall bear a
(1)
D.
§ 405-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-7
C:514
certification signed by the land surveyor on the title sheet stating
that the plan is derived from an actual survey made on the ground
according to Planning Board and state standards. All surveying
shall conform to the requirements of the Land Court, Class A, as
set forth in the manual of said Court, from time to time current.
Plans shall conform to MGL c. 36, § 13A, and shall be 24 inches
wide and 36 inches long. If multiple sheets are required, they shall
be numbered consecutively in the lower right-hand corner and
they shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire
subdivision. The index sheet shall contain a key plan at one inch
equals 100 feet or as approved by the Board, indicating the location
of each street.
The street improvement submittal shall include six full size (24
inches wide and 36 inches long), 18 11 x 17 sets and a pdf file
(CD/DVD or USB).
(a)
The plan shall contain the following:
Street address/name of property owner, date, bar scale,
name of applicant, engineer, North point, bench marks,
and map locus, an identification of the appropriate zoning
district, including but not limited to wetlands as delineated
under MGL c. 131 and the Town of Marshfield Wetland
Bylaw, and any possible exceptions or conflicts with the
Zoning Bylaw (including flood designation). All plans shall
note that design and construction are to conform to the
rules and regulations of the Board. A title block must
appear on each page and suitable space shall be provided
to record the action of the Board and the signatures of the
Board members on the first page thereof. Said title box
shall be on the lower right-hand corner of the plan page.
[1]
Names of all abutters as they appear on the most recent
tax list and approximate intersecting boundary lines of
abutting lands. All contiguous property owned by the
applicant shall be included in the plan regardless of
whether or not a substantial portion of the applicant's
remaining land remains undivided. Such remaining area
shall be considered as a single lot, requiring approval as a
resubdivision before further division of the remaining area
occurs.
[2]
Lines of existing and proposed streets, ways, lots,
easements, and public or common areas within the
subdivision and/or street improvement.
[3]
Sufficient data to determine the minimum lot areas and
zoning dimensional compliance of lots within or affected
by the subdivision.
[4]
(b)
§ 405-7 CHARTER § 405-7
C:515
Location of all permanent monuments as defined in Article
IV, Design Standards and Required Improvements,
properly identified as to whether existing or proposed.
[5]
A sketch plan showing tracts of land, ownership, and
topography at no less than a two-foot contour and the
location, names and present widths of the secondary
streets bounding, approaching or within the street
improvement or reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
[6]
Size and location of existing and proposed storm drains,
water main locations, and utilities within and adjacent to
the subdivision and/or street improvement (refer to design
standards herein).
[7]
Location of and distance from sources of private and the
nearest public water supply in accordance with the rules
and regulations of the Board of Health.
[8]
Major site features such as existing easements, stone
walls, fences, buildings, other structures, historic
structures, vistas, areas of unique vegetation, existing
septic systems, wooded areas, rock ridges and rock
outcroppings, swamps, marshes, water bodies, wetlands
as cited in § 405-5D(2), and existing topography as
required. During discussion of the street improvement
plan, the complete information required for the definitive
plan will be developed.
[9]
Base flood elevation data, as shown on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, as most recently revised, published by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. [Amended
7-24-2017]
[10]
An estimate of the number of potential lots that could be
served by the way based on existing zoning if a positive
street determination were issued.
[11]
A certified list of all abutters to the street that is being
developed. If two streets are being improved, all abutters
to both streets must be notified.
[12]
The plan shall have a statement that the applicant intends
to have the street remain private.
[13]
The sheet showing the topographic information shall
provide the following certification:
[14]
§ 405-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-7
C:516
I certify that the topographic information on this plan was
derived wholly from an on ground instrument survey and
that the datum was obtained from a U.S.G.S. Bench Mark
# ____________________
Date:
(Signature of Professional Land Surveyor)
Waiver requests. If any waivers from the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations are requested, the applicant shall include a waiver
request letter which lists all of the requested waivers and the
reasons why waivers are requested. The waiver request letter shall
state how it would be in the public's best interest to waive strict
compliance with specific sections of the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations.
(2)
Town Clerk copy. Following the submission of the application
packages to the Planning Board, one complete application package
must also be filed with the Town Clerk who will time and date
stamp it and keep it for his or her records. This includes a copy
of the drainage calculations. A copy of the completed set of plans
(stamped by the Town Clerk) shall also be submitted to the
Planning Board. If the applicant would like a stamped application
package for his or her records, an additional set should be provided
to the Town Clerk.
(3)
Incomplete applications. Incomplete application submittals may be
denied by the Planning Board at the first public hearing.
(4)
Special permits and or definitive subdivisions. Where a street
improvement plan also requires a definitive subdivision plan or
special permit approval in accordance with the Marshfield Zoning
Bylaw, both applications shall be filed concurrently.
(5)
Inspection. At the time of construction, an inspector supplied by
the Town shall be paid at the specified hourly rate by the Town to
be reimbursed on at least a quarterly or monthly basis, as billed,
by the Planning Department. Release from covenant or bond shall
not be made until all inspection fees have been paid. [Amended
7-24-2017]
(6)
Administrative expenses. An administrative fee as provided in
Chapter 420, Fee Schedule, shall be provided with a street
improvement plan. A check payable to the Town of Marshfield for
administrative fees shall be submitted to the Planning Board for
deposit with the Town Treasurer/Collector. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(7)
Review fees/special accounts. Every applicant filing a street
improvement plan shall be required to file a minimum review fee as
(8)
§ 405-7 CHARTER § 405-7
C:517
provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule, to establish an individual
special account. [Amended 7-24-2017]
Any change deemed to be significant by the Planning Board
such as a new roadway location or connection shall require a
new submission and filing fees/review fees as required above.
The Board may, at its discretion, waive filing fees where
changes to plans are required through circumstances beyond
the control or design responsibility of the applicant.
(a)
Specific conditions arising from the land or the nature of the
proposal may necessitate the assistance of a planning,
engineering, traffic, soils, or other consultant to assist the
Board in analyzing a project to ensure compliance with all
relevant laws, ordinances, bylaws and regulations. The Board
may require that applicants pay a review fee consisting of
the reasonable costs incurred by the Board for employment
of outside consultants engaged by the Board to assist in the
review of the application.
(b)
Funds received by the Planning Board pursuant to this
subsection shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer/
Collector who shall establish a special account for this
purpose. Expenditures from this special account may be made
at the direction of the Board without further appropriation.
Expenditures from this special account shall be made only in
connection with the review of a specific project or projects
for which a review fee has been or will be collected from the
applicant. Failure of an applicant to pay a review fee shall be
grounds for denial of the application or permit.
(c)
Review fees may only be spent for services rendered in
connection with the specific project from which they were
collected. Accrued interest may also be spent for this purpose.
At the completion of the Board's review of a project, any excess
amount in the account, including interest, attributable to a
specific project, shall be repaid to the applicant or the
applicant's successor in interest. Upon a written request
received from the applicant, a final report of said account shall
be made available to the applicant or the applicant's successor
in interest. For the purpose of this regulation, any person
or entity claiming to be an applicant's successor in interest
shall provide the Board with documentation establishing such
succession in interest.
(d)
Any applicant may take an administrative appeal from the
selection of the outside consultant to the Board of Selectmen,
provided that such appeal is taken within 14 days of
notification of the Board's appointment of the consultant. The
grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that
the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not
(e)
§ 405-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-7
C:518
possess the minimum educational degree in, or related to, the
field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field
at issue or a closely related field. The required time limit for
action upon an application by the Board shall be extended by
the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that
the Board of Selectmen makes no decision within one month
following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the
Board shall stand.
Testing. The applicant shall pay expenses for street improvement
inspections and/or testing to ensure the work conforms to the rules
and regulations.
(9)
Public hearing. Before approval, approval with conditions or
disapproval of the street improvement plan is given, a public hearing
shall be held. Notice of the time and place of the hearing and of the
subject matter sufficient for identification shall be given by the Board
by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Marshfield once a week for two successive weeks, the first publication
being not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing. The applicant
is responsible for preparing notices to abutters by certified mail, return
receipt requested. The prepared notice shall then be verified by the
Planning Board or its agent before being mailed by the applicant.
Return receipts are to be addressed to the Planning Board for further
verification. The notice shall be mailed to the abutters by certified mail
not less than 10 days before the date of the hearing. A copy of said
notice shall be mailed to all owners of land abutting the subdivision
and/or street improvement as appearing in the most recent tax list.
Failure to do so will result in the continuation of the public hearing.
E.
Design and construction standards for street improvements. Based on
site and right-of-way conditions, road improvements shall follow the
definitive subdivision road standards (see Article IV, Design Standards
and Required Improvements) except as follows:
Pavement width shall be a minimum of 20 feet and shall include a
minimum eight-inch gravel base, a two-inch base course and a oneand-
one-half-inch top course.
(1)
Drainage. Catch basins with deep sumps and hoods shall be
required. Depending on topography and other site conditions,
forebays and other drainage pretreatment structures may be
required in environmentally sensitive areas. In all cases,
appropriate provision for water runoff shall be made so that it
leads into a drainage system. Stormwater shall not be directed onto
any abutting property unless it is within an approved stormwater
management system. Stormwater management systems shall be
designed to minimize erosion. Drainage pipes located within the
right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe.
(2)
(3) Curb/berm. All roads shall have twelve-inch-wide Cape Cod berms.
F.
§ 405-7 CHARTER § 405-7
C:519
Sidewalks. In areas where the adjoining streets do not have
sidewalks, the Board may not require sidewalks or contribution to
the sidewalk fund as part of the street improvement.
(4)
Tapering. Where necessary, newly constructed segments of an
unaccepted street shall be tapered back to provide a safe transition
to the cross section of the existing ways.
(5)
Performance guarantee. An applicant of a street improvement plan
shall, prior to endorsement of the plan, provide the Board with the
required provisions to guarantee the construction of ways and
installation of municipal services in accordance with § 405-8E,
definitive subdivision plan performance guarantee.
G.
Certificate of action. The action of the Board in respect to such plan,
as to approval, modification or disapproval thereof, shall be by vote.
Copies of the certificate of action shall be certified and filed with the
Town Clerk and sent by delivery or registered mail, postage prepaid, to
the applicant. If the Board modifies or disapproves such plan, it shall
state in its vote the reasons for its decision. Final approval, if granted,
shall be endorsed on the original drawing of the street improvement
plan by the signatures of a majority of the Board, but not until the
statutory twenty-day appeal period has elapsed following the filing of
the certificate of action of the Board with the Town Clerk, and said
Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has been filed. The Town
Clerk shall endorse on the plan or record separately and refer to on
said plan the fact that no notice of appeal was received during the 20
days of the plan. Endorsement and recording of final plans must occur
within six months of the filing of the decision with the Town Clerk or
the Planning Board may vote to revoke its approval of the plan.
Failure of the Board to take final action regarding a street
improvement plan within 90 days after such submission, or such
further time as may be agreed upon at the written request of the
applicant, shall be deemed to be an approval thereof. After the
street improvement plan has been approved and endorsed, the
applicant shall furnish the Board with six prints and two Mylars.
(1)
Final approval of the street improvement plan does not constitute
the laying out or acceptance by the Town of streets within a
subdivision.
(2)
Approval in all cases is granted for a two-year period from the
date of such approval, and if a development is not completed in its
entirety in that time, the applicant must again petition the Board
for action on the undeveloped portion.
(3)
The Board may grant extensions of this two-year deadline if
petitions for such extensions are received prior to the expiration
of the two-year period. After expiration of the two-year period, the
Board shall conduct a public hearing on the petition for action on
(4)
H.
§ 405-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-7
C:520
the undeveloped portion and may make revisions to the approval to
reflect current conditions.
Payment of taxes. Prior to endorsement of the street improvement
plan, applicants shall provide the Planning Board with a current (within
one month) municipal lien certificate demonstrating that all taxes have
been paid in full on the property subject to the certificate of action.
I.
Recording of certificate of action, plans and associated documents. The
applicant is responsible for recording at his or her cost the approved
street improvement plan, certificate of action, all easements,
covenants, declaration of homeowners' associations and any other
documents which require recording at the Registry of Deeds or Land
Court. Following recording, the applicant shall provide proof of
recording to the Planning Board.
J.
Minimum street improvement conditions. If the Planning Board votes
to approve a street improvement plan, the applicant will be required to
comply with the following minimum conditions:
Prior to construction.
Prior to the endorsement of the plan, the applicant shall
deposit with the Planning Board a sum of money to be
determined by the Board, based on length of new roadway,
for inspection of the street improvements during construction
by the Planning Board's consulting engineer. Any unexpended
funds will be returned to the applicant following completion of
work.
(a)
The applicant shall schedule a preconstruction meeting with
the Town Planner, the Planning Board's consulting engineer,
the Town Engineer and the applicant's contractor that will be
constructing the road improvements.
(b)
The applicant shall provide the Planning Board with 48 hours'
notice of when construction is scheduled to commence.
(c)
The applicant is responsible for recording the signed street
improvement plan and street improvement decision at the
Plymouth County Registry of Deeds and/or Land Court (if
applicable) and providing proof of said recording to the
Planning Board.
(d)
The applicant shall stake out the location of the roadway
widening and limit of work three days prior to construction and
notify all abutters in writing and the Planning Board and the
Board's consulting engineer of the construction start date.
(e)
All trees to be preserved shall be clearly identified with
flagging tape.
(f)
(1)
K.
§ 405-7 CHARTER § 405-7
C:521
The applicant shall obtain approval from the Department of
Public Works for the water main connection prior to
construction of the roadway.
(g)
Construction shall not be started after October 1 and prior to
March 1 of any given calendar year.
(h)
During construction.
With the approval of the Town Planner and Planning Board
consulting engineer, road and utility construction is allowed to
shift within the right-of-way in order to preserve any existing
mature trees located within the right-of-way (ROW). The
roadway contractor should make an effort to avoid damaging
the roots, trunks and limbs of trees, shrubs or other vegetation
to be preserved within and adjacent to the ROW.
(a)
The contractor shall keep open, at a minimum, a single travel
lane to allow for vehicular travel for area residents and
emergency vehicles. The work zone shall be properly marked
with signs approved by the Department of Public Works
Engineering Division.
(b)
The applicant shall be responsible for controlling any erosion
that may occur during construction with hay bales and/or silt
fence. All exposed areas shall be stabilized with loam and seed
or sod and maintained until they are stabilized.
(c)
Construction shall be completed in accordance with the
approved final revised plan.
(d)
All construction traffic control signs and/or barriers must be
clearly marked and easily removable. All signs and barricades
must be reflective for clear visibility at night.
(e)
(2)
Completion of improvements.
If the applicant chooses to undertake all roadwork prior to the
release of a lot(s), four copies of as-built drawings and two Mylars
of the street improvement work shall be submitted for review and
approval prior to the issuance of a positive street determination.
Applicants that provide security for lots to be released shall provide
four copies of as-built drawings and two Mylars of the street
improvement work to be submitted for review and approval prior
to the release of security.
(1)
After improvements are completed in accordance with approved
plans and the Planning Board is so notified in writing, the Planning
Board shall issue a positive street determination for the applicable
portion of the street(s) and shall notify the Building Department
and the applicant in writing of its decision.
(2)
L.
§ 405-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-7
C:522
§ 405-8. Definitive plan.
All street improvements shall be completed within two years of the
date of the Planning Board's vote to approve a street improvement
plan.
(3)
General. All plans shall be submitted in accordance with MGL c. 36,
§ 13A, as amended. A definitive plan of a subdivision may be submitted
by the applicant for discussion, approval, conditional approval, or
disapproval by the Board. An applicant shall demonstrate ownership
of the fee interest on the land in question or else document that (s)he
is acting as the duly authorized agent of said owner by means of a
notarized letter so stating. Any person who submits a definitive plan of
a subdivision for approval shall file with it the following:
Definitive subdivision plan submission requirements.
Definitive subdivision plan applicants shall submit to the
Planning Board the following information in their application
package:47
Information Required
Number
Required Format
Definitive Subdivision
Plan
14 24" x 36"
Definitive Subdivision
Plan
7 11" x 17"
Completed Application
Form C, Definitive
Subdivision Plan
2 Standard form
Completed Definitive
Subdivision Plan Form M,
Submission Requirements
Checklist
1 Standard form
Drainage Calculations 4 8.5" x 11" bound
If the property is located in the Water Resource Protection
District, 1 extra set of prints 24" x 36" shall be submitted.
If the property is located on a state road, Route 3A or Route
139, 1 extra set of prints 24" x 36" shall be submitted.
If the property is located in an area within the sewer district,
1 extra set of prints 24" x 36" shall be submitted.
If the property is located in the Water Resource Protection
District, 1 additional copy of the drainage calculations shall be
required.
(a)
(1)
A.
47.Editor's Note: Forms C and M are available at the Planning Board office.
§ 405-7 CHARTER § 405-8
C:523
Waiver requests. If any waivers from the Subdivision Rules
and Regulations are requested, the applicant shall include
a waiver request letter which lists all of the requested
waivers and the reasons why waivers are requested. The
waiver request letter shall state how it would be in the
public's best interest to waive strict compliance with
specific sections of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
[1]
Town Clerk copy. Following the submission of the
application package to the Planning Board, one complete
application package must also be filed with the Town Clerk
who will time and date stamp it and keep it for his or her
records. This includes a copy of the drainage calculations.
If the applicant would like a stamped application package
for his or her records, an additional set should be provided
to the Town Clerk.
[2]
Filing fees. The application package shall include the filing
fee in the amount specified in the most recent fee
schedule.48
[3]
A separate check shall be provided for the cost of any
consultants the Planning Board may retain to provide technical
assistance in reviewing the subdivision plan. The amount of
the consultant review fee is listed in the fee schedule based on
the size of the development. Following action of the Planning
Board on the subdivision application, any remaining funds in
the consultant review fee account will be returned to the
applicant, upon written request.
(b)
The definitive plan application fee and consultant review fee
shall be submitted to the Planning Department in the form of a
check made out to the Town of Marshfield.
(c)
Incomplete application packages will not be accepted by the
Planning Department.
(d)
Special permits. Where a definitive subdivision plan also requires
special permit approval in accordance with the Marshfield Zoning
Bylaw, both applications shall be filed concurrently.
(2)
Inspection. At the time of construction, an inspector supplied by
the Town shall be paid at the specified hourly rate by the Town to
be reimbursed on at least a quarterly or monthly basis, as billed,
by the Planning Department. Release from covenant or bond shall
not be made until all inspection fees have been paid. [Amended
7-24-2017]
(3)
(4) Administrative expenses.
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 420, Fee Schedule.
§ 405-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-8
C:524
In addition, fees for the review and staff time required to
process the definitive plan by the Planning Department, Board
of Health, Fire Department, Police Department, Highway
Division, Sewer Division, Water Division, and Building
Department, or consultants used in lieu of departmental staff,
shall be as provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule. [Amended
7-24-2017]
(a)
The Board may reduce or waive the above administrative
expenses if the applicant has previously filed a preliminary
plan which has been approved.
(b)
Testing. The applicant shall pay expenses for subdivision inspection
and/or testing to ensure the work conforms to the rules and
regulations.
(5)
Review fees/special accounts. Every definitive plan shall be
required to file the minimum review fee to establish an individual
special account as provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule. The
Board may credit the review fee/special account by the amount
paid for a preliminary plan that has been approved. [Amended
7-24-2017]
Any change deemed to be significant by the Planning Board,
such as a new roadway location or connection, shall require a
new submission and filing fees/review fees as required above.
The Board may, at its discretion, waive filing fees where
changes to plans are required through circumstances beyond
the control or design responsibility of the applicant.
(a)
Where specific conditions arising from the land or the nature
of the proposal necessitate the assistance of a planning,
engineering, traffic, soils, or other consultant to assist the
Board in analyzing a project to ensure compliance with all
relevant laws, ordinances, bylaws and regulations, the Board
may require that applicants pay a review fee consisting of
the reasonable costs incurred by the Board for employment
of outside consultants engaged by the Board to assist in the
review of the application.
(b)
Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall
be deposited with the Town Treasurer/Collector who shall
establish a special account for this purpose. Expenditures from
this special account may be made at the direction of the Board
without further appropriation. Expenditures from this special
account shall be made only in connection with the review of a
specific project or projects for which a review fee has been or
will be collected from the applicant. Failure of an applicant to
pay a review fee shall be grounds for denial of the application
or permit.
(c)
(6)
§ 405-8 CHARTER § 405-8
C:525
Review fees may only be spent for services rendered in
connection with the specific project from which they were
collected. Accrued interest may also be spent for this purpose.
At the completion of the Board's review of a project, any excess
amount in the account, including interest, attributable to a
specific project shall be repaid to the applicant or the
applicant's successor in interest. A final report of said account
shall be made available to the applicant or the applicant's
successor in interest. For the purpose of this regulation, any
person or entity claiming to be an applicant's successor in
interest shall provide the Board with documentation
establishing such succession in interest.
(d)
Any applicant may take an administrative appeal from the
selection of the outside consultant to the Board of Selectmen,
provided that such appeal is taken within 14 days of
notification of the Board's appointment of the consultant. The
grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that
the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not
possess the minimum educational degree in, or related to, the
field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field
at issue or a closely related field. The required time limit for
action upon an application by the Board shall be extended by
the duration of the administrative appeal. In the event that
the Board of Selectmen makes no decision within one month
following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the
Board shall stand.
(e)
Contents.
The definitive plan shall be prepared by an engineer and land
surveyor registered in Massachusetts and shall be clearly and
legibly drawn in black India ink upon tracing cloth, or reproducible
Mylar. All surveying shall conform to the requirements of the Land
Court, Class A, as set forth in the manual of said Court, as updated
from time to time. The plan shall be at scale of one inch equals
40 feet. Plans shall conform to MGL c. 36, § 13A, and shall be 24
inches wide and 36 inches long. If multiple sheets are required,
they shall be numbered consecutively in the upper-right hand
corner and they shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing
the entire subdivision. The index sheet shall contain a key plan at
one inch equals 100 feet, or as approved by the Board, indicating
the location of each sheet. The land surveyor, in addition to
providing the record plan Mylars, is to provide at least two copies
of his grid plan (working drawings) showing the perimeter survey
traverse and all other data normally found on such plans. The
definitive plan shall contain the following:
Name of subdivision, date, bar scale, name of applicant,
engineer, North point, bench marks, and map locus, an
identification of the appropriate zoning district, including but
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 405-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-8
C:526
not limited to wetlands as delineated under MGL c. 131 and
the Town of Marshfield Wetland Bylaw, and any possible
exceptions or conflicts with the Zoning Bylaw. All plans shall
note that design and construction are to conform to the rules
and regulations of the Board. A title block must appear on each
page and suitable space provided to record the action of the
Board and the signatures of the Board members on the first
page thereof.
The following notations are to be provided on the first
page of all definitive subdivision plans:
Subject to a covenant duly executed, dated the _____ day
of ___________, 20 ____, running with the land, to be duly
recorded by or for the owner of record.
This plan is subject to all conditions of the Marshfield
Planning Board Certificate of Action dated __________,
filed with the Marshfield Town Clerk on ___________ and
herewith recorded as a part of this plan.
I hereby certify that there has been no appeal taken to
this Planning Board action during the 20-day statutory
appeal period.
Date:
Town Clerk, Town of Marshfield
I certify that this survey was made on the ground in
accordance with the standards of the Land Court
Instructions of 1989 on or between __________ and
__________.
Date:
(Signature of professional land surveyor)
I certify that all design and construction as presented
conforms to the Rules and Regulations of the Planning
Board with no exceptions or conflicts except as listed
below.
[1]
Separate plan-profile drawings of all proposed streets
shall be submitted with the subdivision plan. They shall
show and identify all existing and proposed utilities and
construction items, including dimensions, pertinent to the
road construction.
[2]
Names of all abutters as they appear in the most recent tax
list and approximate intersecting boundary lines of abutting
lands. All contiguous property owned by the applicant shall be
(b)
§ 405-8 CHARTER § 405-8
C:527
included in the plan regardless of whether or not a substantial
portion of the applicant's land remains undivided. Such
remaining area shall be considered as a single lot, requiring
approval as a resubdivision before further division of the
remaining area occurs.
Lines of existing and proposed streets, ways, lots, easements,
and public or common areas within the subdivision. Where a
definitive plan is not preceded by a preliminary plan, reference
shall be made to § 405-6C for street naming procedures.
Definitive plans shall show the proposed siting of dwellings,
grading, and numbering of each dwelling. Numbering shall
be obtained from the office of the Town Engineer prior to
definitive plan submission.
(c)
Sufficient data to determine the location, elevation, direction
and length of every street and way line, lot line, and boundary
line, and to establish these lines on the ground.
(d)
Location of all permanent monuments as defined in Article
IV, Design Standards and Required Improvements, properly
identified as to whether existing or proposed.
(e)
Location, names and present widths of streets bounding,
approaching or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
(f)
Size and location of existing and proposed storm drains, water
mains, utilities and their appurtenances, including hydrants,
within and adjacent to the subdivision (refer to design
standard herein). The applicant shall submit calculations for
the determination of all waterway openings to justify culvert
and drain sizes as hereinafter set forth. A registered
professional engineer shall prepare such calculations.
(g)
Location of sources of private water supply, nearest public
water supply source, and existing septic systems in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
(h)
Location of approved percolation test pits and deep
observation pits, if any, in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Board of Health. Whether or not septic
systems are proposed, general soil logs and groundwater
profiles shall be shown based on on-site observation pits and/
or wells and/or percolation test. Soil logs shall be sufficient in
detail to show the depth of organic matter, subsoil thickness,
and depth to bedrock (up to eight feet), as well as percent
composition of soil and subsoil types. Locations of test pits
shall be adequately distributed throughout the land area to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board, providing at least one test
hole per every two lots, and one per each 500 feet of proposed
roadway. The Board may require additional soil boring,
probings and test pits, additional soils tests, and submission of
(i)
§ 405-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-8
C:528
a foundation design report from a Massachusetts geotechnical
engineer demonstrating that the existing soils will provide
adequate support for pavements and utilities.
Locations of proposed sewage disposal facilities with the
elevation of the bottom of the leaching bed or trenches shown.
(j)
Profile plans of proposed streets drawn as follows:
[1] A horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet.
[2] A vertical scale of one inch equals four feet.
[3] Existing center line in the fine solid line.
[4] Existing right side line in fine dotted line.
[5] Existing left side line in dashed line.
Proposed center-line grades in heavy lines, all
appropriately designated, showing grade elevations at
every fifty-foot station, except on vertical curves where
they shall be shown at every twenty-five-foot station and at
PVC and PVT.
[6]
Proposed system of drainage, including catch basins,
manholes, and proposed inverts, and pipe sizes.
[7]
[8] All existing intersecting walks and driveways.
The elevation datum shall be mean sea level as determined
from USGS bench marks. One bench mark for each 1,000
feet of roadway, with a minimum of three, must be
established and preserved for construction purposes.
[9]
Rates of gradient shown by figures for roadways, drainage,
and driveways.
[10]
[11]Road profiles must have been obtained from field survey.
All road center lines must have been staked out on the
ground and clearly marked with station numbers two
weeks prior to public hearing.
[12]
(k)
Typical section of proposed streets shown on a profile plan in
accordance with typical cross section as shown in appendix,49
showing construction and all proposed and required utilities.
(l)
Profiles and cross sections of drainage easements where
applicable.
(m)
Existing and proposed topography as follows: The contour
intervals shall be one foot where slopes are less than 5% and
(n)
49.Editor's Note: See Appendix A included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 405-8 CHARTER § 405-8
C:529
two feet on slopes 5% or greater; distinguishable line densities
shall be used to show the difference between one- and twofoot
contours. The topographic maps shall meet National Map
Accuracy Standards as defined by the United States Geological
Survey (USGS) and shall have been derived wholly from onground
instrument surveys. Elevations shall be based upon
USGS National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and
permanent bench marks shall be identified that are outside
the limits of work. A reasonable number of permanent bench
marks, to be determined by the Planning Board through
consultation with the Planning Board Engineer, shall be
established on the site for convenient elevation reference
during and after road construction. Existing contours are to
be shown as dashed lines and proposed final contours as solid
lines. Topographic plans shall extend beyond the limits of the
site as far as may be necessary to provide information relative
to the project, but in no case shall extend for less than 100 feet,
and shall include but not be limited to all natural features such
as stone walls, fences, buildings, historic structures, vistas,
areas of unique vegetation, wells, septic systems, utilities,
existing water bodies, natural waterways, swamps, wetlands
(as defined under MGL c. 131, the Local Wetlands Bylaw and
the Zoning Bylaw), marshlands, and floodplains (as shown on
the Federal Insurance Rate Map as most recently amended)
within and adjacent to the subdivision. The topographic plan is
to be provided with the following certification:
"I certify that the topographic information on this plan was
derived wholly from an on-ground instrument survey and that
the datum was obtained from USGS Bench Mark No.
________________________"
Date:
(Signature of professional land surveyor)
Landscaping and planting plan, showing treatment of all
planting strips, roadway islands and medians, and disturbed
slope areas by species, location, size and quantity.
(o)
Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development.
(p)
A sketch plan showing a feasible, prospective street layout for
any adjacent unsubdivided land whether or not owned by the
applicant unless such a plan has already been filed with the
Board.
(q)
An erosion control and construction management plan showing
the construction methods, scheduling (including any necessary
(r)
§ 405-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-8
C:530
or proposed phasing of work), winter stabilization measures,
and location of necessary water pollution and erosion control
methods.
Designation of temporary stump storage or spoils material
area, in accordance with local and state regulations.
(s)
The completed Form M checklist of required items under the
provisions of these regulations demonstrating the
completeness of the submission for review.50
(t)
The proposed siting of dwellings, grading and numbering of
each lot (as obtained from the Department of Public Works).
(u)
Location on the plan and draft language for easements for
utilities, drainage or any necessary off-site uses, improvements
or structures. In the case of any necessary off-site easements,
such as for drainage, water mains, or other needs, copies of the
fully executed easements must be provided to the Board prior
to final plan endorsement.
(v)
Location on the plan and draft easement or conservation
restriction language for any proposed open space. Final
language shall be provided prior to final endorsement.
(w)
Sufficient data to determine the minimum lot areas and zoning
dimensional compliance of lots within or affected by the
subdivision.
(x)
In case a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than normal
building lots, the Board may decline to approve the plan unless
such parcels are arranged so as to allow the opening of proper
future ways and logical and proper subdivision.
(2)
Public hearing. Before approval, modification and approval or
disapproval of the definitive plan is given, a public hearing shall be
held. Notice of the time and place of the hearing and of the subject
matter sufficient for identification shall be given by the Board by
advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Marshfield once a week for two successive weeks, the first publication
being not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing. The applicant
is responsible for preparing notices to abutters by certified mail, return
receipt requested. The prepared notice shall then be verified by the
Planning Board or its agent before being mailed by the applicant.
Return receipts are to be addressed to the Planning Board for further
verification. The notice shall be mailed to the abutters by certified mail
not less than 10 days before the date of the hearing. A copy of said
notice shall be mailed to all owners of land abutting the subdivision as
appearing in the most recent tax list. Failure to do so will result in the
continuation of the public hearing.
C.
50.Editor's Note: Form M is available at the Planning Board office.
§ 405-8 CHARTER § 405-8
C:531
Review by Board of Health as to suitability of the land. The Board
of Health shall report to the Board in writing, giving its approval or
disapproval of the plan in accordance with the State Environmental
Code, Title 5, copies of which are available from the Board of Health.
In the event of disapproval, it shall make specific findings as to which,
if any, of the lots shown on the plan cannot be used for building sites.
Such conditions shall be noted on the plans, specifying the lots or land
to which said condition applies. The Planning Board shall not approve
any plan that is disapproved by the Board of Health. Every lot shall be
approved with a connection with a municipal sewer or septic system
acceptable to the Board of Health.
D.
Performance guarantee. Before endorsement of a plan, the Board shall
require provision for the construction of ways and installation of
municipal services in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Board. Such construction and installation shall be secured by one, or in
part one and in part the other, of the methods described in the following
Subsection E(1) and (2), which method may be selected and from time
to time varied by the applicant.
Approval by bond or money or negotiable securities. The applicant
may file a bond or a deposit of money or negotiable securities in an
amount determined by the Board to be sufficient to cover the cost
of all or any part of the improvements as shown on the definitive
plan and as specified in the rules and regulations. Detailed cost
estimates for all improvements shall be submitted by the
applicant's professional engineer to the Board for review. If said
estimates are found by the Board and its engineer to be
unsatisfactorily low, a revised estimate satisfactory to the Board
will be required. Such bond or security, if filed or deposited, shall
be approved as to form and manner of execution by the Board
and by Town Counsel and, in addition, as to sureties, by the Town
Accountant and shall be contingent on the completion of such
improvements within one year of the date of the bond. At the
discretion of the Board, time extensions may be granted for periods
of one year, provided that such an extension may be conditioned
upon an increase in the amount of such bond or security as
determined by the Board. The penal sum of any such bond or the
amount of any deposit held may, from time to time, be reduced by
the Board and obligations of the parties thereto released in whole
or in part. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(1)
Approval by covenant. Instead of filing a bond or depositing money
or negotiable securities, the applicant may provide covenant
restrictions. Such covenant, executed and duly recorded by the
owner of record, running with the land, shall provide that
construction of ways and installation of municipal services shall
be provided for the entire subdivision before any lot may be built
upon or conveyed. For corporations registered in Massachusetts,
covenant documents shall be executed by any two of the following
(2)
E.
§ 405-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-8
C:532
officers, or by evidence of corporate vote: president, vice president,
or treasurer. Such a covenant shall comply with the requirements
of Chapter 377 of the Acts of 1958.51 Any covenant given shall be
either inscribed on the plan or contained in a separate document
referred to on the plan. Before any lot is released from the
covenant restrictions, the construction of subdivision
improvements for the segment of the street providing frontage for
said lots and for all roadway segments connecting said lots to the
roadway system of the Town shall be complete, with respect to
all utilities, curbing, drainage, roadway base course, and roadway
pavement binder course.
Certificate of approval, modification, or disapproval.
The action of the Board in respect to such plan, as to approval,
modification or disapproval thereof, shall be by vote, copies of
which shall be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by
delivery or registered mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant. If
the Board modifies or disapproves such plan, it shall state in its
vote the reasons for its decision. Final approval, if granted, shall
be endorsed on the original drawing of the definitive plan by the
signatures of a majority of the Board, but not until the statutory
twenty-day appeal period has elapsed following the filing of the
certificate of action of the Board with the Town Clerk and said
Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has been filed. The
Town Clerk shall endorse on the plan or record separately and
refer to on said plan the fact that no notice of appeal was received
during the 20 days following the filing of the Board's action on the
plan. Endorsement and recording of final plans must occur within
six months of the filing of the decision with the Town Clerk or the
Planning Board may vote to revoke its approval of the plan. Any
definitive plan evolved from the submission of a preliminary plan
which has received approval, with or without modifications, shall
be governed by the rules and regulations relative to subdivision
control in effect at the time of submission of the preliminary plan,
provided that the definitive plan is duly submitted within seven
months from the date on which the preliminary plan was submitted.
[Amended 7-24-2017]
(1)
Failure of the Board to take final action regarding a definitive plan
within 90 days when the plan was preceded by a preliminary plan
or within 135 days when not preceded by a preliminary plan, after
such submission, or such further time as may be agreed upon at the
written request of the applicant, shall be deemed to be an approval
thereof. After the definitive plan has been approved and endorsed,
the applicant shall furnish the Board with four prints thereof.
(2)
Final approval of the definitive plan does not constitute the laying
out or acceptance by the Town of streets within a subdivision.
(3)
F.
51.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81U.
§ 405-8 CHARTER § 405-8
C:533
Approval in all cases is granted for a two-year period from the
date of such approval, and if a development is not completed in its
entirety in that time, the applicant must again petition the Board
for action on the undeveloped portion.
(4)
The Board may grant extensions of this two-year deadline if
petitions for such extensions are received prior to the expiration
of the two-year period. After expiration of the two-year period, the
Board shall conduct a public hearing on the petition for action on
the undeveloped portion and may make revisions to the approval to
reflect current conditions.
(5)
Subdivision reinstatement. In the event that the subdivision
approval has expired beyond the two-year period for completion,
the applicant shall pay an administrative fee as provided in Chapter
420, Fee Schedule, and all costs associated with readvertising the
public hearing. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(6)
Subdivision modifications. Any proposed modification to conditions
of approval or a major modification that triggers the need for a
public hearing will require an administrative fee in the amount as
provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(7)
Payment of taxes. Prior to endorsement of subdivision plans, applicants
shall provide the Planning Board with a current (within one month)
municipal lien certificate demonstrating that all taxes have been paid in
full on the property subject to the certificate of action.
G.
Recording of certificate of action, plans and associated documents. The
applicant is responsible for recording at his or her cost all approved
definitive subdivision plans, certificate of action, all easements,
covenants, declaration of homeowners' associations and any other
documents which require recording at the Registry of Deeds or Land
Court. Following recording, the applicant shall provide proof of
recording to the Planning Board.
H.
Minor changes; plan revisions; incomplete submissions. Definitive plans
submitted to the Planning Board for review under the Town Clerk's
stamp may not be revised without the consent of the Board, and only
as discussed in public session at the public hearing. Any such changes
shall be prominently noted on the plan set cover sheet and on any
individual sheets affected so as to make clear the plan of record on
which the action of the Board is being requested.
Minor changes may be allowed by the vote of the Board at any
time after the public hearing, again with the required notations on
cover sheet and affected plan sheets. A minor change is defined
by the Board as a change which has no discernible impact outside
the subdivision, does not increase rates or volumes of stormwater
runoff, does not increase the amount of cut or fill required, or does
not involve regrading of more than two lots nor more than 200
(1)
I.
§ 405-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-8
C:534
linear feet of roadway within the subdivision. The Planning Board
shall determine, in its opinion, if plan revisions are minor changes
or constitute major changes requiring refiling and rehearing.
The Board reserves the right to disapprove incomplete submissions
at any time if, in its opinion, review of the plan is hampered by the
absence of required information. In the event of such disapproval,
the plans shall be returned to the applicant as incomplete and a
copy of the certificate of action filed with the Town Clerk noting
the reason for the Board's action. The Board also reserves the right
to retain any filing and review fees, or to reimburse any portion
of such fees to the applicant, based on the extent to which the
review has proceeded and to cover administrative costs of filing,
notification, distribution, etc.
(2)
Prohibited activities. Site preparation, tree cutting, filling, grading and
other work done in anticipation of the subdivision plan approval should
not be performed prior to the submission and approval of a definitive
plan. The Planning Board reserves the right to disapprove any such
work, to order restoration of the site, and to assess fines as provided for
in these regulations upon filing of a Form A, Preliminary or Definitive
Plan Application.52
J.
Certificate of performance. Upon completion of the construction of
ways and installation of services in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Board, security for the performance of which was
given by Subsection E(1) and/or (2), or upon the performance of any
covenant with respect to any lot, the applicant shall submit as-built
drawings of all utilities and drainage systems to the Board and a
written statement in duplicate to the Town Clerk, stating that the
necessary requirements have been met. Such statement shall contain
the address of the applicant, and the Town Clerk shall furnish the
Planning Board with one copy of the above statement with a notice
provided by the applicant from the Register or Recorder that the plan
is recorded in Book No., Page No., and date. If the Board is satisfied
that all requirements have been met, it shall release the interest of
the Town in such bond and return the bond or the deposit to the
person who furnished the same, or release the covenant by appropriate
instruments, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded.
If it is determined that the necessary work has not been completed,
the Board shall so notify the applicant in writing specifying the
details. Failure of the Board to so notify the applicant within 45
days after the receipt by the Town Clerk will cause all obligations
under the bond to cease and terminate by operation of the law. Any
deposits shall be returned and any covenant shall become void.
(1)
If the forty-five day period expires without such specifications, or
without release and return of the bond or return of the deposit or
(2)
K.
52.Editor's Note: Form A is available at the Planning Board office.
§ 405-8 CHARTER § 405-8
C:535
release of the covenant, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to
such effect, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded.
The Board shall retain a portion of the performance guarantee
to ensure acceptance of streets by the Town in accordance with
§ 405-17, Street acceptance.
(3)
The Building Commissioner shall issue no building permit for a lot
within a subdivision until such lot has been released by the Board.
[Amended 7-24-2017]
(4)
§ 405-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-8
C:536
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards and Required Improvements
§ 405-9. Streets.
Protection of natural and cultural features. Due regard shall be shown
for all natural features, such as large trees, watercourses, scenic
points, historic spots, stone walls, and similar community assets which,
if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision. If,
in the opinion of the Board, excessive vegetation is removed due to
proposed grades, a restoration plan shall be submitted for approval,
together with the definitive plan. In no case shall areas larger than
100 feet in width be clear-cut to accommodate siting of houses. Areas
larger than 150 feet in width shall not be clear-cut to accommodate
siting of roads and drainage structures. The applicant shall strive to
maintain clear-cutting within the roadway and, where necessary, within
the planting strip. Stone walls shall not be removed or buried unless
approved by the Board and shall be reconstructed and used in
subdivision design.
A.
Grading and topography.
Efforts shall be taken to maintain the continuity of the natural
topography. Cut and fill shall be avoided in all instances possible.
Except in areas where terracing is used, when excavation is
necessary, grading shall be done in such a way that the resulting
contours follow smooth natural curves that conform to the curves
of the surrounding landscape. Straight or angular slopes or cuts
that interrupt natural topography shall not normally be allowed.
Existing contours shall be preserved insofar as it is possible
through optimal location of streets and dwellings to the satisfaction
of the Planning Board. In any event, no change shall be made in
existing contours which adversely affects any land abutting the
proposed subdivision.
(1)
Street layouts shall generally follow (parallel) the existing
contours, or existing stream valley and natural swales, and should
be designed with the objective of the preservation of natural
features identified on the plan, as required in Subsection A above.
All work on the ground hereinafter specified shall be performed
by the applicant in accordance with these rules and regulations,
in conformity with approved definitive plans and specifications and
other construction requirements of the Town agencies concerned,
and to the satisfaction of such agencies. In particular, all design,
material, and construction specifications of the Marshfield
Department of Public Works (DPW) relative to road and utility
construction shall be adhered to unless otherwise provided for
in these regulations. Where no detail is given under Marshfield
DPW or the Department's specifications, reference shall be made
to construction details of the Massachusetts Municipal Engineers
(2)
B.
§ 405-9 CHARTER § 405-9
C:537
Association. All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that,
in the opinion of the Board, they shall provide safe vehicular travel.
Location of streets.
In case a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than normal
building lots, the Board may decline to approve the plan unless
such parcels are arranged so as to allow the opening of proper
future ways and logical and proper subdivision.
(1)
In case access to a subdivision crosses land in another municipality,
the Board may require certification from appropriate authorities
that such access is in accordance with the master plan and
subdivision requirements of such municipality and that a legally
adequate performance bond had been duly posted or that such
access is adequately improved to handle prospective traffic.
(2)
The Planning Board may require space reserved for future streets
(shown on said plan as paper streets) to provide for interconnecting
ways and to avoid excessive dead-end streets. All portions of the
tract being subdivided shall be taken up in lots, streets, public
lands, or other proposed uses, so that remnants and landlocked
areas shall not be created.
(3)
Provision satisfactory to the Board shall be made for the proper
projection of streets, or for access to adjoining property which is
not yet subdivided.
(4)
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property
shall not be permitted except where, in the opinion of the Board,
such strips shall be in the public interest.
(5)
Roadways, culs-de-sac, detention facilities, sidewalks, and other
required infrastructure or improvements shall not be placed within
easements but within the right-of-way or on parcels not buildable
for residential, commercial or industrial structures. Sewer, water,
and drainage lines may be exempted from this position by the
express waiver of the Board. All such land parcels, common land,
or waivered easements shall be bounded with concrete bounds at
all corners.
(6)
Where the street system within the proposed subdivision does
not intersect with or have adequate access, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, from an existing public way or approved
subdivision way, the Board may require, as a condition of approval,
that such adequate access be provided by the applicant through
physical improvements from the proposed subdivision ways to the
nearest public way or approved subdivision way most suitable in
terms of width, grade and construction.
(7)
C.
D. Width, alignment and grades of streets.
§ 405-9 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-9
C:538
The following standards shall govern the design of streets:
Type of
Street
Width of
Way*
(feet)
Width of
Roadway*
(feet)
Minimum
Center-
Line
Radii
Maximum
Center-
Line
Grade
Design
Speed
(mph)
Secondary 50 to 60 26 200 6% 33
Residential
"D"
52 24 100 10% 29
Residential
"C"
46 20 100 10% 23
Residential
"B"
40 20 100 10% 23
Residential
"A"
40 18 100 10% 23
Type of
Street
Minimum
Center-Line
Grade
Minimum Curb
Radius at
Street
Intersections
(feet)
Minimum
Length of
Tangents
Between
Reverse Curves
(feet)
Secondary 0.8% 30 100
Residential** 0.5% 30 —
NOTES:
* The Board may require that the traveled way be separated by
a raised median strip with a width, minimum 20 feet, to be
determined by the Board. In this case, the traveled way shall
consist of two roadways, each with a minimum width of 20 feet
or such greater width as the Board may specify.
** No area of single access, as defined in Article II, shall provide
access for more than eight dwellings total.
(1)
Street intersection with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet
shall not be permitted without a specific waiver from the Board.
(2)
Proposed subdivision streets shall intersect existing and other
proposed streets at ninety-degree right angles whenever feasible
for a distance of at least 100 feet from the intersecting street
lines. Up to a ten-degree variation from the ninety-degree design
objective will be allowed by the Board if the applicant demonstrates
that a right angle is not feasible or practical.
(3)
All changes in grade exceeding 0.5% shall be connected by vertical
curves meeting the following criteria for the purpose of ensuring
suitable sight distances and to avoid harmful application of road
(4)
§ 405-9 CHARTER § 405-9
C:539
salts and undue acceleration of vehicles and stormwater runoff
velocities:
Type of
Street
Minimum
Stopping and
Sight Distance
(feet)
Crest Vertical
Curve,
Minimum K
Value
Sag Vertical
Curve, K
Value
Arterial 275 60 60
Secondary 225 40 50
Collector 200 30 40
Minor
residential
156 20 30
No center-line gradient is to exceed 6% on any curve having a
center-line radius of less than 500 feet or 8% on one having a
center-line radius of more than 500 feet.
(5)
Way lines shall be parallel or concentric, and the roadway shall be
centered in the layout. Details and dimensions shown in the typical
road cross sections in Appendix A shall be complied with.53
(6)
Layout radii concentric with required curb radii shall be required
at all street intersections.
(7)
Leveling areas having a maximum slope of 2% for 100 feet at every
intersection or terminus of secondary streets shall be provided.
Leveling areas having a maximum slope of 2% for 50 feet at the
intersection or terminus of a residential street shall be provided.
(8)
Solar access. The Planning Board may require orientation of ways
and lots to be designed for preservation of maximum solar access
opportunities for future residents of the subdivision, based on
information as to existing topography and vegetative cover.
(9)
The above standards are based further on the typical roadway
cross sections hereby incorporated as part of these regulations and
street design standards as follows.
(10)
Dead-end streets.
Dead-end streets shall not be longer than 600 feet unless, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, a greater length is necessitated
by the topography or other local conditions. In general, maximum
lengths are governed by the most stringent of the following
performance standards:
Frequency of vehicular conflicts (passing vehicles): more than
eight dwelling units.
(a)
(1)
E.
53.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 405-9 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-9
C:540
Convenience of design speed (to ensure observance of posted
speed): 25 miles per hour, 1/4 mile (1,320 feet).
(b)
Stagnation of water lines, and user convenience during repair:
800 feet.
(c)
Child safety; elementary:
[1] Walkers: 1,320 feet.
[2] Bus pickup: 600 feet.
(d)
Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a
turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 120 feet
in diameter with a property line diameter of at least 140 feet, the
configuration of which is to conform to the typical cul-de-sac detail
drawing.54
(2)
Upon construction of an extension of a dead-end street, the
turnaround shall be removed by the extending applicant.
(3)
All culs-de-sac shall include a landscaped center island. A
landscape plan for islands shall be provided. The only stormwater
management facilities allowed within the center island of culsde-
sac are landscaped bio-retention areas. The use of cul-de-sac
islands for stormwater bio-retention areas is encouraged and
should be considered in the design process.
(4)
Construction of roadway.
Construction of the roadway shall conform to the applicable typical
cross section as shown and the hereinafter listed requirements.55
(1)
The entire roadway area shall be cleared and grubbed of all
growth, and unsuitable material shall be removed to the required
depth and as required by the Planning Board Engineer. Where
sidewalks are provided, the grass strips may remain undisturbed.
Applicants are not required to clear the entire right-of-way where
wooded areas are provided in lieu of grass strips.
(2)
All fill and undisturbed soils within four feet of the finished
subgrade shall be non-frost-susceptible and shall not contain more
than 3% passing the 0.02 millimeter sieve to a minimum depth of
four feet below the finished grade.
(3)
The roadway shall consist of a minimum of 10 inches of well-graded
gravel within the following gradation range as established by the
Department of Public Works, topped with a minimum of three
inches of dense graded crushed stone (see typical cross section):
[Amended 7-24-2017]
(4)
F.
54.Editor's Note: See Appendix B included as an attachment to this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: See Appendix A included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 405-9 CHARTER § 405-9
C:541
Sieve Size Percent Passing by Weight
3" 100%
1/2 50% to 85%
No. 4 40% to 75%
50 8% to 28%
200 0% to 8%
The subgrade shall be prepared to required lines and grades, and
all fill shall be constructed in six-inch lifts. The subgrade shall
be compacted to a minimum of 92% of maximum dry unit weight
and at or near optimum moisture content as determined by the
ASTM D 1557-66T, Method D. Preparation of the subgrade shall be
approved by the Planning Board Engineer before any subsequent
construction is permitted. All soil samples for testing purposes
must be selected from the subject material by a qualified testing
laboratory in a manner and quantity which will permit it to certify
that they are representative of the material as a whole. Samples
selected by anyone else will not be allowed as valid for the purpose.
(5)
After approval of the subgrade, the above-specified base course
shall be prepared to lines and grades. Prior to paving of the base
course, the project engineer shall certify in writing to the Planning
Board that the location of survey controls is accurate and in
accordance with the approved plan so as to minimize corrective
work and changes required in the as-built plans. The base course
shall be constructed in maximum lifts of six-inch lifts and shall be
compacted to a minimum of 95% of maximum dry unit weight and
at, or near, optimum moisture content as determined by the ASTM
D 1557-66T, Method D.
(6)
The approved base course shall be paved with a minimum of three
inches of Massachusetts Highway Department Type I-1 binder
course and 1 1/2 inches of top course to lines and grades as
required. The application of the top course shall be delayed for
six months after binder course is applied. The pavement shall be
placed and constructed in accordance with the specifications of the
Marshfield Department of Public Works, shall be compacted to a
minimum of 95% of laboratory density, and surface irregularities
greater than 1/4 inch as measured with a ten-foot straight edge
shall be corrected as determined by the Planning Board Engineer.
Paving operations shall not start or continue without permission
of the Planning Board Engineer, who will determine whether
preparation, weather conditions, etc., are suitable.
Notwithstanding, all paving operations are to be concluded for the
season by November 20, regardless of weather conditions.
(7)
Construction of lots. Lots shall not be clear-cut and shall not be cleared
prior to the establishment of a base course of pavement on the roadway.
G.
§ 405-9 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-9
C:542
§ 405-10. Utilities.
All clearing shall be done in accordance with that shown on the
definitive plan and with the approved erosion control and construction
management plan.
General requirements. All utilities, including drainage, ponds,
watercourses, swales, and lines, which service more than one dwelling
unit must be located within street layouts or on properties set aside
expressly for utility purposes rather than on building lots. Such utility
areas shall have the boundaries defined by concrete bounds at all
corners and shall be furnished with gated vehicle accessway for
maintenance purposes to the proposed subdivision roadway or an
existing accepted way. Such accessway shall be constructed to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board and provided with permanent
monumentation to inform abutters of location of said accessway on the
ground. All utility line and accessway properties shall be a minimum of
20 feet in width.
A.
Drainage. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board that the project is designed to have no measurable or
significant impact as to existing vegetation, topography, wetlands, and
other natural or man-made features.
Criteria. The applicant shall review best available drainage systems
for the appropriate application on the proposed development site.
The development suitability of the site shall be based on natural
features, such as soil types, slope, vegetative cover, water table,
etc. Drainage plans shall be developed in consultation with the
Planning Department and the Board's consultants with the
following objectives and criteria in mind: [Amended 7-24-2017]
(a) Protection of surface water and groundwater quality.
(b) Public safety.
(c) Protection of existing abutting homes and septic systems.
Enhancement of and connection to natural drainage systems,
including streams, floodplains, and associated wetlands.
(d)
Attractiveness of the plan, minimizing disruption to existing
features, and successful imitation of natural systems.
(e)
Minimizing of long-term maintenance and/or reconstruction
obligations to ensure the natural operation of the system and
conserve manpower, energy, and fiscal resources.
(f)
(1)
Large developments; off-site mitigation. For developments in
excess of 50 dwelling units, 50 acres, or which create more than
three acres of impervious surfaces of all kinds, the Planning Board
may require a storm drainage design analysis for the one-hundred-
(2)
B.
§ 405-9 CHARTER § 405-10
C:543
year storm at the watershed level, from drainage divide to tidal
water, which demonstrates the adequacy of existing and proposed
structures. If no measurable impact is shown, no off-site mitigation
measures will be required by the Board. Said analysis shall include
at least the following information: consideration of the entire
watershed and the calculations used in designing the drainage
system, including area calculations, intensity of rainfall, coefficient
of runoff, time of concentration, discharge, pipe coefficients of
roughness, and quantity and velocity of flow under design
conditions at buildout capacity allowed under current zoning.
Additionally, the following information shall be supplied:
(a) Soil map for the sub area watershed.
(b) Topographic map for the sub area watershed.
(c) Land use map for the sub area watershed.
(d) Pre-development drainage patterns on the site.
(e) Post-development drainage patterns on the site.
All developments; on-site mitigation. In addition to the above
watershed area analysis, the Planning Board shall require an onsite
storm drainage design analysis for all proposed developments
that mitigates the ten-, twenty-five-, and one-hundred-year storm
events in accordance with the standards contained herein. The
following information shall be required:
(a) Calculations of wetland areas on site.
(b) Analysis of soil conditions throughout the site.
Analysis of the square footage and percent of impervious
coverage in relation to the square footage and percent of area
devoted to drainage proposed.
(c)
Considerations of density of development appropriate to the
above conditions.
(d)
Proposed use and assessment of effectiveness of water
pollution and erosion control devices (e.g., absorption pillows,
hay bales, swales, etc.).
(e)
Conformance with DPW standards for maintenance and
performance.
(f)
Consideration of existing or potential public water supplies on
or near the site.
(g)
Design calculations shall be based on the ten-, twenty-five-,
and one-hundred-year storm event for all ponding areas and
twenty-five-year storm event for pipe sizing.
(h)
(3)
§ 405-10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-10
C:544
TR-55 or TR-20 model calculations as deemed appropriate by
the Town Engineer for the project design.
(i)
Demonstration of no increase in the rate of discharge from predevelopment
to post-development conditions.
(j)
Demonstration that post-development runoff volume shall not
exceed pre-development volumes.
(k)
On-site drainage systems, including detention areas, must meet the
following performance standards: A fifty-foot buffer zone of existing
vegetation shall be retained between all detention or siltation
structures and adjacent uses or structures for protection of scenic
corridors, surface water and wetlands subject to MGL c. 130 and
c. 131 and/or local wetland bylaws. A thirty-foot buffer zone of
existing vegetation shall be retained between all point source
discharges of stormwater and surface waters and wetlands.
However, the provision of this subsection shall not prohibit the
selective clearing of trees and shrubs, the establishment of new
vegetation better suited to the proposed conditions, or the
discharge of stormwater across such buffer areas as any of these
actions may be permitted by the Conservation Commission under
an order of conditions.
(4)
Use of retention basins shall not be permitted except in
combination with detention facilities and for the express purpose
of containing the design storm for a twenty-four to forty-eighthour
period, or in Water Resource Protection Districts where the
stormwater management system includes measures to abate the
contaminants prior to recharge and where, in the Board's opinion,
retention facilities will promote recharge that will benefit surface
water or groundwater resources. Detention facilities shall be
permitted insofar as such systems are designed to function as
natural wetlands, having characteristics of side slopes, gradients,
vegetation and topographic location which follow naturally
occurring wetland types. Use of such artificial storm drainage
systems shall not substitute for proper erosion control measures,
including appropriate design for soil and slope conditions. Design
of such facilities shall observe the following guidelines:
Side slopes of wetland/detention areas shall be no steeper than
3:1 horizontal to vertical relationship.
(a)
A maximum of 2% slope shall be permitted for the bottom of
the wetland/basin.
(b)
Where clearing and/or regrading of the site may be
unavoidable for installation of the basin and necessary
structures, vegetation shall be reestablished in conformance
with the proposed landscape plan.
(c)
(5)
§ 405-10 CHARTER § 405-10
C:545
The prohibition of undesirable or unnatural accumulation of
water shall refer to stagnant, pond waters, but not to wet
systems, which are designed to have continuous stream flow
through the basin. Ground infiltration by means of leaching
pits, leaching catch basins or similar facilities is not allowed as
a means of calculating or mitigating stormwater disposal.
(d)
Drainage outfalls shall be designed in conformance with this
subsection and shall further provide rip-rapped aprons in
accordance with typical details shown in the appendix of these
regulations,56 and in every case shall provide a minimum of 30 feet
of vegetation swale before the property line and above the highwater
line of any stream, swamp, bank or wetlands. As with other
drainage structures, detention areas shall have a positive outfall
and connection to an existing water body, including wetlands as
defined above, except in Water Resource Protection Districts where
the stormwater management system includes measures to abate
the contaminants prior to recharge and where, in the Board's
opinion, retention facilities will promote recharge that will benefit
surface water or groundwater resources. Basins and swales shall
be incorporated into separate land parcels for this exclusive
purpose rather than be shown as easements over areas required
for other uses, or required to serve purposes of other bylaws or
regulations of the Town of Marshfield.
(6)
Subsurface drains or subdrains. In areas where the finished grade
of the roadway is less than four feet above the water table or in
areas where less than four feet of fill is placed above water in
swampy places, or any standing water, or in other areas where, in
the opinion of the Board, the subgrade must be drained, a system
of subdrains shall be designed for such areas. In addition, laterals
may be required as directed by the Board in areas in which an
undue amount of water could accumulate in the subgrade. The
system of subdrains shall be discharged into the storm drainage
system or otherwise disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the
Board.
(7)
Storm drains.
Storm drainage design is to conform to specifications of the
Master Drainage Plan when applicable. Design shall be on
the basis of a twenty-five-year storm. A complete storm drain
system shall be designed for each street in the subdivision and
shall be so laid out and of sufficient size to permit unimpeded
flow of all natural waterways, to provide adequate drainage
of all portions of the street system so that water does not
accumulate thereon, to intercept stormwater runoff from the
adjacent lots of the subdivision, and to eliminate undesirable
or unnatural accumulation of water on any portion of the
(a)
(8)
56.Editor's Note: See Appendix B included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 405-10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-10
C:546
subdivision or surrounding property to the satisfaction of the
Board. The storm drain system shall include gutters, catch
basins, manholes, culverts, drain lines, head walls and such
other items as may be required to complete the system to the
satisfaction of the Board.
Catch basins and manhole structures shall be preferably
reinforced, precast concrete. Structures are not to be
backfilled until inspected by the subdivision inspector.
(b)
Catch basins shall be located in pairs, one on each side of the
road, at all low points or sag curves in the roadway, at intervals
of 300 feet for grades up to 4%, 250 feet for grades from 4%
to 6% and 200 feet for grades more than 6% and at or near
corners of the way at intersecting streets. Catch basins will be
in conformance with Marshfield DPW standards. Double-grate
catch basins should be provided where warranted by runoff
conditions.
(c)
Manholes shall be located at all changes in direction, either
horizontally or vertically, of a drain line, or so located that no
drain line greater than 300 feet in length would exist without
either a catch basin or manhole. Manholes shall conform to
Marshfield DPW standard. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(d)
Culverts shall be designed on the basis of a one-hundred-year
storm and on the assumption that the entire drainage area is
built up to the density and in the manner which the applicable
section of the Zoning Bylaw allows. The calculations (or a copy
thereof) necessary to determine the size of any culvert which
carries a brook, stream, river or other natural waterway shall
be submitted to the Board for review. Such calculations shall
be based on a method (Rational Method or Talbot's Formula)
acceptable to the Board for determining the size of waterway
openings. All culverts shall have a head wall at each end, and
any culvert over 36 inches in diameter shall include additional
protection as approved by the Board for the roadway side
slopes at the upstream end.
(e)
All the drains shall be a minimum of 12 inches in diameter and
shall be laid on a slope of not less than 1/2 of 1%. If the system
is designed as a self-cleaning system, the Board may accept
a lesser minimum slope for the drain lines. A maximum pipe
velocity of 10 feet per second shall be allowed, with a minimum
velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second required. All final outfalls
within or serving the subdivision shall extend to a natural
waterway, or to drainage easements or pipe systems leading
to waterways, and such pipe shall have a capacity of 25%
greater than required by the calculations. Provisions shall be
made for the disposal of surface water intercepted or collected
by the system in such a manner that no flow is conducted
(f)
§ 405-10 CHARTER § 405-10
C:547
over Town ways or over the land of others unless a drainage
easement is obtained or unless such flow, in essentially the
same quantity, previously existed in the same location. Where
adjacent property is not subdivided, provision shall be made
for extension of the system by continuing appropriate drains to
the boundary of the subdivision at such size and grade as will
allow their proper projection.
A head wall with wing walls shall be provided at the outfall
end of all drains. Use of pre-formed flared end sections for this
purpose is also acceptable.
(g)
No drainage outfall shall discharge at an elevation below the
high-water line of a swamp, stream, or body of water as defined
in Article II.
(h)
Pipe outfalls shall be located away from dwellings a distance
down grade equivalent to the required lot depth in the
applicable zone.
(i)
In the event that no specific requirement is given in these
regulations, Massachusetts Highway Department standards
shall apply.
(j)
Calculations. The calculations (or a certified copy thereof) to
determine the sizes of all pipes and culverts in the drainage system
shall be submitted to the Board for review Such calculations should
be based on the Rational Method and prepared by a registered
professional engineer. A drainage analysis map shall show the
tributary watershed area and downstream area affected by runoff,
and drainage computations shall consider the entire watershed
area. Where excessive poor soils or disturbed cover exists,
calculations shall give consideration to frozen ground conditions,
soil types and cover for all affected areas, including but not limited
to lawns, base ground, graveled ways, etc.
(9)
Sewer. Sewer pipes and related equipment, such as manholes and
connecting Y's, shall be constructed in conformity with Marshfield DPW
standards. Sewer pipes shall be installed where sewering is proposed
by the Sewerage Master Plan.
C.
Water. Preliminary approval for availability of adequate water supply
must be obtained from the Board of Public Works. Design of the
proposed installations of water distribution lines and appurtenances
must also be approved by that Board. Water pipes and related
equipment, such as hydrants and main shutoff valves, and service
boxes, shall be installed within the subdivision as necessary to provide
all lots on each street with adequate water supply for domestic and fire
protection use and in conformity with specifications of the Department
of Public Works (Marshfield). Pipe size shall be as specified by the
Board of Public Works, but in no case shall be less than eight inches
in diameter. The entire cost of installation, including connection to the
D.
§ 405-10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-10
C:548
Town system and wages of the inspector, shall be borne by the owner.
The Water Supervisor shall approve all materials. Taps on water mains
shall be made and located as directed by the Water Division. Titles to
mains and hydrant will not be accepted until at least six months after
pressure has been put onto them, all measurements have been turned
over to the Water Division, and all lines proven tight, after which 10%
of the cost of the entire water installation or a minimum of $500 will be
held out for an additional year. No services shall be connected at the
property line until an application has been filed at the Water Division
office. Final approval of water system specifications shall be given by
the Department of Public Works. Water lines in excess of 800 feet shall
be required to be looped. [Amended 7-24-2017]
Pipes.
Sewer, water, gas and other underground utilities, if any, together
with all connections to the proposed subdivision lots on both sides
of the street, shall be laid after the roadway is subgraded but
before application of the gravel base occurs. All such pipes shall be
given a definite location as per the typical cross sections contained
in the appendix of these rules and regulations.57
(1)
Drainage pipes shall be of not less than 12 inches reinforced
concrete, coated corrugated aluminum or plastic construction. All
drainpipes shall have a minimum of 2 1/2 feet of cover, except that
reduced cover may be permitted at the discretion of the Board if
Class V reinforced concrete pipe is specified. Each length shall be
laid true to line and grade as shown on the plan. Each length shall
have a full firm bearing throughout.
(2)
The backfilling of all trenches shall be thoroughly tamped in
accordance with Article IV, Design Standards and Required
Improvements, and shall not be puddled.
(3)
E.
Underground utilities.
All electrical, telephone, cable television and other utility wires
shall be placed below ground in every subdivision unless the Board
determines that such placement is not feasible or is not in the best
interest of the Town. Such utilities shall be constructed according
to the information contained in the appendix.
(1)
All service connections for utilities shall be clearly marked at the
lot line and shall be installed so that electric, telephone, sewer, and
water services are located perpendicular to the street at the lot
line. Telephone and electric utilities shall be located at alternate
side lot lines (at every other lot corner).
(2)
F.
Easements. All easements shall comply with the following
requirements:
G.
57.Editor's Note: See Appendix A included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 405-10 CHARTER § 405-10
C:549
§ 405-11. Erosion control facilities; criteria and objectives.
As required under § 405-8 above, an erosion control plan shall be submitted
which meets the following objectives and criteria:
If a waiver is granted allowing utility pipe lines to be placed in
easements, said easements shall be 20 feet (or more if deemed
necessary) in width and shall be adjacent to or centered on
property lines unless otherwise permitted. Concrete bounds shall
be set at all corners and angle points for the information of the
landowners.
(1)
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
wetland, stream, or channel, the Board may require that there
be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of
adequate width to conform substantially to the lines of such
watercourse, drainageway, wetland, stream or channel and to
provide for construction, maintenance, access or other necessary
purposes.
(2)
(3) All easements must be of a form acceptable to the Town Clerk.
Stone walls. Any removal or alteration of trees/stone walls on Towndesignated
scenic roads shall require an application and public hearing
pursuant to the Scenic Road Act.58
H.
Keep disturbed areas small. No more than 50 feet wide, 100 feet
long, and 20% of a single lot, or five acres of the overall tract, are
recommended guidelines. Consideration of topographic, soil, and
vegetative characteristics shall be demonstrated through identification
of erodible soils, steep slopes, stream banks and drainageways, and
measures designed to limit disturbance of these areas.
A.
Stabilize and protect disturbed areas quickly. Exposed areas and
stockpiles should be revegetated within 30 to 60 days. Two methods
are available for stabilizing disturbed areas, mechanical (or structural)
methods and vegetative methods. In some cases, both are combined
in order to retard erosion. The selected measure should be identified
in a construction management plan submitted with the subdivision
application.
B.
Keep stormwater runoff velocities low. Acceptable velocities are in the
two to 10 feet per second range. The removal of existing vegetative
cover during development and the resulting increase in impermeable
surface area after development will increase both the volume and
velocity of runoff. These increases must be taken into account when
providing for erosion control. [Amended 7-24-2017]
C.
58.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40, § 15C, and Ch. 250, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. VII, Scenic
Roads, of the Town General Bylaws.
§ 405-10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-11
C:550
§ 405-12. Other facilities.
Protect disturbed areas from stormwater runoff. Conservation
measures can be utilized to prevent water from entering and running
over the disturbed area. Diversions and other control practices to
intercept runoff from higher watershed areas, store or divert it away
from vulnerable areas, and direct it toward stabilized outlets should
be utilized. Selected measures should be identified in the proposed
construction management plan.
D.
Retain sediment within site area. Sediment can be retained by two
methods, filtering runoff as it flows and detaining sediment or detaining
runoff for a period of time so that the soil particles settle out. The best
way to control sediment, however, is to prevent erosion.
E.
Sidewalks. The Planning Board shall require sidewalks of such width
and construction to be constructed in accordance with the typical cross
section.59 In no case shall sidewalks be less than five feet in width.
They shall be of broom-finished portland cement concrete with oneinch-
deep score lines spaced five feet apart on centers. Sections shall
be a maximum of 30 feet in length, with sections separated from each
other and from driveway sections by one-half-inch-thick premolded
bitumastic filler. The depth (thickness) of concrete and of filler shall be
four inches except at driveways where it shall be six inches. Portland
cement concrete driveway aprons from the sidewalk to the gutter line
shall be constructed to the same specifications as the sidewalk where it
crosses the driveway.
A.
Driveways. Proposed driveways shall be shown on the road
construction plan and topographic plan and shall be designed to
intersect the street at a grade not greater than 3% for a distance of
25 feet back from the edge of the traveled way and shall intersect
generally at right angles and in locations having proper sight distances.
Curb cuts for driveways shall not be placed within 50 feet of street
intersections. Driveways within the lot shall not contain grades greater
than 15%.
B.
Vegetation.
Every effort shall be made to preserve the existing trees on the
right-of-way and on the lots to be sold. Filling and cutting of
roadways shall be done in such a manner as to preserve the trees
and existing soil cover whenever possible. The Planning Board shall
require that the applicant shall provide and plant suitable shade
trees spaced not less than 40 feet apart along the way, variety to
be approved by the Planning Board. Trees to be planted shall have
a minimum height of 12 feet with eight-foot head clearance and
shall be of at least three-inch caliper at the height of 42 inches from
ground level. All trees shall be planted within the way lines, except
(1)
C.
59.Editor's Note: See Appendix A included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 405-11 CHARTER § 405-12
C:551
that, with written consent of the owner, trees may be planted up to
20 feet from the exterior lines of the way if deemed desirable by
the Planning Board.
On slopes along the way where stabilization is required, or where
lawn maintenance and moving may be unfeasible, a combination of
ground covers and shrub plantings may be required by the Board.
The landscape plan shall specify species, quantities and sizes of
proposed plantings.
(2)
Streetlighting. Streetlighting shall be provided only for the purpose of
vehicular and pedestrian safety as recommended by the Police Safety
Officer at locations that may present particular hazards, e.g., street
intersections. Illumination for general residential purposes or security
is not intended in single-family residential areas. The Board of
Selectmen shall approve proposed streetlighting prior to endorsement
of the definitive plan.
D.
Fire alarm systems. Before approval of a plan, the Board may require
the plan to show location and type of fire alarm system in accordance
with recommendations of the Marshfield Fire Chief. The developer shall
pay the cost of installation.
E.
Parks and open spaces. Before approval of a plan by the Board, it
may require the plan to show a park, or parks, suitably located for
playground or recreation purposes or for providing light and air, and
not unreasonable in area in relation to the land being subdivided and
the prospective uses of such land, and make the appropriate
endorsement on the plan, requiring that no building be erected upon
such park or parks without its approval.
F.
Slope stabilization.
Slope is defined as the ratio of vertical rise over horizontal
distance. Upon completion of grading and replacement of topsoil,
slopes shall be appropriately stabilized to prevent erosion.
Excessive slopes shall not be permitted. The Board shall approve
an adequate slope stabilization plan.
(1)
The following guide is recommended:
Slopes more than 1 in 2: riprap or terracing. Not allowed
where alternative layouts permit lesser slopes.
(a)
Slopes of 1 in 8 to 1 in 2: sod or establishing vegetation
or seedlings in association with webbing or approved mulch
placed over the soil. Not allowed where alternative layouts
permit lesser slopes.
(b)
Slopes of 2 in 20 to 1 in 8: plant seed in association with
webbing or approved mulch placed over the soil.
(c)
(2)
G.
§ 405-12 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-12
C:552
Appropriate temporary measures should be taken to prevent
erosion of bankings and slopes during construction.
(3)
Retaining walls.
Wherever retaining walls may be required, design and type of wall
construction shall be submitted to the Board for approval prior to
installation.
(1)
All retaining walls shall be constructed on the line of the street
layout.
(2)
Retaining wall shall have a maximum individual height of four feet
and a total combination of no more than 12 feet in height.
(3)
Where several retaining walls are used, a minimum five-foot
separation shall be provided between walls.
(4)
H.
Dwellings per lot. Not more than one building designed or available for
use for dwelling purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use
as such on any lot in a subdivision, or elsewhere in the Town, without
the consent of the Planning Board, and such consent may be conditional
upon the providing of adequate ways furnishing access to each site for
such building, in the same manner as otherwise required for lots within
a subdivision.
I.
Impediments to access. In order to provide safe access and egress
for all subdivisions, no temporary or permanent gate, fence or other
obstruction may be erected on any portion of the right-of-way unless
permitted by the Board.
J.
§ 405-12 CHARTER § 405-12
C:553

ARTICLE V
Completion of the Way
§ 405-13. Monuments. [Amended 7-24-2017]
Stone or approved reinforced concrete bounds shall be placed on both
sides of the street at all angle points, at the beginning and end of all
curves, and at all intersections of streets and ways. Intermediate bounds
must be set where the distance between bounds would otherwise exceed
500 feet. Bounds shall be not less than three feet in length and not less
than six inches in width and breadth. No permanent monuments or bounds
shall be installed until all construction, which would destroy or disturb the
monuments, is completed and the top of the bounds shall be set to finished
grade. The bounds are to be set by a land surveyor who shall certify in
writing that they conform to the approved subdivision plan. Bounds shall
also be set for all front lot corners before utilities are installed to ensure
accurate measurement for utility location. All street monuments are to
be accurately tied into three or more suitable objects selected for their
durability and prominence. This information is to be provided to the Town
Engineer on a copy of the street layout or the subdivision plan.
§ 405-14. Curbs.
When vertical or slope block granite street curbing is required, it shall be
in accordance with the standards set forth below, and all culs-de-sac and
curves with a radius of 60 feet or less shall be of vertical granite only. Cape
Cod berm when specified shall be used throughout, except that vertical
granite curb inlets with appropriate inclined transition sections (of vertical
granite) shall be provided at all catch basins. The curb inlet and catch basin
installation shall conform to the typical curb inlet detail drawing.60
Granite curbs; general. Curbstone shall be of hard and durable granite,
or a light color satisfactory to the Engineer, free from seams which
impair its structural integrity, and of a good smooth splitting
appearance. Granite shall come from approved quarries and, when
tested, shall have a Los Angeles percentage of wear not more than 32.
Test samples shall be hand broken.
A.
Slope granite curbing.
Dimensions.
The stones for the several types of slope curb shall be cut to
the dimensions given in the following table:
(a)
(1)
B.
60.Editor's Note: See Appendix B included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 405-13 CHARTER § 405-14
C:555
Depth of Slant Face
Type
(inches)
Thickness
(inches)
Length*
(feet)
SB 12 3 to 6 3 to 6
* Minimum lengths do not apply to radial slope curb.
Maximum lengths of stones shall be as directed by the
Engineer, when the curb is used on curves of 100 feet radius
or less.
(b)
Finish. Finish and surface dimensions for the several types of stone
curb shall conform to the following requirements:
Exposed face shall be smooth quarry split to an approximately
true plane having no projections or depressions which will
cause over one inch to show between a two-foot straight edge
and the face when the straight edge is placed as closely as
possible on any part of the face. If projections on the face
are more than that specified, they shall be dressed off. Drill
holes will be permitted on the exposed face, but only along the
bottom edge.
(a)
Arris line, top front, shall be pitched to a line, which shall not
show over 1/2 inch in any direction between the stone and a
straight edge laid the full length of the stone.
(b)
Arris line, bottom front, shall be pitched so that not over 1/2
inch shall show between the stone and a straight edge, the full
length of the stone, when viewed at right angles to the plane of
the face.
(c)
Arris lines at ends shall be pitched with no variation from the
plane of the face more than 1/4 of an inch.
(d)
Ends shall be square to the plane of the face and so finished
that when stones are placed end to end, as closely as possible,
no space more than 3/4 of an inch shall show in the joint for
the full depth of the face.
(e)
Tops and bottoms shall not be under the square more than four
inches or over the square at the back more than one inch.
(f)
(2)
Mortar.
Mortar for pointing joints shall be composed of equal parts of
air-entraining cement and sand with sufficient water to form a
workable mixture. Materials shall conform to the requirements
of ASTM C-91 and C-144.
(a)
Setting methods. Slope granite curb shall be set at line and
grade required. Top line of curb shall be set straight and true
(b)
(3)
§ 405-14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-14
C:556
allowing natural variations in depth of curb to occur at the
bottom of the face. Spaces under the stones shall be filled
with approved material and so tamped that the slope granite
curb will bear and be completely supported throughout its
entire length and width at the required line, grade and slope.
Curbstones shall not fit closer to each other than 1/4 of an inch;
otherwise, they shall be fitted together as closely as possible.
Pointing joints. Joints shall be primed and caulked with a beak
of Thiokol or approved equal. Joints shall be filled with mortar
when necessary, to provide adequate base for caulking.
(c)
Protection. The contractor shall protect slope granite curb
and keep stones in first-class condition until completion of the
entire contract. Particular care shall be exercised to prevent
any discoloration of exposed surfaces.
(d)
Vertical granite curbing.
Dimensions. The stones for several types of curb shall be cut to the
dimensions given in the following table:
Type: VA
Width at top: 5 inches
Depth: 17 to 19 inches
Minimum length: 6 feet
Minimum width at bottom: 5 inches (for 2/3 length)
* Minimum lengths do not apply to radial curb and closures.
Type VA-4 curbstones to be set on a radius of 160 feet or less
shall be out to the curve required, unless otherwise directed
by the Engineer.
(1)
Finish. Finish and surface dimensions for the several types of curb
shall conform to the following requirements: Type VB curb:
Top surface of curbstones shall be sawed to an approximately
true plane.
(a)
Exposed arris lines shall be pitched straight and true with no
variation from a straight line greater than 1/8 of an inch.
(b)
Back surfaces of curbstones shall have no projection for a
distance of three inches down from the top, which would
exceed a batter of four inches in 12 inches.
(c)
Front face shall be at right angles to the plane of the top and
shall be smooth quarry split. Drill holes in exposed part of face
will not be permitted.
(d)
(2)
C.
§ 405-14 CHARTER § 405-14
C:557
§ 405-15. Driveways.
A driveway opening is to be left in front of each lot at the best suited
location and is to be shown on the road detail plan. A five-foot minimum
inclined transition section of vertical granite curbing is to be set at each
side of the driveway opening whenever granite curbing is installed.
Minimum curb opening is to be 15 feet. Abandoned curb cuts must have
required curbing installed and sealed. Changes in the location of curb cuts
Front face shall have no projections greater than 3/4 of an
inch or depressions greater than 1/2 inch measured from the
vertical plane of the face through the top arris line for a
distance down from the top of eight inches. Remaining
distance shall have no projections greater than one inch
measured in the same manner.
(e)
Ends of all stones shall be square with the planes of the top and
face and so finished that when stones are placed end to end,
as closely as possible, no space more than 1/2 inch shall show
in the joint for the full width of the top or down on the face for
eight inches. Remainder of end may break back not over eight
inches from the plane of the joint.
(f)
Mortar. Mortar for pointing joints shall be composed of equal parts
of air-entraining cement and sand with sufficient water to form a
workable mixture. The materials shall conform to the requirements
of ASTM C-91 and C-144.
(3)
Setting curbstones.
Curb shall be set at line and grade required, and it shall project
seven inches above the shoulder grade or pavement, unless
otherwise directed or called for on the plans.
(a)
Curbstones for Type VA-4 curb shall not fit closer to each other
than 1/8 of an inch; otherwise they shall be fitted together as
closely as possible.
(b)
(4)
Granite curb inlets.
Granite for curb inlets shall meet the requirements of
Subsection A.
(a)
Curb inlets shall not be less than five feet, 11 inches, or more
than six feet, one inch, in length, from 17 inches to 19 inches
in depth, and match other curbing in width.
(b)
Finish of curb inlets shall meet the requirements of Subsection
C.
(c)
(d) Mortar shall conform to Subsection B(3).
(e) Pointing shall conform to Subsection B(3)(c).
(5)
§ 405-14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-15
C:558
from that shown on the definitive plan may be considered a modification of
the approved plan and must receive the approval of the Board in writing,
whether a major or minor change (see § 405-8I).
§ 405-16. Street signs.
Street signs to specification of the Superintendent of the DPW are to
be furnished and installed for every intersection by the developer. The
developer shall maintain street signs until the Town accepts the ways. Said
signs are required to be installed by the developer following the installation
of the base course of the roadway, and prior to issuance of building permits.
In the event that the covenant is released by the posting of surety, the
applicant shall place at least temporary street signage at all intersections
until the base course, as required above, is completed. In addition to the
sign stating the name of the street, the applicant shall be responsible for
installing a sign beneath the street name that reads "Not a Town Way." This
sign shall remain in place until the Town accepts the street.
§ 405-17. Street acceptance.
Approval of the definitive plan does not constitute the layout or
acceptance by the Town of streets shown on the plan.
A.
The developer shall provide a street layout plan suitable for recording
containing all necessary information for Town acceptance of the
streets. This street layout plan shall be provided prior to the release of
security for the subdivision.
B.
After completion of construction, the developer shall execute an
instrument, in a form acceptable to Town Counsel, transferring to the
Town, without cost, valid unencumbered title to the right-of-way and all
utilities installed therein, the drainage system, including any drainage
lots and/or easements, and any other easements associated with the
subdivision.
C.
The Board shall retain a minimum of $10,000 surety or one lot for a
period not to exceed 24 months after completion of the subdivision and
the submittal of as-built and street acceptance plans acceptable to the
Planning Board and Town Engineer or until the streets are accepted by
the Town, whichever comes first. After this date, the Board shall return
the remainder of the security to the person or persons who furnished
the same.
D.
Once street acceptance plans have been submitted and approved by the
Town, the developer shall be responsible for petitioning the Board of
Selectmen and Department of Public Works to accept the streets. The
developer shall be responsible for repairing all damage to constructed
ways and municipal services within the roadway layout and shall be
responsible for maintaining all landscaping for the time periods set
forth in Subsection D.
E.
§ 405-15 CHARTER § 405-18
C:559
§ 405-18. As-built plans.
Prior to final release of his security, the developer shall provide the Town
with as-built plans of all roads, drainage systems, etc., on durable material
from which contact print copies can be made. These plans shall show
the precise location, size, type, etc., of all required construction, as built,
and shall include, but not be limited to, the components of water, sewer,
and drainage system, other public utilities, elevations, slopes, street layout
monuments, etc., as necessary to show that design requirements have
been met and changes documented. These plans shall be certified by the
designing engineer that the information shown correctly represents the
construction as built.
§ 405-19. Site cleanup.
The entire area of the subdivision shall be cleaned of all dirt, debris,
construction materials, etc., leaving a neat and presentable appearance.
The complete storm drainage system, including catch basins, manholes and
pipes, shall be properly cleaned and free of debris.
§ 405-20. Certificate of occupancy. [Amended 7-24-2017]
No certificate of occupancy may be applied for, or issued by the Building
Commissioner, with respect to any structure erected on any lot located in
an approved subdivision until the Board has certified that the ways and
municipal services designed to serve such lot have been constructed and
installed in accordance with these rules and regulations.
§ 405-21. Streets of record.
No new subdivision which will relocate or eliminate existing streets of
record will be approved until the applicant has provided proof that said
streets are clear in title and free of all encumbering rights of others.
§ 405-18 MARSHFIELD CODE § 405-21
C:560
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 405-22. Waivers; Subdivision Control Law.
§ 405-23. Supervision and inspection.
All work required by these rules and regulations shall be under the
supervision of and with the approval of the respective Town departments
involved hereunder. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant and/or
contractor to give one week's written notice to the pertinent agency in order
that inspection may be scheduled. Costs of all inspectors shall be borne by
the developer.
§ 405-24. Pre-construction meeting.
The applicant shall request a pre-construction meeting through the
Planning Board office prior to commencement of any work within an
approved subdivision.
§ 405-25. Responsibility of owner.
The Board may, when appropriate, waive such portions of these rules
and regulations when, in its judgment, such action is in the public
interest and not inconsistent with the purpose of the Subdivision
Control Law. [Amended 7-24-2017]
A.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference
should be made to MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG, inclusive, as
amended.
B.
All work performed under these rules and regulations shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
A.
The purpose of inspection is to assure that good practices are followed
in constructing the project in accordance with the designs and
specifications, and not to establish these practices.
B.
Inspection does not relieve the owner of his responsibility to do the
work properly in accordance with the rules and regulations.
C.
The owner should maintain his own quality control staff. Inspection by
the Town of Marshfield is only to ascertain that this quality control is
being maintained.
D.
Inspection by the Town of Marshfield will be on a sampling technique
basis and does not guarantee freedom from failure. Only conscientious
and capable effort by the owner and/or contractor produces desired end
results.
E.
§ 405-22 CHARTER § 405-25
C:561
Chapter 408
AGE-RESTRICTED ADULT VILLAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 305. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 405.
§ 408-1. General provisions.
§ 408-2. Applicant.
An application or petition for a special permit may be brought by a property
owner, agent or prospective purchaser who submits certification of property
interest and authority to file.
§ 408-3. Pre-application conference.
The Planning Board may hold pre-application conferences at any regular or
special meeting of the Board. If the applicant proposes to include affordable
units within the development, the applicant is encouraged to attend a
pre-application conference with the Marshfield Housing Authority. Concept
plans may be submitted for discussion purposes and to assist in the
identification of the nature of information necessary to meet the
requirements of the Zoning Bylaw for the special use.61
§ 408-4. Application for special permit.
Purpose and authority. The following rules are hereby adopted by the
Marshfield Planning Board as provided in MGL c. 40A for the purpose of
establishing uniform procedures for the granting of special permits for
the development of elderly and handicapped housing. These regulations
were amended on December 15, 2003, in order to encourage the
production of housing units that are affordable in perpetuity to elderly
and handicapped persons of low or moderate income.
A.
Adoption and amendment. These rules and regulations may be adopted
and from time to time amended by majority vote, provided such
adoption or amendment is submitted in writing at a meeting of the
Board and action thereon taken after a public hearing.
B.
Effective date. These rules and regulations are effective when voted. A
copy shall be filed with the office of the Town Clerk, with appropriate
endorsements, such as date of adoption, date filed with Town Clerk, and
dates of amendments.
C.
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 305, Zoning, § 305-11.08, Age-Restricted Adult Village.
§ 405-25 MARSHFIELD CODE § 408-4
C:562
Official application form. Application for special permits shall be made
on an official form, which shall be furnished by the Town Clerk or the
staff of the Planning Board upon request. This will include a copy of
the monitoring agreement to be signed upon completion of construction
with the Marshfield Housing Authority. Any communication not on an
official form shall be considered as a notice of intention to apply and
not as an application. All information indicated on the form shall be
accurately and fully supplied by the applicant. Failure to meet this
requirement will be considered a failure to submit an application, and
no public hearing will be scheduled.
A.
Certified list of abutters.
The applicant shall obtain from the Board of Assessors a certified
list of the names and addresses of all owners of land abutting
the proposed development as appearing in the most recent tax
list. The applicant shall mail the notice to abutters by certified
mail, return receipt requested, not less than 10 days before the
date of the hearing. The prepared notice shall be verified by the
Planning Board or its agent before being mailed by the applicant.
The applicant shall submit envelopes addressed to each abutter
along with certified mail, return receipt requested slips, to be filled
out for each abutter. Return receipts are to be addressed to the
Planning Board for further verification:
Marshfield Planning Board
Town Hall
870 Moraine Street
Marshfield, MA 02050
(1)
Failure to comply with the requirements of this section will result
in the continuation of the public hearing.
(2)
B.
Contents of an application. The completed application form, original
plan and 17 copies shall be submitted to the Planning Board with
an additional copy filed with the Town Clerk by the applicant. The
following information shall be furnished by the applicant:
A site plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet, unless
another scale is previously requested and found suitable by the
Board.
(1)
A professional engineer, registered architect or registered
landscape architect shall prepare the site plan.
(2)
The plan shall be stamped by the registered land surveyor who
performed the boundary survey and who shall certify the accuracy
of the locations of the buildings, setbacks and all other required
dimensions, elevations and measurements and shall be signed
under the penalties of perjury.
(3)
C.
§ 408-4 CHARTER § 408-4
C:563
(4) The scale, date and North arrow shall be shown.
Lot number, dimensions of lot in feet, size of lot in square feet, and
width of abutting streets and ways.
(5)
(6) Easements within the lot and abutting thereon.
The location of existing or proposed buildings on the lot shall
be shown with the total square footage and dimensions of all
buildings, all building elevations and floor plans, and perspective
renderings. The information shall be sufficient so that the Board
may make recommendations regarding, among other things, the
architectural value and significance of the site, building or
structure, the general design, arrangement and texture, material
and color of the features involved and the relation of such features
to similar features of buildings and structures in the surrounding
area.
(7)
The total number and breakdown of elderly and/or handicapped
dwelling units, including designation of dwelling units reserved in
perpetuity for occupancy by persons or families of low or moderate
income. Affordable housing units shall be of comparable design
and construction and shall not be segregated from market-rate
or larger dwelling units in the development in which they are
proposed.
(8)
The location of existing wetlands, vernal pools, water bodies, wells,
one-hundred-year floodplain elevation, streams, vistas, slope areas,
geological features, unique vegetation, historic features, and other
natural features that may be important to the site. Where wetland
delineation is in doubt or dispute, the Planning Board shall require
the applicant to submit to the Conservation Commission a request
for determination of applicability pursuant to MGL c. 131, § 40, and
310 CMR 10.05(3), the Wetlands Protection Act.
(9)
The distance of existing and proposed buildings from the lot lines
and the distance between buildings on the same lot.
(10)
Percent of building lot coverage and percentage of paved
(impervious) area used for parking, loading, and access within the
property.
(11)
Existing and proposed topographical lines at two-foot intervals on
tract and within 50 feet thereof.
(12)
Height of all buildings above average finished grade of abutting
streets, including architectural details.
(13)
A landscape plan to include the total square feet of all landscape
and recreation areas and depiction of materials to be used and the
quantity, size, and species of plantings.
(14)
§ 408-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 408-4
C:564
Deed or other recorded instrument that shows the applicant to
be the owner under option of the land to be designated as an
elderly and handicapped residential development, and that the land
is in single or consolidated ownership at the time of final plan
application.
(15)
The applicant shall submit information to address the following:
measures proposed to prevent pollution of surface water or
groundwater, soil erosion, increased runoff, and flooding; design
features intended to integrate the proposed new development into
the existing landscape, to enhance aesthetic assets, and to screen
objectionable features from neighbors; and projected traffic flow
patterns into and upon the site for both vehicles and pedestrians
and an estimate of the projected number of motor vehicle trips
to and from the site for an average day and for peak hours; the
information and proposed mitigation measures shall apply to both
on-site and related off-site conditions, as identified in § 305-11.08B,
Required performance standards, of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw.
The scheduling of mitigation measures shall ensure that said
remedies are in place and functioning properly at the time of
project occupancy. The Planning Board reserves the right to
require additional information as may be necessary to protect the
public interests outlined in § 305-11.08 and relevant sections of the
Zoning Bylaw.
(16)
The location and acreage of areas to be devoted to specific
principal and accessory uses.
(17)
Existing and proposed street, parking, drainage, and utility system
shall be prepared by a Massachusetts registered professional
engineer and the property line plan by a Massachusetts registered
land surveyor.
(18)
A locus plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, 200 feet,
or 400 feet showing the location, names, and present widths of
the secondary streets bounding, approaching or within reasonable
proximity of the site, and including the tracts of land, ownership,
and topography from Assessor's plans or field survey, if available,
of properties therein.
(19)
The application shall also furnish a summary of the vital statistics
of the project. Such statistics shall include: total gross and net
square footage, number of parking spaces, estimated water
consumption and sewage discharge, and total number and location
of affordable units demonstrating compliance with required
performance standards.
(20)
One copy of all local, state, and federal approvals, if obtained prior
to site plan approval, including any variances obtained prior to site
plan approval.
(21)
§ 408-4 CHARTER § 408-4
C:565
§ 408-5. Fees. [Amended 7-24-2017]
All applications shall be accompanied by a certified check made payable to
the order of the Town of Marshfield. All payments must be made within 30
Applicants seeking an affordable housing density bonus shall
demonstrate in their application that the affordable units comply
with the requirements of 760 CMR 45.03, Local Initiative Units.
The applicants shall complete and return with their application the
attached worksheet titled "Local Initiative Program - Units Only
Application" dated 2003, or as amended.62
(22)
Performance standards for affordable housing developments.
Applicants are required to include a minimum of 10% of the total
number of dwelling units as affordable to households at or below
80% of the area median income as published by the Department of
Housing and Urban Development.
(1)
Applicants shall include with their application a copy of the
proposed resale restrictions for the affordable units. The
restrictions shall remain in force in perpetuity and shall be
approved as to form by legal counsel to the Planning Board, and
the right of first refusal upon the transfer of such restricted units
shall be granted to the Marshfield Housing Authority for a period
not less than 120 days after notice thereof.
(2)
Applicants shall include with their application a copy of the
proposed monitoring agreement with the Marshfield Housing
Authority which will be signed upon completion of construction.
The monitoring agreement shall remain in force for 99 years and
shall be approved as to form by legal counsel to the Planning
Board.
(3)
The applicant shall affirmatively take steps to utilize the Marshfield
Housing Authority, a public agency, a nonprofit agency, limited
dividend corporation, or other appropriate entity, and through a
Local Initiative Program petition or other similar mechanism or
program, cause application to be made to the Department of
Housing and Community Development (DHCD), so as to timely
furnish all forms and information necessary to promote the
designation of those units designated as affordable as affordable
units qualifying as part of the Subsidized Housing Inventory. The
Planning Board shall require submission of application forms and
appropriate information to the DHCD as a condition of approval.
(4)
Affordable units created through this special permit shall be
marketed in a manner consistent with the affirmative marketing
plan of the Marshfield Housing Authority.
(5)
D.
62.Editor's Note: The worksheet is available at the Planning Board office.
§ 408-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 408-5
C:566
days of billing date. Fees can be waived for applications from the Town of
Marshfield and religious and nonprofit organizations, at the discretion of
the Planning Board, on a case-by-case basis.
Administrative fees.
A minimum administrative fee as provided in Chapter 420, Fee
Schedule, for a special permit application shall be charged to
defray the expenses incurred by the Town for administrative costs.
(1)
The applicant will be charged an additional fee as provided in
Chapter 420, Fee Schedule, if the application requires technical
assistance from the Local Initiative Program staff. Review fees
for eligibility for the affordable housing density bonus shall be
deposited with and administered by the Planning Board.
(2)
Approved development applications will be assessed a monitoring
fee as provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule, to support the work
of the Marshfield Housing Authority to run a housing lottery and to
ensure that the unit remains affordable in perpetuity. Developers
will be required to pay all advertising costs for affordable units.
(3)
A.
Consultant fees. Where normal in-house engineering services are
unavailable and/or where specific conditions arising from the land or
the nature of the proposal necessitate the assistance of a planning,
engineering, traffic, soils, hydrologic, or other consultant, the Planning
Board may engage such consultant services to assist the Board in
its review at the applicant's expense. The Board shall so notify the
applicant in writing, along with an estimate provided by the Board's
consultant of the cost of such studies the Board has determined to
be necessary. Prior to commencement of such studies, the applicant
shall post a minimum performance guarantee of $5,000 in an interestbearing
escrow account with the Town Treasurer/Collector in the name
of the Marshfield Planning Board. The consultant shall provide monthly
invoices to the Planning Board for approval of services and shall report
directly to the Planning Board as to his findings, investigations, scope of
work, and action. The Planning Department shall inform the applicant
of the need to deposit additional funds if at any time the Town's
obligation to its consultant shall exceed the funds held in escrow for
review purposes. Release of approved plans and building permits shall
not be given until the Town has been compensated in full for review
costs as outlined herein.
B.
Other costs and expenses. The applicant is responsible for preparing
addressed notices to abutters by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The prepared notice shall be then verified by the Planning
Board or its agent before being mailed by the Planning Board agent.
Return receipts are to be addressed to the Planning Board for further
verification. The prepared notices/certified mailing shall be delivered to
the Planning Board agent with the application at the time of filing. Upon
final action (filing of a decision with the Town Clerk) the Planning Board
C.
§ 408-5 CHARTER § 408-5
C:567
§ 408-6. Planning Board review. [Amended 7-24-2017]
Upon a filing of application and plans with the Town Clerk, the Planning
Board shall distribute copies of the plans and supporting information to the
following Town departments: Planning Board, Planning Board Engineering
Consultant, Planning Board Water Scientist (if within the Water Resource
Protection District), Assessors, Town Clerk, Conservation Commission,
Engineering Division, Water Division (two), Highway Division, Housing
Authority, Board of Health, Building Department, Historical Commission,
Police Department and Fire Department. Said distribution shall be
completed within 10 days of the receipt of the plans and application by the
Planning Board. In addition, where the property abuts or is accessed within
100 feet of a state highway (Route 3A or Route 139), the Planning Board
shall mail a copy of plans and supporting application materials in a preaddressed
envelope, certified mail, to the District 7 office, Massachusetts
Department of Transportation, to serve to alert both the applicant and the
Department of Transportation of potential curb cut permit issues. These
departments shall have 35 days to review and submit written comments
to the Board. Failure of the various boards and commissions to make
comments or recommendations within the thirty-five-day time frame shall
be deemed by the Planning Board as a lack of opposition thereto.
shall return the balance of funds in escrow to the applicant but shall
retain sufficient funds to cover any unpaid portion of any approved,
outstanding invoice until such payment is made and shall so notify the
applicant in writing.
Special permit modification. The administrative fee to modify an
existing special permit is as provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule.
The applicant shall submit a check made out to the Town of Marshfield
at the time of the request to modify the special permit.
D.
Decision report. If a special permit does not incorporate the suggestion
of requirements of any properly filed report(s), or is issued contrary to
its recommendations, the Planning Board shall issue a written decision
stating the reasons for not following the recommendations or
requirements of such report(s).
A.
Procedural review.
The Board, acting as the SPGA, shall follow all procedural
requirements of MGL c. 40A, § 9.
(1)
Public hearing. The Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing
within 65 days of receipt of an application. Notice of said hearing
shall be advertised and mailed to parties of interest as required.
(2)
Action by the Board. Within 90 days of the close of the public
hearing, the Planning Board shall file a decision with the Town
Clerk, indicating approval, conditional approval, or denial of a
special permit.
(3)
B.
§ 408-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 408-7
C:568
§ 408-7. Disposition of application.
§ 408-8. Performance bond.
As a condition to a special permit, the applicant shall post a performance
bond to cover the period of construction or provide other safeguards in
the form and amount or penal sum acceptable to the Board prior to the
expiration of the twenty-day appeal period, unless the Board shall specify
otherwise. The purpose of the bond is to assure correction of drainage,
erosion control or safety problems which may affect abutters or the public.
If the applicant is not the owner and must purchase to assume such
obligations, he shall comply within 20 days following the date of purchase.
Withdrawal of application.
An application may be withdrawn without prejudice by an applicant
by notice in writing to the Clerk of the Board at any time prior to
the first publication of the notice of the public hearing.
(1)
After such notice, withdrawal of an application shall be permitted
only by majority vote of the Board.
(2)
A.
Reconsideration. No vote on an application may be reconsidered after
the meeting at which the decision was rendered has been adjourned.
B.
Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board as special
permit granting authority may appeal such decision as provided in MGL
c. 40A, § 17, within 20 days after such decision has been filed in the
office of the Town Clerk.
C.
Reapplication. No application which has been unfavorably and finally
acted upon by the Board shall be reconsidered for a special permit
within two years after the date of the said final unfavorable action,
unless the Board finds by vote of four members specific and material
changes in the conditions upon which the previous unfavorable action
was based and such changes are described in the record of the Board's
proceedings, and after notice is given to parties in interest of the time
and place of the proceedings to reconsider in the same manner as
provided for in § 408-6 of these rules and regulations.
D.
Lapse of special permit. Per Subsection E(4) of § 305-11.08 of the
Zoning Bylaw, every special permit authorized by the Board shall
contain the express condition that it will lapse if substantial use under
the permit is not commenced within two years from the date of final
action by the Board, except for good cause, or the final determination
of an appeal.
E.
Extension of special permits. No special permit shall take effect until
a copy of the decision, bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that
20 days have elapsed after the filing of the decision and no appeal has
been filed, is recorded in the Registry of Deeds and indexed under the
name of the record owner of the land.
F.
§ 408-7 CHARTER § 408-8
C:569
Upon completion of construction work, and satisfactory inspection by the
Planning Board or its agent, the bond shall be returned to the applicant. In
the event of any dispute, the Planning Board shall have the right to require
as-built plans certified by the appropriate registered architect, professional
engineer, or surveyor as a basis for its findings.
§ 408-9. Severability.
The provisions of these rules and regulation are severable. If any provision
of these rules and regulations is held invalid, the other provisions shall
not be affected thereby. If the application of these rules and regulations
or any of their provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the application of these rules and regulations and their provisions to other
persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 408-10. Waiver of full compliance.
Full compliance with these regulations may be waived by the Board,
provided such waivers are deemed to serve the public interest and are not
conflicting with MGL c. 40A.
Chapter 411
OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 305. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 405.
§ 411-1. General provisions.
Purpose and authority. The following rules and regulations are hereby
adopted by the Marshfield Planning Board as provided in MGL c. 40A
for the purpose of establishing uniform procedures for the granting
of special permits for the development of open space residential
developments pursuant to § 305-11.04 of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw.
A.
Adoption and amendment. These rules and regulations may be adopted
and from time to time amended by majority vote, provided such
adoption or amendment is submitted in writing at a meeting of the
Board and action thereon taken after a public hearing.
B.
Effective date. These rules and regulations are effective when voted. A
copy shall be filed with the office of the Town Clerk, with appropriate
endorsements, such as date of adoption, date filed with Town Clerk, and
dates of amendments.
C.
§ 408-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 411-2
C:570
§ 411-2. Applicant.
An application or petition for a special permit may be brought by a property
owner, agent or prospective purchaser who submits certification of property
interest and authority to file such application.
§ 411-3. Pre-application conference.
The Planning Board may hold a pre-application conference at any regular
meeting of the Board. Concept plans may be submitted for discussion
purposes and to assist in the identification of the nature of information
necessary to meet the requirements of the Zoning Bylaw for the application.
§ 411-4. Application for special permit.
Application form. Application for special permits shall be made on
an official form, which shall be furnished by the Town Clerk or the
Planning Board office upon request. All information indicated on this
form and listed under § 411-4B of these rules and regulations shall be
supplied by the applicant at the time of application. Failure to meet this
requirement will be considered a failure to submit an application and no
public hearing will be scheduled. The special permit application shall
be submitted concurrently with a fully completed application under the
Subdivision Control Law.63
A.
Contents of an application. The completed application form, original
plan and nine copies of all information shall be submitted to the
Planning Board with an additional copy filed with the Town Clerk
by the applicant. The following information shall be furnished by the
applicant:
Plans meeting the requirements of the Marshfield Subdivision
Rules and Regulations showing proposed ways, lots, utilities, street
trees, erosion controls, etc. The plans shall also depict the
proposed open space required by the Zoning Bylaw and the cover
sheet shall include the open space calculations required by the
Zoning Bylaw.64 [Amended 7-24-2017]
(1)
Drainage calculations meeting the requirements of the Subdivision
Rules and Regulations.
(2)
Proof of ownership of all property subject to the application or a
notarized statement by the owner(s) of the property authorizing the
applicant to file an application for the property.
(3)
A narrative describing the method of calculation of the number
of proposed building lots and a sketch plan, as necessary, to
demonstrate that the number of building lots does not exceed those
that would be permitted under a conventional subdivision that
(4)
B.
63.Editor's Note: See MLG c. 41, § 81k et seq.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 305, Zoning, and Ch. 405, Subdivision of Land.
§ 411-2 CHARTER § 411-4
C:571
§ 411-5. Fees.
complies with the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw and the Subdivision
Rules and Regulations and other applicable laws.
A narrative describing any requested modifications of setback
requirements as specified in § 305-11.04E(4) and noting the
proposed lots for which setback reductions are being sought.
(5)
A narrative describing the manner in which the open space will
be permanently protected [from the options provided for in
§ 305-11.04G(1) and (2) of the Zoning Bylaw] and any uses and
facilities proposed within the open space. If several uses are
proposed, the plans shall specify what uses will occur in what
areas. The narrative shall also address compliance of the open
space with the design requirements in § 305-11.04H of the Zoning
Bylaw.
(6)
A draft copy of any proposed declaration of covenants and
restrictions and/or conservation restrictions governing the land
subject to the application.
(7)
A draft easement for the maintenance of the open space, if
applicable, as specified in § 305-11.04G(4) of the Marshfield Zoning
Bylaw.
(8)
A traffic study if the land subject to the application will meet the
thresholds specified in § 305-11.10 of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw.
(9)
Application fee. Applicants shall pay the administrative and consulting
review fee required by the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.65 This
consulting review fee may be expended as specified in the Subdivision
Rules and Regulations for review of the combined subdivision/special
permit application. No additional fee is associated with the special
permit application.
A.
Other costs and expenses. The applicant is responsible for mailing
notices to abutters by certified mail, return receipt requested. Return
receipts are to be submitted to the Planning Board prior to the public
hearing.
B.
Fee waiver. Fees can be waived for applications from the Town of
Marshfield and religious and nonprofit organizations, at the discretion
of the Planning Board, on a case-by-case basis. [Amended 7-24-2017]
C.
Special permit modification. The administrative fee to modify an
existing special permit is established in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule.
The applicant shall submit a check made out to the Town of Marshfield
at the time of the request to modify the open space residential
development (OSRD) special permit. [Amended 7-24-2017]
D.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Subdivision of Land.
§ 411-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 411-6
C:572
§ 411-6. Planning Board review.
§ 411-7. Hearing and decision.
The Planning Board, acting as the special permit granting authority, shall
follow all procedural requirements for special permits set forth in MGL
c. 40A, § 9. In addition, the Board shall render its decision within the
time frame for definitive subdivision plans specified in MGL c. 41, § 81U,
whenever this time frame is shorter. Public hearings for the subdivision
and special permit shall be held concurrently. Applicants are encouraged
to file any necessary applications for special permits under the Water
Resource Protection District Bylaw66 so that this hearing may also be held
concurrently. Appeals of the special permit decision shall be in accordance
with MGL c. 40A, § 17.
§ 411-8. Reapplication.
No application which has been unfavorably and finally acted upon by the
Board shall be reconsidered for a special permit within two years after the
date of such unfavorable action, unless the Board finds by a vote of four
Distribution of plans. Upon filing of a complete application, the
Planning Board shall distribute copies of the plans and supporting
information to the following Town departments: Conservation
Commission, Department of Public Works, Board of Health, Building
Department, Historical Commission, Police Department and Fire
Department. Such distribution shall be completed within five days of
the receipt of the plans and application by the Planning Board. In
addition, where the property abuts or is accessed within 100 feet of a
state highway (Route 3A or Route 139), the Planning Board shall mail a
copy of plans and supporting application materials, by certified mail, to
the regional office of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
[Amended 7-24-2017]
A.
Submittal of comments. These departments shall have 35 days to
review and submit written comments to the Board. Failure of the
various boards and commissions to make comment or
recommendations within the thirty-five-day time frame shall be deemed
by the Planning Board as lack of opposition thereto. Notwithstanding
this deadline, the Planning Board reserves the right to request
comments from boards that have failed to do so based on issues raised
at the public hearing and to consider those comments in making its final
decision.
B.
Decision report. If the special permit does not incorporate the
suggestions or requirements of any reports from Town departments
or is issued contrary to their recommendations, the Planning Board
shall in its written decision state the reasons for not following the
recommendations or requirements of said reports.
C.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 305, Zoning, § 305-13.03.
§ 411-6 CHARTER § 411-8
C:573
members specific and material changes in the conditions upon which the
previous unfavorable action was based, and such changes are described in
the record of the Board's proceedings, and after notice is given to parties
in interest of the time and place of the proceedings to reconsider said
application.
§ 411-9. Effective date of special permit.
No special permit shall take effect until a copy of the decision bearing the
certification of the Town Clerk that 20 days have elapsed after the filing
of the decision and no appeal has been filed is recorded in the Registry of
Deeds and indexed under the name of the record owner of the land.
§ 411-10. Performance guarantee.
A performance guarantee shall be required in accordance with MGL c. 41
and the Marshfield Subdivision Rules and Regulations.67
§ 411-11. Severability.
The provisions of these rules and regulations are severable. If any provision
is held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby. If the
application of these rules and regulations or any of their provisions to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the application of these rules and
regulations and their provisions to other persons and circumstances shall
not be affected thereby.
Chapter 414
PLANNED MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 305. Subdivision of land — See Ch. 405.
§ 414-1. General provisions.
Purpose and authority. The following rules and regulations are hereby
adopted by the Marshfield Planning Board as provided in MGL c. 40A
for the purpose of establishing uniform procedures for the granting
of special permits for development within the Planned Mixed-Use
Development (PMUD) Zoning Overlay District pursuant to § 305-11.05
of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw. The purpose of the district, as stated in
the Zoning Bylaw, is as follows:
A.
67.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Subdivision of Land.
§ 411-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 414-1
C:574
§ 414-2. Applicant.
An application or petition for a special permit may be brought by a property
owner, agent or prospective purchaser who submits certification of property
interest and authority to file such application for the area of land comprising
the application locus.
§ 414-3. Pre-application conference.
It is recommended that an applicant meet with the Planning Board staff
and Building Department prior to submitting either a subdivision and land
classification plan or a special permit application. The applicant should
provide a concept plan (for discussion purposes) for said meeting. A preapplication
conference is to assist in the identification of issues and in
determining information necessary to meet the requirements of the Zoning
Bylaw for the application. If determined necessary by staff and requested
by the applicant the Planning Board may hold a pre-application conference
at any regular meeting of the Board.
§ 414-4. Planned mixed-use development application process.
A planned mixed-use development is a two-step process, which allows the
Town and an applicant greater flexibility in the development of the land
within the overlay district. These rules and regulations are intended to
establish specific guidelines regarding submittal requirements, review
procedures, and required performance standards.
To provide an opportunity to comprehensively plan a large tract of
land in a pedestrian-friendly, campus-like setting, around a public
green.
(1)
To ensure high-quality site planning, architecture and landscape
design to create a distinct visual character and identity for the
development that provides an environment with safety,
convenience and amenity.
(2)
To ensure any potential traffic impacts of the planned mixed-use
development are properly mitigated and in keeping with the
character of the Town of Marshfield.
(3)
To generate positive tax revenue, while providing the opportunity
for new business growth and additional local jobs.
(4)
Adoption and amendment. These rules and regulations may be adopted
and from time to time amended by majority vote of the Planning Board,
provided such adoption or amendment is submitted in writing at a
meeting of the Board and action thereon taken after a public hearing.
B.
Effective date. These rules and regulations are effective when voted. A
copy shall be filed with the office of the Town Clerk, with appropriate
endorsements, such as date of adoption, date filed with Town Clerk, and
dates of amendments.
C.
§ 414-1 CHARTER § 414-4
C:575
§ 414-5. Phase I: definitive subdivision and land classification plan.
Phase I. The applicant files a definitive subdivision and land
classification plan as described in § 414-5 for a phase or combination
of phases for land within the PMUD Overlay District. The plan locus
for each phase must include at least 30 contiguous acres within the
PMUD Overlay District as shown on the Town of Marshfield Zoning
Map, as amended. Additional land can be added to or substituted within
a phase, from time to time, provided that the thirty-acre minimum locus
is preserved and that a revised definitive subdivision plan is filed. The
definitive subdivision plan and land classification plan for each phase
shall contain the overall road network, roadway drainage, location of
the public green, bike and pedestrian ways, lots and proposed uses by
phase.
A.
Phase II. The applicant files a special permit application as described in
§ 414-6 with the Planning Board, serving as the special permit granting
authority (SPGA), for an element (or combination of elements) within a
phase. An element may be a single use or group of uses within a phase
of the overlay district.
B.
Application form.
Application for special permits shall be made on an official form,
which shall be furnished by the Town Clerk or the Planning Board
office upon request. All information indicated on this form and
listed under § 414-5B of these rules and regulations shall be
supplied by the applicant at the time of application. Failure to
meet this requirement will be considered a failure to submit a
complete application and the Planning Board will open and close
the public hearing without testimony and shall deny the proposal.
Such denial shall not subject the project to MGL c. 40A, § 16,
relative to repetitive petitions.
(1)
Applicants are encouraged to file any necessary applications for
special permits under the Water Resource Protection District
Bylaw68 so that this hearing may be held concurrently.
(2)
A.
Contents of an application. The completed application form, original
plan and 16 copies of all information shall be submitted to the Planning
Board with an additional copy filed with the Town Clerk by the
applicant. The following information shall be furnished by the
applicant:
The applicant or applicants must demonstrate proof of ownership
of all property subject to the application or a notarized statement
by the owner(s) of the property authorizing the applicant to file an
application for the property.
(1)
B.
68.Editor's Note: See Ch. 305, Zoning, § 305-13.03.
§ 414-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 414-5
C:576
A locus plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, 200 feet, or 400
feet showing the location, names, and present widths of the streets
bounding, approaching or within reasonable proximity of the site,
and including the tracts of land, ownership, and topography from
Assessor's plans or field survey, if available, of properties within the
plan locus.
(2)
A conceptual site layout drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet,
unless another scale is previously requested and found suitable by
the Board. The approximate locations of the buildings, setbacks
and all other required dimensions, elevations and measurements
and may be shown on the site layout.
(3)
Plans shall meet the requirements of the Marshfield Subdivision
Rules and Regulations, § 405-8B(1)(a) to (w), and including the
following required elements:
The location of existing wetlands, streams and rivers, water
bodies, wells, one-hundred-year floodplain elevation, slope
areas, vistas, geological features including topography (twofoot
contours), stone walls, fire trails, unique vegetation,
historic features, and other natural features that may be
important to the site.
(a)
Existing and proposed street, parking, drainage, and utility
systems prepared by a Massachusetts registered professional
engineer.
(b)
Property line plan by a Massachusetts registered land
surveyor.
(c)
Drainage calculations for proposed roadways meeting the
requirements of § 405-10 of the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations, including measures proposed to prevent pollution
of surface water or groundwater, soil erosion, increased runoff,
and flooding.
(d)
A landscape plan for all proposed roadway rights-of-way to
include the total square feet of all landscaped areas, including
a depiction of materials to be used, and the quantity, size, and
species of plantings.
(e)
A narrative describing the manner in which the land
designated on the plans as public green(s) will be either placed
under a permanent conservation restriction or deeded to the
Town of Marshfield. The narrative shall also describe any uses
and facilities proposed within the public green(s). If several
uses are proposed, the plans shall specify what uses will occur
in what areas. The narrative shall also address compliance
of the public green(s) with the design requirements in
§ 305-11.05D(14) of the Zoning Bylaw.
(f)
(4)
§ 414-5 CHARTER § 414-5
C:577
A draft copy of any proposed declaration of covenants and
restrictions and/or permanent conservation restrictions
governing the public green(s) within the application or, if the
public green(s) will be deeded to the Town, a statement to that
effect.
(g)
A draft easement for the maintenance of the public green(s), as
specified in § 305-11.05E(2) of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw.
(h)
The application shall also furnish a summary of the vital
statistics of the project. Such statistics shall include: total
gross and net acreage of locus; total length of new roadways;
area and maintenance plan for public green(s); and the
acreage of land within the proposal, including the percentage
of the total PMUD Overlay District dedicated to the allowable
land uses listed in the required performance standards in
§ 305-11.05D(3) of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw.
(i)
A traffic study for the land subject to the subdivision and land
classification plan application. Said traffic study shall include
information as specified in § 305-11.10 of the Zoning Bylaw.
This overall traffic study will assist the Town and applicants
(within the PMUD) to determine the overall impact of the
development of each phase of the PMUD and determine the
best mitigation package for the Town and development. It
is also to provide the Planning Board and the applicant(s) a
method to determine a fair share of the required mitigation
package by element.
(j)
The proposed traffic mitigation measures shall apply to each
element as approved under the special permit application
(Phase II). Any changes to the anticipated traffic impacts, size
or proposed uses of individual elements shall require updating
and revising the traffic study. The Planning Board under the
special permit application shall determine if said changes are
acceptable.
(k)
Subdivision and land classification plan design objectives.
Uses shall be grouped together to maximize pedestrian access by
connecting sidewalks and pathways. Buildings shall be oriented
around the public green and not Route 139 (Plain Street).
(1)
Except as the Planning Board may otherwise determine, access
to Route 139 (Plain Street) from a PMUD shall be through a
secondary street as defined in the Planning Board Subdivision
Rules and Regulations69 at a signalized intersection.
(2)
A public green shall be required for each phase of development
within the PMUD, and a public green can serve more than one
(3)
C.
69.Editor's Note: See Ch. 405, Subdivision of Land.
§ 414-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 414-5
C:578
§ 414-6. Phase II: special permit application.
Upon approval of a subdivision and land classification plan application
under the Phase I regulations, an applicant may submit a special permit
application for an individual element or group of elements. Phase I and
Phase II plans may be filed and reviewed concurrently, but the Planning
Board may continue the public hearing on a Phase II application until a
decision has been issued and the appeal period has passed for the Phase I
approval.
development phase. The public green(s) shall be a minimum of
1 1/2 acres in size per phase and be designed as a pedestrianfriendly
park. The public green(s) shall contain some combination
of benches, tables, playground equipment, sidewalks, lighting and
landscaping. Each green shall be used solely for active and passive
recreation purposes and shall be open to the public. The total
acreage of the green in each phase may be used toward the land
area calculations to determine allowable density for one of the uses
within that phase.
The Board shall review all submittals for compliance with the
required performance standards under § 305-11.05D of the Zoning
Bylaw and with the criteria for review and approval under
§ 305-11.05F of the Zoning Bylaw.
(4)
Application form.
Application for special permits shall be made on an official form,
which shall be furnished by the Town Clerk or the Planning Board
office upon request. All information indicated on this form and
listed under § 414-6B of these rules and regulations shall be
supplied by the applicant at the time of application. Failure to
meet this requirement will be considered a failure to submit an
application and no public hearing will be scheduled.
(1)
Applicants are encouraged to file any necessary applications for
special permits under the Water Resource Protection District
Bylaw70 so that this hearing may be held concurrently.
(2)
A.
Contents of an application. Any person desiring approval of a site plan
under this section shall submit 16 copies of said plan, with application
for approval thereof, directly to the Planning Board with an additional
copy filed with the Town Clerk. The Board shall, within 10 days after
receipt thereof, distribute such plans as provided in § 414-8A herein.
Applicants are encouraged to meet informally with the Planning Board
staff and the Building Commissioner prior to making a formal
submission of plans to discuss site plan requirements and design
objectives. The Board may provide a set of guidelines to assist
applicants in meeting site plan, architectural and landscaping
B.
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 305, Zoning, § 305-13.03.
§ 414-5 CHARTER § 414-6
C:579
objectives. The site plan submitted to the Board shall show, among
other things as may be required by the Board in the proper
administration of this section: [Amended 7-24-2017]
All existing and proposed buildings, structures, parking areas,
loading areas, driveway openings, driveways, walkways, access
and egress points, service areas, recreation areas and other open
spaces, including dimensions and all elevations.
(1)
(2) Existing and proposed easements within the lot.
Existing and proposed on-site wells, water supply systems, storm
drainage systems, utilities, sites for enclosed refuse containers and
location and capacity of septic systems.
(3)
(4) Wetlands, streams, bodies of water, and drainage swales.
The location and description of all existing and proposed
topographic features on the lot and adjoining areas within 50 feet
of said lot, including two-foot contours, walks, fences, walls,
planting areas, and greenbelts.
(5)
(6) Percent of building lot coverage.
Height of all buildings above average finished grade of abutting
streets, including architectural details, and the amount(s) in square
feet of proposed building(s).
(7)
Impervious surface area and open space (natural and landscaped)
of the lot.
(8)
A traffic study if the land subject to the application will meet the
thresholds specified in § 305-11.10 of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw.
Include projected traffic flow patterns into and upon the site for
both vehicles and pedestrians and an estimate of the projected
number of motor vehicle trips to and from the site for an average
day and for peak hours.
(9)
Proposed traffic mitigation measures applying to both on-site and
related off-site conditions, as identified in § 305-11.05F(3),
required performance standards, of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw.
The scheduling of mitigation measures shall ensure that said
remedies are in place and functioning properly at the time of
project occupancy.
(10)
The distance of existing and proposed buildings from the lot lines
and the distance between buildings on the same lot.
(11)
The location of existing or proposed buildings on the lot shall
be shown with the total square footage and dimensions of all
buildings, all building elevations and floor plans, and perspective
renderings. The information shall be sufficient so that the Board
may make recommendations regarding, among other things, the
(12)
§ 414-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 414-6
C:580
architectural value and significance of the site, building or
structure, the general design, arrangement and texture, material
and color of the features involved and the relation of such features
to similar features of buildings and structures in the surrounding
area.
Design features intended to integrate the proposed new
development into the existing landscape, to enhance aesthetic
assets, and to screen objectionable features from neighbors.
(13)
Number of parking spaces, and estimated water consumption and
sewage discharge.
(14)
The Board reserves the right to require additional information
as may be necessary to protect the public interests outlined in
§ 305-11.05 and relevant sections of the Zoning Bylaw.
(15)
Special permit review standards. In exercising its jurisdiction under
this section, the Board shall conform to all requirements applicable to
the Board when deciding requests for special permits as set forth in
MGL c. 40A, § 9, and Article X of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw. The
Board during its site plan review shall utilize the following objectives,
in addition to any standards prescribed elsewhere in these rules and
regulations. These objectives are intended to provide specific
guidelines for the Board and the applicant:
Architectural details. Architectural details of new buildings and
additions, and textures of walls and roof materials, should be
harmonious with the building's overall architectural style and
should preserve and enhance the historic character of Marshfield.
(1)
Building articulation. Building facades in excess of 40 feet shall
incorporate recesses and projections, of a minimum of two feet
in depth, to break up the building's mass. A minimum of 60%
of the building's public green(s) and/or street side facade shall
contain windows and other appropriate architectural elements.
The windows should be divided by muntins and framed with a
casing trim; awnings should be designed as an integral part of
the building facade; metal awnings are discouraged. Facades shall
emphasize architectural elements (including windows, balconies,
porches, entries, etc.) that create a complementary pattern or
rhythm, dividing large buildings into smaller identifiable pieces.
This standard may be waived for building facades fronting on Route
139 (Plain Street) where, in the opinion of the Planning Board, the
elevated vegetated buffer provides adequate screening.
(2)
Building form and features. The mass, proportion and scale of the
building, roof shape, roof pitch, and proportions and relationships
between doors and windows should be harmonious among
themselves.
(3)
C.
§ 414-6 CHARTER § 414-6
C:581
Building location. Proposed buildings and structures shall be
integrated as much as possible within the existing building
locations, landscape and terrain. Building location shall be oriented
parallel or perpendicular to the public green(s) and/or street and
shall be oriented around the public green and not Route 139 (Plain
Street). Where the minimum setback cannot be maintained, the
applicant shall provide adequate spatial definitions through the
use of walls, fences and/or other elements which will maintain the
street line. Uses shall be grouped together to maximize pedestrian
access by connecting sidewalks and pathways. The large retail
establishment shall either provide an entrance to the public green
or side facade to the public green shall be lined with uses to
enhance the pedestrian activities and the use of the public
green(s).
(4)
Building design. The design of proposed buildings, structures and
additions shall complement, whenever feasible, the general
setback, roofline, roof pitch, arrangement of openings, color,
exterior materials, proportion and scale of existing buildings in the
vicinity.
(5)
Spatial definition. Define various areas both public and private
with walks, plantings, walls, fences and other elements that are in
keeping with the overall architectural design.
(6)
Parking design. The majority of the parking shall be located to the
rear or sides of buildings. All parking and loading areas shall be
completely screened from Route 139 (Plain Street) by a minimum
fifty-foot-wide raised and landscaped buffer. Parking lots and
loading areas shall be appropriately screened from roadways
within the overlay district by a minimum twenty-foot-wide raised
and landscaped buffer. Appropriately designed view corridors of
buildings from the roadways within the overlay district shall be
allowed.
(7)
Parking spaces. Applicant shall demonstrate adequacy of space for
the off-street loading and unloading of vehicles, goods, products,
materials, and equipment incidental to the normal operation of
the establishment. Reduction in parking space requirements may
be permitted where by design and use it is shown to the Board's
satisfaction that the parking is compatibly shared by multiple uses.
However, in no case shall a parking requirement reduction exceed
20% of those parking spaces required under normal application of
requirements for the nonresidential uses proposed.
(8)
Special features. Exposed machinery, utility structures and areas
for parking, loading, storage, service and disposal shall be
screened from adjoining properties and streets as deemed
necessary by the SPGA.
(9)
§ 414-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 414-6
C:582
§ 414-7. Fees. [Amended 7-24-2017]
Lighting. All lighting and other sources of illumination, whether
interior or exterior, and all intense light emanating from operations
or equipment shall be shielded from direct view at normal eye level
from adjacent properties. Lighting should match the architectural
style of the building and comply with the Zoning Bylaw, § 305-8.09.
(10)
Pedestrian furnishings. The Board shall evaluate convenience and
safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site, and in
relation to adjacent streets, property, or improvements. Benches,
bicycle racks, bollards, pedestrian-scale lighting, street trees,
refuse containers, flower boxes, and canopies shall be provided
where deemed appropriate by the SPGA and shall be consistent
with the character of the development.
(11)
Disposal. The Board shall review adequacy of the methods of
disposal for sewage, refuse and other wastes resulting from the
uses permitted or permissible on the site and the methods of
drainage for surface water, including consideration of groundwater
recharge.
(12)
Protection. The Board shall ensure protection of adjoining premises
against detrimental or offensive uses on the site.
(13)
Submittals compliance. The Board shall review all submittals for
compliance with the required performance standards under
§ 305-11.05D of the Zoning Bylaw and with the criteria for review
and approval under § 305-11.05F of the Zoning Bylaw.
(14)
Administrative expenses. Fees for the review and staff time required
to process the application by the Planning Department, Conservation
Commission, Board of Health, Fire Department, Police Department,
Building Department and Highway, Sewer and Water Divisions, or
consultants used in lieu of departmental staff, shall be as provided in
Chapter 420, Fee Schedule.
A.
Review fees/special accounts.
Applicants for Phase I subdivision and land classification plans
shall deposit review fees as provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule,
into a special account subject to guidelines set forward in
§ 405-8A(6) of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations. The
consulting review fee may be expended as specified in the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations for review of the special permit
application. No additional fee is associated with the special permit
application.
(1)
Applicants for Phase II special permits shall deposit review fees
in the amount as provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule, into a
special account subject to guidelines set forward in § 405-8A(6)
of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations. The consulting review
(2)
B.
§ 414-6 CHARTER § 414-7
C:583
§ 414-8. Planning Board review.
fee may be expended as specified in the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations for review of the special permit application. No
additional fee is associated with the special permit application.
Other costs and expenses. The applicant is responsible for mailing
public hearing notices to abutters by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Return receipts are to be submitted to the Planning Board
prior to the public hearing.
C.
Special permit modification. The administrative fee for a modification to
an existing special permit is as provided in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule.
The applicant shall submit a check made out to the Town of Marshfield
at the time of the request to modify the PMUD special permit.
D.
Fee waiver. Fees can be waived for applications from the Town of
Marshfield and religious and nonprofit organizations, at the discretion
of the Planning Board, on a case-by-case basis.
E.
Distribution of plans. Upon filing of a complete application, the
Planning Board shall distribute copies of the plans and supporting
information to the following departments: Planning Board, Planning
Board Engineering Consultant, Planning Board Water Scientist (if
within the Water Resource Protection District), Assessors, Town Clerk,
Conservation Commission, Engineering Division, Water Division (two),
Highway Division, Housing Authority, Board of Health, Building
Department, Historical Commission, Police Department and Fire
Department. Such distribution shall be completed within 10 days of the
receipt of the plans and application by the Planning Board. In addition,
where the property abuts or is accessed within 100 feet of a state
highway (Route 3A or Route 139), the Planning Board shall mail a
copy of plans and supporting application materials, by certified mail, to
the regional office of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
[Amended 7-24-2017]
A.
Submittal of comments. These departments shall have 35 days to
review and submit written comments to the Board. Failure of the
various boards and commissions to make comment or
recommendations within the thirty-five-day time frame shall be deemed
by the Planning Board as lack of opposition thereto. Notwithstanding
this deadline, the Planning Board reserves the right to request
comments from boards that have failed to do so based on issues raised
at the public hearing and to consider those comments in making its final
decision.
B.
Decision report. The Board shall, within 90 days of the close of the
public hearing, issue a decision pertaining to each complete
application. Each decision shall include an approval, an approval with
conditions, or a denial with specific citations stating where the
application did not comply with the required performance standards
C.
§ 414-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 414-8
C:584
§ 414-9. Disposition of application.
and/or the criteria for review and approval. If the special permit does
not incorporate the suggestions or requirements of any reports from
Town departments or is issued contrary to their recommendations, the
Planning Board shall in its written decision state the reasons for not
following the recommendations or requirements of said reports.
Modification. The Board shall have the power to modify or amend its
approval of a Phase I subdivision and land classification plan or Phase
II site plan review on application of the owner, lessee or mortgagee
of the premises, or upon its own motion if such power is reserved by
the Board in its original approval. All of the provisions of these rules
and regulations and § 305-11.05 of the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw shall,
where apt, be applicable to such modification or amendment.
D.
Withdrawal of application. An applicant may withdraw an application
without prejudice by notice in writing to the Clerk of the Board at any
time prior to the first publication of the notice of the public hearing.
After such notice, withdrawal of an application shall be permitted only
by majority vote of the Board.
A.
Reconsideration. No vote on an application may be reconsidered after
the meeting at which the decision was rendered has been adjourned.
B.
Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board as special
permit granting authority may appeal such decision as provided in MGL
c. 40A, § 17, within 20 days after such decision has been filed in the
office of the Town Clerk.
C.
Reapplication. No application which has been unfavorably and finally
acted upon by the Board shall be reconsidered for a special permit
within two years after the date of the said final unfavorable action,
unless the Board finds by vote of four members specific and material
changes in the conditions upon which the previous unfavorable action
was based and such changes are described in the record of the Board's
proceedings, and after notice is given to parties in interest of the time
and place of the proceedings to reconsider in the same manner as
provided for in these rules and regulations.
D.
Effectiveness of special permit. No special permit shall take effect until
certification by the Town Clerk is recorded in the Registry of Deeds and
indexed under the name of the record owner of the land that 20 days
have elapsed after the filing of the decision and no appeal has been
filed.
E.
Lapse of special permit. Every special permit authorized by the Board
shall contain the express condition that it will lapse if substantial
use under the permit is not commenced within two years from the
date of final action by the Board, except for good cause, or the final
determination of an appeal.
F.
§ 414-8 CHARTER § 414-10
C:585
§ 414-10. Waiver of full compliance.
Full compliance with these regulations may be waived by the Board,
provided such waivers are deemed to serve the public interest and are not
conflicting with MGL c. 40A.
§ 414-11. Performance guarantee.
§ 414-12. Severability.
The provisions of these rules and regulations are severable. If any provision
is held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby. If the
application of these rules and regulations or any of their provisions to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, the application of these rules and
regulations and their provisions to other persons and circumstances shall
not be affected thereby.
As a condition to a subdivision and land classification plan, the
applicant shall post a performance guarantee as described in the
Subdivision Rules and Regulations, § 405-8E, to cover the period of
construction or provide other safeguards in the form and amount or
penal sum acceptable to the Board prior to the commencement of
construction, unless the Board shall specify otherwise. The purpose of
the guarantee for Phase I subdivision and land classification plans is to
assure completion of roadways, landscaping, drainage, erosion control
or safety measures which may affect abutters or the public. [Amended
7-24-2017]
A.
As a condition to a special permit, the applicant shall post a
performance guarantee as described in the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations, § 405-8E, to cover the period of construction or provide
other safeguards in the form and amount or penal sum acceptable to
the Board prior to the issuance of a building permit, unless the Board
shall specify otherwise. The purpose of the guarantee for Phase II
special permits is to assure completion of parking lots, landscaping,
public green(s) or safety measures which may affect abutters or the
public. [Amended 7-24-2017]
B.
If the applicant is not the owner and must purchase to assume such
obligations, he shall comply within 20 days following the date of
purchase. Upon completion of construction work, and satisfactory
inspection by the Planning Board or its agent, the bond shall be
returned to the applicant. In the event of any dispute, the Planning
Board shall have the right to require as-built plans certified by the
appropriate registered architect, professional engineer, or surveyor as
a basis for its findings.
C.
§ 414-10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 414-12
C:586
Chapter 417
WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Water — See Ch. 285.
Zoning — See Ch. 305.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 405.
§ 417-1. General provisions.
§ 417-2. Applicant.
An application or petition for a special permit may be brought by a property
owner, agent, or prospective purchaser who submits certification (such
as an executed purchase and sales agreement) of property interest and
authority to file.
§ 417-3. Reoccupation certification.
Pursuant to § 305-13.03E(5) of the Zoning Bylaw, a party seeking to
reoccupy an existing structure in the Water Resource Protection District
(WRPD) with a use that would ordinarily require a special permit pursuant
to § 305-13.03E(4) of the Zoning Bylaw may do so without filing a special
permit application if the party receives a positive determination from the
Building Commissioner through a WRPD reoccupation certificate. It is the
responsibility of any party requesting such a determination from the
Building Commissioner to provide information and plans that verify the
information on the associated certificate. Site plans developed for the prior
use may be used as part of a submittal to the Building Commissioner as long
as they accurately reflect existing conditions. The Building Commissioner
may reasonably request additional materials from the submitting party in
order to make an accurate determination.
Purpose and authority. The following rules are hereby adopted by the
Planning Board as provided in MGL c. 40A for the purpose of
establishing uniform procedures for administering permitting
requirements within the Water Resource Protection District as
established in § 305-13.03 of the Zoning Bylaw.
A.
Adoption and amendment. These rules and regulations may be adopted
and from time to time amended by majority vote of the Planning Board
members present and voting, provided such adoption or amendment is
taken after a public hearing.
B.
Effective date. These rules and regulations are effective when voted. A
copy shall be filed with the office of the Town Clerk, with appropriate
endorsements, such as date of adoption, date filed with Town Clerk, and
amendments.
C.
§ 414-12 CHARTER § 417-4
C:587
§ 417-4. Application for special permit.
Official application form. Application for special permits shall be made
on an official form which shall be furnished by the Planning Department
upon request.
A.
Contents of an application. The completed application form, original
plan, and 15 copies shall be submitted to the Planning Board with an
additional copy filed forthwith with the Town Clerk by the applicant.
Survey and engineered site plans shall be drawn at a scale of one
inch equals 40 feet, unless another scale is previously requested by
the applicant and found suitable by the Board. A professional engineer
shall prepare and stamp all plans. The plans shall be stamped by
the registered land surveyor who performed the instrument boundary
survey and who shall certify the accuracy of the locations of the
building, setbacks and all other required dimensions, elevations, and
measurements and shall be signed under the penalties of perjury. The
Board may engage a Massachusetts professional engineer or
hydrogeologist experienced in groundwater evaluation, hydrogeology,
or hazardous and toxic materials to review the application for
completeness and correctness and shall require the applicant to pay for
the cost of the review. The following information shall be furnished by
the applicant:
A locus plan at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet, 200 feet or 400
feet showing the location, names, and present widths of the streets
bounding, approaching or within reasonable proximity of the site,
and including the tracts of land, ownership, and topography taken
from Assessor's plans or field survey if available.
(1)
Name and complete contact information of the applicant, property
owner and all members of the design and development team.
(2)
(3) The scale, date and North arrow.
Assessor's map and parcel numbers, dimensions of lot in feet, size
of lot in square feet, and width of abutting streets and ways.
(4)
The location of existing wetlands, water bodies, wells, onehundred-
year floodplain elevation, and other natural features
including streams, wetlands, vistas, slope areas, geological
features, unique vegetation, historic features, and others that may
be important to the site.
(5)
(6) Easements within the lot and for properties abutting thereon.
(7) Identification of zoning districts, including any overlay districts.
The location of existing or proposed building(s) on the lot with the
total square footage and dimensions of all buildings.
(8)
B.
§ 417-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 417-4
C:588
Where storage of hazardous materials in excess of household
quantities is proposed, building elevations and floor plans shall be
provided.
(9)
A landscape plan to include the total square feet of all landscape
and recreation areas, and depiction of materials to be used, and the
quantity, size, methods, and species of plantings.
(10)
Percent of building lot coverage and percentage of paved
(impervious) area used for parking, loading, and access within the
property. For the purposes of this calculation, any areas that are
designated for regular vehicle traffic or parking shall be counted as
impervious regardless of how the surface is finished.
(11)
Existing and proposed topographical lines at two-foot contour
intervals on the tract and within 50 feet thereof. Where an
applicant cannot gain access to adjacent property in order to
satisfy this requirement, topography can be provided based on
USGS quadrangles.
(12)
The location and a description of proposed open space or
recreation areas.
(13)
Existing and proposed street, parking, drainage, and utility
systems.
(14)
Information regarding all measures proposed to prevent pollution
of surface water or groundwater, soil erosion, increased runoff, and
flooding.
(15)
A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fuels
and other potentially toxic or hazardous materials to be used or
stored on the premises in quantities greater than those associated
with normal household use, accompanied by a description of
measures proposed to protect all storage containers/fertilizers
from vandalism, corrosion and leakage, and to provide for control
of spills (during and after construction).
(16)
A description of potentially toxic or hazardous wastes to be
generated, indicating storage and disposal methods (during and
after construction).
(17)
Evidence of application to the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) for a groundwater discharge
permit associated with any industrial waste treatment or disposal
system and/or wastewater treatment system (during and after
construction).
(18)
Projections of downgradient concentrations of nitrogen,
phosphorus, and other relevant chemicals to be disposed of on site,
at property boundaries and at other locations deemed pertinent by
the Board, prepared by a hydrogeologist or registered professional
(19)
§ 417-4 CHARTER § 417-4
C:589
§ 417-5. Nitrogen loading regulation.
engineer possessing experience and education in water supply
protection and hydrology.
A narrative summary of the vital statistics of the project. Such
statistics shall include: Total gross and net square footage, number
of parking spaces, and estimated amounts of water consumption
and sewer discharge.
(20)
Direction of groundwater flow and the distance to all public water
supply wells within the Zone 2.
(21)
Any additional information which the Board may require in order to
determine compliance with the applicable standards of the Zoning
Bylaw.
(22)
Findings and purposes. The Town of Marshfield requires industrial,
commercial, community facilities, and residential uses (except existing
one-family detached dwellings) to provide documentation that
demonstrates that the concentration of nitrate-nitrogen in groundwater
resulting from these uses shall not exceed five parts per million (ppm)
at the downgradient property boundary. These requirements are based
on the following findings:
Whereas the Town of Marshfield does not have a sewer system
to treat wastewater from development within its Water Resource
Protection District, the disposal of this wastewater through septic
systems within the district poses a threat to the drinking water
quality of the public supply wells the district is designed to protect.
The primary contaminant of concern coming from the septic
systems is nitrogen.
(1)
Once nitrogen released from septic systems reaches groundwater,
it is not attenuated, but it is diluted with recharge from
precipitation, road and roof runoff, and lawn irrigation. These
dilution waters also transport some nitrogen, though not as
concentrated as septic system wastewater. Wastewater contributes
between 70% and 80% of the nitrogen in groundwater in developed
areas.
(2)
Excessive nitrogen in drinking water has been linked to serious
health effects. Consumption of excessive nitrate-nitrogen by infants
has been linked to methemoglobinemia (blue baby syndrome);
nitrate occupies the hemoglobin site on red blood cells limiting
the transport of oxygen through the blood. There is also a concern
that excessive nitrogen in drinking water can be converted to
excessive nitrosamines (carcinogenic nitrogen forms) in stomach
acid. Excessive nitrogen in groundwater has also been linked to
excessive levels of other contaminants.
(3)
A.
§ 417-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 417-5
C:590
Due to these health concerns, the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) and the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) have adopted maximum contaminant levels in
drinking water. If these levels are exceeded in a drinking water
supply well, utilization of the well must cease and an alternative
supply must be found. Treatment technology to remove excessive
nitrogen from drinking water prior to its use is currently
prohibitively expensive.
(4)
Since the Town of Marshfield has invested significant public funds
in the development of its current drinking water supply and wishes
to avoid the expense and potential health and economic concerns
that excessive nitrogen in its drinking water would cause, the
Town of Marshfield has adopted a nitrogen loading assessment
requirement in its Zoning Bylaw for development in its Water
Resource Protection District.
(5)
Applicability. The following projects which require a special permit in
accordance with the Table of Uses in the Marshfield Zoning Bylaw71
shall be subject to the provisions of this regulation:
(1) New commercial and industrial development;
(2) New community facilities;
New residential uses, including residential subdivisions of five or
more new lots; and
(3)
Existing commercial, industrial, or community facilities where a
change of use is proposed that will increase the concentration of
nitrogen on the site.
(4)
B.
Nitrogen loading assumptions and calculations.
Nitrogen loading. For the purposes of this regulation, nitrogen
loading shall be calculated using the attached form titled "Town of
Marshfield - Planning Board Nitrogen Loading Calculation Form."72
(1)
Nonresidential wastewater flow. Although Title 5 wastewater flows
will be used conventionally in the calculation of nitrogen loading,
commercial and industrial development and community facilities
may use measured water use flows to calculate nitrogen loads
from wastewater. In order to use measured water use flows, an
applicant must present annual water bills or equivalent information
to support the use of these flows. It is recommended that measured
water use information from at least three comparable
developments or three years worth of water records be provided.
The Town of Marshfield Planning Board shall determine the validity
(2)
C.
71.Editor's Note: See § 305-5.04.
72.Editor's Note: The form is available at the Planning Board office.
§ 417-5 CHARTER § 417-5
C:591
of supporting information and may reject or modify the use of
wastewater flows other than Title 5 wastewater flows.
Residential wastewater flow. Residential developments may use a
wastewater flow that is the mean of standard Title 5 wastewater
flows and modified Title 5 flows based on occupancy data. Modified
Title 5 flows shall be calculated by multiplying actual Title 5 flows
by the fraction represented by dividing the average single-family
residence occupancy in the Town by two times the number of
proposed bedrooms. Average occupancy shall equal total Town
population divided by occupied housing units (both values from the
most recent U.S. census) unless the Planning Board determines
that alternative values should be used.
Sample Calculation for a three-bedroom home:
Base Statistics
Number of bedrooms = 3
Standard Title 5 flow = 330 gpd
Average occupancy = 2.5 people1
Step One: Calculate Modifying Fraction
Average occupancy divided by 2 times number of bedrooms:
2.5/(2 * 3) = 0.42
Step Two: Calculate Modified Title 5 Flow
Modifying fraction times Title 5 flow:
0.42 * 330 = 138.6 gpd
Step Three: Calculate Mean Estimated Flow
Mean of standard Title 5 flow and modified Title 5 flow:
(138.6 + 330)/2 = 234.3 gpd
1 For illustration purposes only. Does not necessarily represent
the actual average occupancy rate in the Town of Marshfield.
(3)
Nitrogen concentrations. Nutrient concentrations applied to
nitrogen loading calculations shall follow the following schedule:
Source of Nitrogen
Concentration of
Nitrogen
(milligrams per
liter)
Wastewater effluent from a standard onsite
system
35
Wastewater effluent from a DEP
approved denitrification system
19
(4)
§ 417-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 417-5
C:592
Source of Nitrogen
Concentration of
Nitrogen
(milligrams per
liter)
Wastewater effluent from a centralized
wastewater treatment facility
10
Runoff from roadways and driveways 1.5
Runoff from rooftops 0.75
Rainfall (runoff on natural surfaces) 0.05
Nutrient loading from turf fertilization.
To calculate the loading of nitrogen from turf areas, the
applicant shall first multiply the area of turf by the estimated
application rate of 3.0 pounds of nitrogen per 1,000 square
feet of turf. The applicant shall then multiply this value by 0.25
assuming a 25% leaching rate to groundwater.
(a)
The area of turf associated with a residential development
shall be equal to 50% of the lot area. The Planning Board may
allow for a reduction in this value based upon area calculations
performed from an engineered site plan. Where landscaped
areas are proposed to be unfertilized on a site plan, the burden
of proof will be on the applicant to provide assurance that the
area will not be fertilized in the foreseeable future based on
plant selection and landscape design.
(b)
(5)
Recharge rates. Recharge rates assigned to the site shall be based
on preexisting hydrologic soils groups in accordance with the
following table:
NRCS Hydrologic Soils Group
Recharge Rate
(inches per year)
A Soils 24
B Soils 18
C Soils 10
D Soils 3
Wetlands and surface waters 0
(6)
Nutrient loading from impervious surfaces. Nitrogen loading from
impervious surfaces will be calculated by multiplying the
appropriate nitrogen loading coefficient by the recharge rate
associated with the soil that will be covered by the impervious
surface. This approach is based on the assumption that postdevelopment
recharge volumes shall approximate pre-development
recharge rates pursuant to the Massachusetts Stormwater
(7)
§ 417-5 CHARTER § 417-5
C:593
§ 417-6. Fees.
All applications shall be accompanied by two certified checks made payable
to the order of the Town of Marshfield. One check shall be for administrative
Standards. Where an alternative approach is used specifically for
redevelopment pursuant to the Massachusetts Stormwater
Standards, the Planning Board may accept annual recharge volume
calculations associated with impervious cover that are provided
and stamped by the applicant's engineer.
The final average concentration of nitrogen. The final average
concentration of nitrogen in groundwater shall be calculated by
dividing the total annual mass load of nitrogen by the total annual
volume of recharge and shall be expressed as milligrams per liter
(mg/l).
(8)
Aggregate concentration calculations. For those applicants who require
a special permit pursuant to § 305-13.03E(4)(d) of the Zoning Bylaw, an
aggregate concentration calculation shall be developed to demonstrate
that the concentration of nitrogen in groundwater shall not exceed five
mg/l at the boundary of the Zone I for the public water supply.
Description of calculation. The aggregate concentration calculation
is used to examine the aggregate effect of adding larger individual
wastewater systems to the district. These analyses determine the
area that the wastewater effluent will occupy on its way to the Zone
I boundary, and the extent to which the flow is or is not diluted
by overlying land use activity. Similar to on-site nitrogen loading
calculations, the aggregate concentration calculations will use a
mass balance approach, dividing the total load of nitrogen from
overlying land uses by the annual volume of recharge to determine
an average downgradient concentration.
(1)
Area of impact (AOI). The nitrogen aggregation calculation shall
first determine the AOI created by the plume from the leach field
of the on-site wastewater treatment system. The applicant shall
develop a flow net analysis that includes a groundwater mounding
analysis to delineate the wastewater plume as it travels from the
leach field to the edge of the Zone I.
(2)
Calculating nitrogen concentration. The concentration of nitrogen
at the Zone I boundary shall be calculated using the same
assumptions as those provided in § 417-4B of these regulations. To
estimate the different land use categories for areas within the AOI
that are off site, the applicant shall use best available information
from readily available GIS databases. Interpretation of aerial
photography to estimate the coverage of different land features
may be allowed along with any vector files that represent
impervious cover. The Planning Board shall make the final
determination as to which data is the best suited for the analysis.
(3)
D.
§ 417-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 417-6
C:594
fees and the second check shall establish an individual special account. Any
additional payments required shall be made within 30 days of the billing
date.
Administrative fees. The filing fee shall be as provided in Chapter 420,
Fee Schedule, for a special permit application. [Amended 7-24-2017]
A.
Consultant review fee/special account.
Every special permit application shall be required to file the
minimum review fee to establish an individual special account. If, in
addition, this minimum amount is not sufficient to cover the entire
cost of the review, the Board shall adjust said special account.
The minimum fee and the adjustment schedule are as provided in
Chapter 420, Fee Schedule. [Amended 7-24-2017]
(1)
Where specific conditions arising from the land or the nature of
the proposal necessitate the assistance of a planning, engineering,
traffic, soils, hydrologic or other consultant(s), the Planning Board
may engage such consultant services to assist the Board in
analyzing the project to ensure compliance with all relevant laws,
bylaws, regulations, good design principles and state of the art
technology. The Board may require that applicants pay a review fee
consisting of the reasonable costs to be projected to be incurred by
the Board for the employment of consultants engaged by the Board
to assist in the review of the application.
(2)
Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall be
deposited with the Town Treasurer/Collector who shall establish a
special individual account for this purpose. Expenditures from this
special account may be made at the direction of the Board, without
further appropriation. Expenditures from this special account shall
be made only in connection with the review of a specific project
or projects for which a review fee has been or will be collected
from the applicant. Failure of an applicant to pay all review fees
shall be grounds for denial of the application or permit. [Amended
7-24-2017]
(3)
Review fees may only be spent for services rendered in connection
with the specific project for which they were collected. Accrued
interest may also be spent for this purpose. At the completion of
the Board's review of a project, any excess amount in the account,
including any interest, attributable to a specific project shall be
repaid to the applicant or the applicant's successor in interest. The
applicant must submit a written request for these funds. A final
report for said account shall be made available to the applicant,
upon request, or the applicant's successor in interest. For the
purpose of this regulation, any person or entity claiming to be an
applicant's successor in interest shall provide the Board with the
documentation establishing such succession in interest.
(4)
B.
§ 417-6 CHARTER § 417-6
C:595
§ 417-7. Planning Board review.
Any applicant may take an administrative appeal from the selection
of the outside consultant to the Board of Selectmen, provided that
such appeal is taken within 14 days of notification of the Board's
appointment of the consultant. The grounds for such an appeal
shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict
of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications
as may be set by the Board. The minimum qualifications shall
consist either of a four-year college level educational degree in, or
one related to, the field of knowledge at issue or three or more
years of practice in the field at issue or a closely related field.
Minimum qualifications may be increased at the Board's discretion
depending upon the complexity and importance of the proposed
project. The required time limit for action upon an application by
the Board shall be extended by the duration of the administrative
appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the Board of
Selectmen within one month following the filing of the appeal, the
selection made by the Board shall stand.
(5)
Other costs and expenses. The Planning Board shall write the public
hearing notice and furnish the notice to the applicant. The applicant
is responsible for paying the cost of the legal advertisement in the
newspaper. The notice of public hearing shall be mailed certified
delivery by the applicant to all parties in interest not less than 10 days
before the date of the public hearing. The applicant is responsible for
the costs associated with mailing the notice to abutters and any parties
in interest by certified mail, return receipt requested. Return receipts
are to be addressed to the Planning Board for further verification.
C.
Modification. The administrative fee to modify an existing special
permit is established in Chapter 420, Fee Schedule. The applicant shall
submit a check made out to the Town of Marshfield at the time of the
request to modify the WRPD special permit. [Amended 7-24-2017]
D.
Fee waiver. Fees can be waived for applications from the Town of
Marshfield and religious and nonprofit organizations, at the discretion
of the Planning Board, on a case-by-case basis. [Amended 7-24-2017]
E.
Review by other Town agencies. Prior to its formal review, the Planning
Board shall distribute copies of the plans and supporting documents
and information (within five business days of the receipt of the complete
application) to the following Town departments: Conservation
Commission, Department of Public Works, Board of Health, and Police
and Fire Departments. These departments shall have 35 days to review
and submit written comments to the Board. Failure of the various
boards and commission to make comments within the thirty-five-day
time frame shall be deemed lack of opposition thereto.
A.
Report on special permit decision. If a special permit decision does not
incorporate the suggestions and/or requirements of any properly filed
B.
§ 417-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 417-7
C:596
§ 417-8. Disposition of application.
report(s) from other Town departments or boards, or from other entities
commissioned by the Planning Board, or is issued contrary to advisory
reports, the Planning Board shall issue a written decision stating the
reasons for not following the recommendations or requirements of said
report(s).
Procedural report.
The Board, acting as the special permit granting authority, shall
follow all procedural requirements of MGL c. 40A, § 9. All
applicants are advised to review this chapter in order to
understand the special permit granting process.
(1)
Public hearing. The Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing
within 65 days of receipt of an application. Notice of said hearing
shall be advertised in newspapers of general circulation in the
Town of Marshfield and mailed to parties of interest as required.
(2)
Action by the Board. Within 90 days of the close of the public
hearing, the Planning Board shall file a decision with the Town
Clerk, indicating approval, conditional approval, or denial of the
special permit. When a petition or application has been voted upon
and the meeting adjourned, there shall be no reconsideration of a
decision for that application by the Board.
(3)
C.
Withdrawal of application. An application may be withdrawn without
prejudice by an applicant by notice in writing to the Planning Board,
which notice the applicant shall also deliver to the Town Clerk, at any
time prior to the first publication of the notice of the public hearing.
After such notice, withdrawal of an application shall be permitted only
by Board vote, which shall consist of a majority present and voting.
A.
Reconsideration. No vote on an application may be reconsidered after
the meeting has adjourned.
B.
Appeals. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Board as special
permit granting authority may appeal such decision as provided in MGL
c. 40A, § 17, within 20 days after such decision has been filed in the
office of the Town Clerk.
C.
Reapplication. No application which has been unfavorably and finally
acted upon by the Board shall be reconsidered for a special permit
within two years after the date of the said final unfavorable action,
unless the Board finds, by vote of four members, specific and material
changes in the condition upon which the previous unfavorable action
was based and such changes are described in the record of the Board's
proceedings, and after notice is hereby given to parties in interest of
the time and place of the proceedings to reconsider in the same manner
as provided for in § 417-6C of these rules and regulations.
D.
§ 417-7 CHARTER § 417-8
C:597
§ 417-9. Severability.
The provisions of these rules and regulations are severable. If any provision
of these rules and regulations is held invalid, the other provisions shall
not be affected thereby. If the application of these rules and regulations
or any of their provisions to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
the application of these rules and regulations and their provisions to other
persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
§ 417-10. Waiver of full compliance.
Full compliance with these rules and regulations may be waived by the
Planning Board, provided such waivers are deemed to serve the public
interest and are not conflicting with MGL c. 40A. Requested waivers shall
be submitted in writing at the time of the application. Waivers may only be
granted through a majority vote of the Planning Board.
Lapse of special permit. No special permit shall be authorized by the
Board without the express condition that it will lapse if substantial
use under the permit is not commenced within two years from the
date of final action by the Board, except for good cause, or the final
determination of an appeal.
E.
Extension of special permit. Approval in all cases is granted for a twoyear
period from the date of the filing of such approval with the Town
Clerk. If a development is not completed in its entirety in that time,
the applicant must again petition the Planning Board for an extension
of time to complete the project. The applicant shall apply for the
extension 30 days prior to the lapse of the special permit. In the event
that the project has not been completed within two years of approval
and the Planning Board has not granted an extension of the time to
complete the project, the special permit approval will have expired.
If the special permit has expired, the applicant will be required to
request a reinstatement of the special permit approval. The process for
reinstatement of the special permit is the same as the process required
for a new special permit as specified in these rules and regulations, in
§ 305-13.03 of the Zoning Bylaw and as required in MGL c. 40A, § 9.
All applications under this section must comply with the bylaw and its
rules and regulations in force at the time of application. [Amended
7-24-2017]
F.
Recording. No special permit shall take effect until a copy of the
decision, bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that 20 days have
elapsed after the filing of the decision and no appeal has been filed, is
recorded in the Registry of Deeds and is indexed under the name of the
record owner of the land. Proof of recording at the Registry of Deeds or
in Land Court as applicable shall be provided to the Planning Board.
G.
§ 417-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 417-11
C:598
§ 417-11. Notice of violation. [Amended 7-24-2017]
Written notice of any violation of these rules and regulations shall be
provided by the Building Commissioner to the owner of the premises,
specifying the nature of the violations and a schedule of compliance,
including cleanup of any spilled materials. This compliance schedule must
be reasonable in relation to the public health hazard involved and the
difficulty of compliance. In no event shall more than 30 days be allowed for
either compliance or modification of a plan for longer-term compliance. In
the enforcement of these rules and regulations, the Building Commissioner
shall notify the Health Inspector of any violations and seek the Health
Inspector's and/or Agent's assistance.
Chapter 420
FEE SCHEDULE
§ 420-1. Planning Board Fee Schedule.
Planning Board Fee Schedule
Type
Administrative
Fee Consultant Fee Monitoring Fee
Preliminary
Subdivision
$600 $2,000
Definitive
Subdivision
0 to 10 lots $500 + $100 per
unit
$2,000
11 to 20 lots $700 + $100 per
unit
$4,000
21 to 30 lots $900 + $100 per
unit
$6,000
31+ lots $1,200 + $100
per unit
$8,000
Reinstatement
and Repetitive
Petitions
$300
Modifications $400 $1,000
Approval Not
Required Plans
$100 plus $150
per buildable lot
Special Permits
ARAV $750 plus $50
per affordable
unit
$5,000 $7,000 per
affordable unit
§ 417-11 CHARTER § 420-1
C:599
Planning Board Fee Schedule
Type
Administrative
Fee Consultant Fee Monitoring Fee
OSRD Same as
subdivision fees
Same as
subdivision fees
PMUD $750 Phase I $7,400 Phase I
$900 Phase II $9,400 Phase II
WRPD $500
0 to 10 acres $2,000
10 to 20 acres $4,000
21 to 30 acres $6,000
31+ acres $8,000
Inclusionary
Zoning
Same as
subdivisions plus
$7,000 per
affordable unit
Same as
subdivision fees
Special Permit
Modifications
$400 $1,000
Scenic Road
Applications
$200
Street
Determinations
$250
Street
Improvements
$500 $1,200
Chapter 500
GENERAL PROVISIONS, CONSERVATION COMMISSION
§ 420-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § 420-1
C:600
ARTICLE I
Approval of Codification
[The codification of the Wetlands Protection Bylaw as Chapter 294
and the Wetlands Protection Regulations as Chapter 505 of the Town
Code was approved by the Conservation Commission 6-20-2017.]
CHARTER § 420-1
C:601
Chapter 505
WETLANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 294.
Zoning — See Ch. 305.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 405.
§ 505-1. Authority; amendments.
These regulations are promulgated by the Town of Marshfield Conservation
Commission pursuant to the authority granted to it under § 294-4C of
the Town of Marshfield Wetlands Protection Bylaw, Town of Marshfield
General Bylaws Chapter 294 (hereinafter referred to as "the bylaw"). These
regulations shall complement the bylaw by setting forth controls in addition
to those already promulgated by the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) under MGL c. 131, § 40. After a public hearing, these
regulations may be amended from time to time by majority vote of the Town
of Marshfield Conservation Commission.
§ 505-2. Purpose.
These regulations provide definitions, procedures and standards for
work within those areas subject to protection under the bylaw. Any
project subject to regulation shall comply with all applicable
regulations.
A.
The bylaw sets forth a public review and decision-making process by
which activities affecting areas subject to protection under the bylaw
are to be regulated in order to contribute to the protection of the
following interests:
(1) Public water supply.
(2) Private water supply.
(3) Groundwater.
(4) Flood control.
(5) Erosion control.
(6) Sedimentation control.
(7) Recreation.
(8) Public safety.
(9) Aquaculture.
B.
§ 420-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § 505-2
C:602
§ 505-3. Jurisdiction.
(10)Fish.
(11)Shellfish.
(12)Wildlife.
(13)Wildlife habitats.
(14)Fish habitats.
(15)Shellfish habitats.
(16)Prevention of water pollution.
(17)Prevention of storm damage.
(18)Agriculture.
These regulations seek to control those activities within the jurisdiction
of the Marshfield Conservation Commission, as set forth under the
bylaw, and prevent any activities from having adverse impact upon any
of the interests protected by the bylaw.
C.
These regulations will define and clarify the process by establishing
standard definitions and uniform procedures by which the Marshfield
Conservation Commission may carry out its responsibilities under the
bylaw.
D.
These regulations are intended solely for use in administering the
bylaw; nothing contained herein should be construed as preempting
or precluding other protections afforded to wetlands or other natural
resource areas by other Marshfield Town boards, regulations or bylaws.
E.
Areas subject to protection. The following areas are subject to
protection under the bylaw:
Any bank; freshwater wetland; coastal wetland; beach; dune; flat;
marsh; wet meadow; bog; swamp; lands adjoining the ocean or any
estuary, creek, river, stream, pond, or lake; or any land under said
waters; or any land subject to tidal action, coastal storm flowage or
flooding.
(1)
(2) Land at or below elevation 11 feet above mean sea level.
A.
Activities subject to regulation.
Any activity proposed or undertaken within 100 feet (buffer zone)
of an area specified in § 505-3A(1) of these regulations or within
an area specified in § 505-3A(2) of these regulations which will
remove, fill, dredge, or alter that area is subject to regulation under
the bylaw and will require a notice of intent and approval of the
Conservation Commission.
(1)
B.
§ 505-2 CHARTER § 505-3
C:603
§ 505-4. Procedures.
§ 505-5. Fees.
Any activity proposed or undertaken which is not set forth in
§ 505-3B(1) but which in the opinion of the Marshfield
Conservation Commission will alter an area subject to the bylaw
will require the filing of a notice of intent.
(2)
Any person who proposes to commence an activity subject to regulation
under the bylaw shall submit a notice of intent (Exhibit 1 attached
hereto), as most recently amended.73
A.
The notice of intent shall be filed in accordance with the submittal
requirements set forth in the general instructions for completing a
notice of intent (Exhibit 2 attached hereto), as most recently
amended.74
B.
The applicant must also submit a list of abutters, with names and
mailing addresses, along with evidence that this list has been reviewed
and verified by the Marshfield Board of Assessors.
C.
Failure to provide any of the information required in completing a
notice of intent shall be deemed an incomplete filing and, as such,
the application will be deemed to not have been received by this
Commission until such filing is complete.
D.
A new notice of intent for a project that was denied may not be filed
(and will be rejected if filed) for a period of two years from the date
of denial, unless substantial changes have been made to the plan and
those changes are responsive to and attempt to resolve those issues
causing the Commission to previously deny the project. The
Commission shall solely determine whether or not the changes are
substantial and address the issues for denial and shall solely determine
whether to accept or reject the notice of intent.
E.
Effective date. In accordance with the Town of Marshfield Wetlands
Protection Bylaw, as amended, the following regulations with respect to
the payment of fees shall be effective as to those notices of intent and
all other matters filed with the Conservation Commission as of May 1,
2008. The Conservation Commission establishes these fee regulations
to defray costs incurred by the Commission with respect to specific
applications and hearings held under the Wetlands Protection Bylaw.
A.
Rules.
(1) Fees are payable at the time of application and are nonrefundable.
B.
73.Editor's Note: Exhibit 1 is available at the office of the Conservation Commission.
74.Editor's Note: Exhibit 2 is available at the office of the Conservation Commission.
§ 505-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 505-5
C:604
Fees shall be calculated by the Conservation Commission per the
schedule established below in Subsection C.
(2)
Any notice of intent or request for determination of applicability fee
received as a result of after-the-fact removal, alteration, dredging
or filling within Conservation jurisdictional boundaries as per
§ 505-3(A) or the Commission issuing an enforcement order for a
violation of the Wetlands Protection Bylaw shall be doubled.
(3)
Filing fees. Filing fee for any notice of intent or abbreviated notice
of resource area delineation under the Marshfield Wetlands Protection
Bylaw shall be equal to and in addition to the fee required by 310 CMR
10.03(7), set forth as follows:
Wetland Fee Category Summary
Notice of Intent/WPA Form 3:
Category 1: $125
a) Work on single-family lot: addition, pool, etc.
b) Site work without house
c) Control vegetation single-family house (SFH): removal, herbicide,
etc.
d) Resource improvement
e) Work on septic system separate from house
f) Monitoring well activities minus roadway
Category 2: $500
a) Construction of single-family house (SFH)
b) Parking lot
c) Beach nourishment
d) Electric generating facility activities
e) Inland limited projects minus road crossings
f) New agricultural or aquacultural projects
g) Each crossing for driveway to SFH
h) Any point source discharge
Category 3: $1,050
a) Site preparation (for development) beyond NOI scope
b) Each building (for development) including site
c) Road construction not crossing or driveway
d) Hazardous cleanup
Category 4: $1,450
a) Each crossing for development or commercial road
b) Dam, sluiceway, tide-gate work
C.
§ 505-5 CHARTER § 505-5
C:605
Wetland Fee Category Summary
c) Landfill
d) Sand and gravel operation
e) Railroad line construction
f) Control vegetation in development (SFH)
g) Bridge (SFH)
h) Water level variation
i) Hazardous waste alterations to resource area
j) Dredging
k) Package treatment plant and discharge
Category 5: $4.50 per linear foot (minimum $50, maximum $1,000)
a) Docks, piers, revetments, dikes, etc. (coastal or inland)
Category 6: $3 per linear foot (maximum $200 for SFH, maximum
$2,000 for any other)
a) Delineation of wetland resources
Cost of publication in the local newspaper. Check shall be made payable
to the designated newspaper in an amount required by said newspaper
and delivered to the Commission.
D.
Cost of notice to abutters. Cost of delivering notice of hearings by
certified mail to abutters shall be paid for by applicant.
E.
Other fees.
(1) Extension of order of conditions/WPA Form 7: $100.
Amending order of conditions/WPA Form 3/modified for
Amendment: $100.
(2)
Certificate of compliance/WPA Form 8B:
$125 if submitted within five years of date of issuance of
Orders/WPA Form 5;
(a)
$250 if submitted beyond five years of date of issuance of
Orders/WPA Form 5.
(b)
(3)
(4) Request for determination of applicability/WPA Form 1: $150.
(5) Request for copy of order of conditions: $10.
Abbreviated notice of resource area delineation/WPA Form 4A: The
delineation fee for each resource area equals $2 per linear foot.
The maximum fee for activities with a single family house is $200
and the maximum fee for any other activity is $2,000.
(6)
F.
G. Consultant fee.
§ 505-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 505-5
C:606
The applicant shall pay for the cost and expense of expert
consultants to review the application or to gather additional
information as deemed necessary by the Commission. Such
consultants shall work for and represent the interests of the
Commission.
(1)
Upon receipt of a permit application or RFD, or at any point in
its deliberations, the Commission may deem it necessary to obtain
expert engineering or other outside consultant services in order to
reach a final decision on the application. The specific consultant
services may include but are not limited to resource area survey
and delineation, analysis of resource area values, including wildlife
habitat evaluations, hydrogeologic and drainage analysis, and
environmental or land use law. In such instances the Commission
shall notify the applicant of this need and the estimated costs
and provide the opportunity for the application to be amended or
withdrawn. Should an applicant choose to proceed the Commission
shall require the applicant to pay the reasonable costs and
expenses borne by the Commission for these consulting services as
listed below. This fee is called the "consultant fee."
(2)
The exercise of discretion by the Commission in making its
determination to require the payment of a consultant fee shall
be based upon its reasonable finding that additional information
acquirable only through outside consultants would be necessary for
the making of an objective decision.
(3)
Consultants must meet the minimum qualifications of:
(a) An educational degree in or related to the field at issue; or
Three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related
field.
(b)
(4)
An applicant may appeal the choice of the consultant selected by
the Commission to the Board of Selectmen. Such an administrative
appeal is limited to claims that:
(a) The consultant has a conflict of interest.
The consultant does not possess the minimum required
qualifications.
(b)
(5)
The time required for action by the Commission on the application
for a permit or approval is extended pending the appeal. The
selection by the Commission stands unless the Board of Selectmen
decides otherwise within one month following the filing of the
appeal.
(6)
The Commission may require the payment of the consultant fee at
any point in its deliberations prior to a final decision. The applicant
shall pay the fee to be put into a special revolving fund consultant
(7)
§ 505-5 CHARTER § 505-5
C:607
§ 505-6. Public hearing.
services account of the Commission, which may be drawn upon by
the Commission for specific consultant services approved by the
Commission at one of its public meetings.
The Commission shall return any unused portion of the consultant
fee, along with any interest accrued during the time the funds were
deposited in the special revolving fund consultant services account,
to the applicant.
(8)
The estimated required consultant fee charged to reimburse the
Commission for reasonable costs and expenses shall be according
to the following schedule:
Project Cost Estimated Deposit Fee*
Up to $100,000 $1,200
$100,001 to $500,000 $2,500
$500,001 to $1,000,000 $5,000
$1,000,001 to $1,500,000 $7,500
$1,500,001 to $2,000,000 $10,000
* The amount is an estimate only. Applicant is responsible for
all overages.
Each additional $500,000 project cost increment (over
$2,000,000) shall be charged at an additional $2,500 estimated
required fee per increment.
(a)
The project cost means the estimated entire cost of the project,
including but not limited to building construction, site
preparation, landscaping, roadway and drainage construction,
utilities, and all site improvements. The consultant fee shall
be paid pro rata for that portion of the project cost applicable
to those activities affecting all resource areas protected by
this bylaw. The project shall not be segmented to avoid being
subject to the consultant fee. The applicant shall submit
estimated project costs at the Commission's request, but the
lack of such estimated project costs shall not avoid the
payment of the consultant fee.
(b)
(9)
The Conservation Commission shall hold a public hearing within 21
days of receipt of a complete notice of intent by the Commission. The
hearing may be continued in accordance with the regulations set forth
in 310 CMR 10.05(5)(b).
A.
The public hearing shall be conducted as follows:
A public hearing officer shall call the meeting to order and shall
read the notice as published.
(1)
B.
§ 505-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 505-6
C:608
§ 505-7. Order of conditions.
§ 505-8. Certificate of compliance.
(2) Applicant shall make presentation.
(3) The Commissioners shall question the applicant.
Questions from other Town boards shall be addressed to the
applicant through the hearing officer.
(4)
Questions from the public to the applicant shall be addressed
through the hearing officer.
(5)
The hearing shall then be continued or closed by vote of the
Commission.
(6)
Within 21 days of closing the public hearing, the Commission shall
either:
Determine the proposed activity is not significant to any of the
interests identified by the bylaw; or
(1)
Make a determination that the proposed activity is significant to
one or more of the interests identified by the bylaw and shall issue
an order of conditions for the protection of said interests.
(2)
A.
The order of conditions shall impose such conditions as are necessary
to protect one or more of the interests identified by the bylaw. If the
Commission finds that the proposed activity cannot be regulated so
as to protect the interests identified in the bylaw, then the order may
prohibit the proposed activity.
B.
If the Commission finds that the information submitted by the applicant
is not sufficient to describe the site, the work or the effect of the
work on the interests identified in the bylaw, it may issue an order of
conditions prohibiting the work. The order shall specify the information
lacking and why it was necessary.
C.
The order of conditions shall be valid for three years from the date
of its issuance. The order may be extended by majority vote of the
Commission.
D.
The order of conditions shall be voted and approved by a majority of
a quorum of the Conservation Commission and shall be signed by a
majority of the Commission.
E.
The order of conditions shall be recorded in the Plymouth County
Registry of Deeds or Registry District of the Land Court, where
appropriate, prior to the commencement of any of the proposed
activities regulated by the order of conditions. No work shall commence
until proof of recording is provided to the Commission.
F.
§ 505-6 CHARTER § 505-8
C:609
§ 505-9. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the Commission's issuing of an order of conditions
or a certificate of compliance may file an appeal in accordance with
Massachusetts General Laws. Presently, the party aggrieved may file a
complaint in the Plymouth County Superior Court within 60 days of the date
of said order of conditions or certificate of compliance in accordance with
MGL c. 249, § 4.
§ 505-10. Performance standards.
Upon completion of the activity described in the notice of intent in
accordance with the order of conditions, the applicant or his or her
successor in interest shall request the Commission, in writing, that
a certificate of compliance be issued stating that the work has been
satisfactorily completed in compliance with all conditions set forth in
the order of conditions. Unless exempted by the Commission, said
request shall be accompanied by an as-built plan, certified by a
professional engineer or surveyor who is registered in the
commonwealth, certifying that the work conforms to the plans, or
specifying how the completed work differs from that shown on the
submitted plans.
A.
In all other respects, the procedure for granting a certificate of
compliance shall be identical to those procedures set forth in 310 CMR
10.05(9).
B.
There shall be no habitable space in any structure wherein the top of
any floor elevation of the habitable space is below 11 feet above mean
sea level (MSL) or below the flood surge height as determined by the
most recent FEMA flood insurance maps. No utilities for any structure
shall be placed below 11 feet above MSL or below the flood surge
height as determined by the most recent FEMA flood insurance maps,
whichever is higher.
A.
A setback zone shall be created so that no disturbance or alteration
shall occur within 50 feet and no building or structure shall be placed
within 75 feet of any area set forth in § 505-3A(1) for any new
construction or development. No activity, including but not limited to
landscaping, mowing, or removal of vegetation, is allowed in the no
disturbance zone.
A setback zone shall be created so that no disturbance or alteration
shall occur within 25 feet of any area set forth in § 505-3A(1) for
existing lots with existing buildings.
(1)
The following activities shall be exempt from the setback zone of
any area set forth in § 505-3A(1):
Work related to the public water supply or municipal sewer
systems.
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 505-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 505-10
C:610
Structures related to stormwater management such as swales,
retention and detention basins, drainage pipes and headwalls.
(b)
Work related to maintaining, repairing or replacing, but not
substantially changing or enlarging, an existing and lawfully
located structure or facility used in the service of the public
to provide electric, gas, water, or telephone service, provided
that the written notice has been given to the Conservation
Commission prior to commencement of work.
(c)
Public open space nature trails, observation platforms,
boardwalks, or footbridges.
(d)
(e) Seawalls, bulkheads, and revetments.
(f) Docks, piers, and associated ramps.
Repairs or improvements to existing on-site septic systems
and their related structures in order to comply with current
standards where there is no viable alternative. No increase in
the design flow of the dwelling shall be permitted.
(g)
A vernal pool setback zone shall be created where no disturbance or
alteration shall occur within 100 feet of a vernal pool.
C.
Any proposed way or pavement within 100 feet of an area subject to
protection under these regulations must be constructed with a surface
approved by the Conservation Commission. Construction of any way
which is built in an area subject to protection under these regulations,
which constitutes a limited project as defined in the Code of
Massachusetts Regulations, 310 CMR 10.53(3), must not be
constructed in a manner which restricts the flow of water or restricts or
endangers the movement of local wildlife. Every way in an area subject
to protection must provide throughways accessible to local wildlife. The
total width of said throughways shall not be less than 5% of the length
of that portion of the way which passes through the area subject to
protection.
D.
There shall be no removing, filling, dredging, or altering of isolated
wetland subject to flooding in the Polder, which is that area identified
as the Green Harbor Reclamation Area on the plan titled "Plan Showing
Boundaries of Green Harbor Reclamation District," dated February
1925, Plymouth Registry of Deeds, Plan Book 1, Page 142.
E.
Any alteration of a vegetated wetland may be allowed up to but not
to exceed 5,000 square feet; provided, however, that the wetland so
altered is replaced in kind by an area not less than 200% of the area
so altered and the replication is conducted in accordance with the
regulations set forth in 310 CMR 10.55(4)(b). The exception provided
in 310 CMR 10.55(4)(c) is not allowed under the bylaw. Therefore,
any alteration of any bordering vegetated wetlands is subject to this
provision.
F.
§ 505-10 CHARTER § 505-10
C:611
§ 505-11. Emergencies.
§ 505-12. Enforcement orders.
There shall be no destruction or removal of woody vegetation, shrubs,
trees, and the like within 100 feet of an area subject to protection, as
set forth in these regulations at § 505-3A(1), without first obtaining the
permission of the Commission.
G.
Breakaway walls (constructed in accordance with the State Building
Code) will be required in all structures built in areas subject to flooding
or coastal storm flowage, unless specifically exempted by the
Commission.
H.
Any project, whether it is within 100 feet of an area subject to
protection under these regulations or not, where there exists a
reasonable likelihood that stormwater runoff or drainage will be
discharged into or adversely affect an area subject to protection will
be subject to the Wetlands Protection Bylaw, and the proponent must
file a notice of intent with the Commission and take action necessary to
prevent such adverse effects on the areas protected by the bylaw.
I.
Where any structure is proposed within land subject to tidal action,
coastal storm flowage or flooding, adequate access to and egress from
said structure must be proven by the applicant to be available so that
individuals can leave the structure and emergency vehicles can access
the structure during the entire course of a 100-year storm. Failure on
the part of the proponent to meet such a burden shall be reasonable
cause for the Commission to conclude that the health, welfare and
safety of individuals in the community are endangered and, therefore,
it may deny the application.
J.
Where activity is necessary to protect public health and safety, the
Commission may certify an emergency situation and allow the activity.
A.
Any person requesting permission to do an emergency project shall
specify why the project is necessary for the protection of the public
health or safety and what agency of the commonwealth or subdivision
thereof is to perform the project or has ordered the project to be
performed. If the project is certified to be an emergency by the
Commission, the certification shall include a description of the work
which is to be allowed and shall not include work beyond that necessary
to abate the emergency. A site inspection shall be made prior to
certification.
B.
An emergency certificate shall be issued only for the protection of
public health or safety.
C.
The time limitation for performance of emergency work shall not
exceed 30 days.
D.
§ 505-10 MARSHFIELD CODE § 505-12
C:612
§ 505-13. Severability.
If any provision of any part of these regulations or the application thereof
is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other provision of
these regulations.
§ 505-14. Variance.
When the Commission determines that an activity is in violation of the
bylaw, these regulations or an order of conditions, the Commission may
issue an enforcement order. Violations include, but are not limited to:
Failure to comply with an order of conditions, such as failure to
observe a particular condition or time period specified in the order;
(1)
Failure to complete work described in an order of conditions, when
such failure causes damage to the interests identified in the bylaw;
or
(2)
Failure to obtain a valid order or extension permit prior to
conducting an activity subject to regulation under the bylaw as
defined in § 505-2C of these regulations.
(3)
A.
An order of conditions shall be enforceable by the Conservation
Commission. The members, officers, employees and agents of the
Commission may enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under the bylaw and these regulations.
B.
An enforcement order issued by the Conservation Commission shall
be signed by a majority of the Commission. In a situation requiring
immediate action, an enforcement order may be signed by a single
member or agent of the Commission and must be ratified by a majority
of the members at the next scheduled meeting of the Commission.
C.
The Conservation Commission may, in its discretion, grant variances
from the operation of one or more of these regulations pursuant to
this section. Such variances are intended to be granted only in rare
and unusual cases and shall be granted only in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
A.
The applicant must request a variance in writing, filed with the notice
of intent. The request shall set forth the reasons particular to the
applicant's project which meet the requirements for a variance as set
forth in Subsection C.
B.
A variance may be granted only for the following reasons and upon the
following conditions:
The Conservation Commission may grant a variance from these
regulations upon a clear and convincing showing by the applicant
that any proposed work, or its natural and consequential impacts
and effects, will not have any adverse effect upon any of the
(1)
C.
§ 505-12 CHARTER § 505-14
C:613
§ 505-15. Effective date.
These rules and regulations were first promulgated on May 15, 1990; they
have been subsequently amended on December 18, 1990, December 17,
1991, June 19, 2002, October 2, 2002, September 17, 2003, December 1,
2004, May 1, 2008 and October 30, 2018, and shall apply, as amended, to
all applications and requests filed after that date.
§ 505-16. Definitions.
As used in these rules and regulations, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ENDANGERED SPECIES — Any plant or animal listed by the Massachusetts
Division of Fisheries and Wildlife Natural Heritage and Endangered Species
Program (NHESP) as endangered, threatened, or special concern.
ISOLATED LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING — A freshwater wetland that
is a confined basin or depression which does not support a minimum of
400 square feet of predominantly wetland plant vegetation and does not
function as a vernal pool and is not contiguous with other wetland
resources.
ISOLATED VEGETATED WETLAND — A freshwater wetland not bordering
on the ocean or any estuary, creek, river, stream, pond or lake and having a
minimum of 400 square feet of predominantly wetland vegetation.
RIVERFRONT AREA — The area of land between a perennial stream's
annual high-water line and a parallel line measured horizontally and at a
distance of 200 feet.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
to give support or shelter, including but not limited to a building, bridge,
interests protected in the bylaw. It shall be the responsibility of
the applicant to provide the Conservation Commission with any and
all information which the Commission may in writing request in
order to enable the Commission to ascertain such adverse effects,
and the failure of the applicant to furnish any information which
has been so requested shall result in the denial of a request for a
variance pursuant to this subsection; or
The Conservation Commission may grant a variance from these
regulations when it is necessary to avoid so restricting the use of
the property as to constitute an unconstitutional taking without
compensation. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide the Conservation Commission with any and all information
necessary to determine if the enforcement of these regulations
constitutes such an unconstitutional taking without compensation.
No variance shall be granted unless and until the Conservation
Commission has received from Town Counsel a written opinion
that such enforcement of these regulations shall constitute an
unconstitutional taking without compensation.
(2)
§ 505-14 MARSHFIELD CODE § 505-16
C:614
driveway, trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, stadium,
reviewing stand, shed, platform, deck, fence, sign, flagpole, windmill, solar
devices, tennis courts, swimming pools, paved areas or anything requiring
a building permit.
VERNAL POOL — A freshwater wetland that is a confined basin or
depression (not occurring in existing lawns, gardens, or driveways) which,
in most years, holds water for a minimum of two months in the spring and/
or summer; is free of self-sustaining populations of adult predatory fish;
and functions as breeding habitat for one or more obligate or two or more
facultative amphibian, reptile, crustacean, mollusk or insect populations
listed by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife Natural
Heritage and Endangered Species Program (NHESP), regardless of
whether the site has been certified by the NHESP and regardless of
association with other resource areas. The presumption that any seasonal
basin functions as a vernal pool shall prevail through a minimum of one
spring/summer breeding season for the purpose of documenting the
occurrence or lack of occurrence of breeding activity of one or more
obligate or two or more facultative vernal pool species. The buffer zone for
vernal pools shall extend 100 feet from the highest extent of flooding.
WETLAND DELINEATION — The line connecting test plots showing the
upper limit of a plant community where 50% or more of the individual
plants are included in facultative (FAC), facultative wetland (FACW), or
obligate wetland (OBL) categories. Wetlands shall be delineated by qualified
wetlands scientists using analysis of plant communities. For sites where
plant communities have been altered, disturbed or modified, analysis of
soils for hydric indicators may be used to augment or replace plant analysis.
WETLAND PLANTS — Any plant listed in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
"National List of Plant Species That Occur in Wetlands: Massachusetts
1988" and condensed by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Wetlands and Waterways, April 1995, having an
indicator category of obligate wetland (OBL), facultative wetland (FACW),
or facultative (FAC).
Chapter 600
GENERAL PROVISIONS, BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 505-16 CHARTER § 505-16
C:615

ARTICLE I
Approval of Codification
[The codification of the rules and regulations of the Board of Health
as Division 6 (Chapters 608 through 670) of the Town Code was
approved by the Board of Health 6-12-2017.]
CHARTER § 505-16
C:617
Chapter 608
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENTS AND PRACTITIONERS
§ 608-1. Findings and purpose.
Whereas body art is becoming prevalent and popular throughout the
commonwealth; and whereas knowledge and practice of universal
precautions, sanitation, personal hygiene, sterilization and aftercare
requirements on the part of the practitioner should be demonstrated to
prevent the transmission of disease or injury to the client and/or
practitioner; now, therefore the Board of Health of the Town of Marshfield
passes these rules and regulations for the practice of body art in the Town
of Marshfield as part of our mission to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the public.
§ 608-2. Authority.
These regulations are promulgated under the authority granted to the
Board of Health under MGL c. 111, § 31.
§ 608-3. Definitions.
As used in these regulations, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFTERCARE — Written instructions given to the client, specific to the body
art procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the body art and surrounding
area, including information about when to seek medical treatment, if
necessary.
APPLICANT — Any person who applies to the Board of Health for either a
body art establishment permit or practitioner permit.
AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a
specific temperature over a period of time.
AUTOCLAVING — A process which results in the destruction of all forms of
microbial life, including highly resistant spores, by the use of an autoclave
for a minimum of 30 minutes at 20 pounds of pressure (psi) at a temperature
of 270° F.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS STANDARD — Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) guidelines contained in 29 CFR 1910.1030,
titled "Bloodborne Pathogens."
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The Board of Health of the Town of
Marshfield, Massachusetts.[Amended 6-12-2017]
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment by permitted
establishments and practitioners using, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and
scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered
§ 505-16 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-3
C:618
medical procedures by the Board of Registration in Medicine, such as
implants under the skin, which are prohibited procedures.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT — Location, place, or
business that has been granted a permit by the Board, whether public or
private, where the practices of body art are performed, whether or not for
profit.
BODY ART PRACTITIONER or PRACTITIONER — A specifically identified
individual who has been granted a permit by the Board to perform body art
in an establishment that has been granted a permit by the Board.
BODY PIERCING — Puncturing or penetrating the skin of a client with
presterilized single-use needles and the insertion of presterilized jewelry
or other adornment in the opening. This definition excludes piercing of the
earlobe with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp system manufactured
exclusively for ear piercing.
BRAIDING — The cutting of strips of skin of a person, which strips are then
to be intertwined with one another and placed onto such person so as to
cause or allow the incised and interwoven strips of skin to heal in such
intertwined condition.
BRANDING — Inducing a pattern of scar tissue by use of a heated material
(usually metal) to the skin, making a serious burn, which eventually
becomes a scar.
CLEANING AREA — The area in a body art establishment used in the
sterilization, sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment
used for the practice of body art.
CLIENT — A member of the public who requests a body art procedure at a
body art establishment.
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Waste as defined in 105 CMR 480.000, Storage
and Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological
Waste, State Sanitary Code, Chapter VIII, and/or 29 CFR 1910.1030,
Bloodborne pathogens; contaminated items that would release blood or
other potentially infectious material in a liquid or semiliquid state if
compressed; items on which there is dried blood or other potentially
infectious material and which are capable of releasing these materials
during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood or other
potentially infectious materials.[Amended 6-12-2017]
COSMETIC TATTOOING — Also known as "permanent cosmetics," "micro
pigment implantation" or "dermal pigmentation," the implantation of
permanent pigment around the eyes, lips and cheeks of the face and hair
imitation.
DISINFECTANT — A product registered as a disinfectant by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use
or handling.
§ 608-3 CHARTER § 608-3
C:619
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the lobe of the ear with a presterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system following the manufacturer's
instruction.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,
devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks and all
other apparatus and appurtenances, used in connection with the operation
of a body art establishment.
EXPOSURE — An event whereby there is an eye, mouth or other mucus
membrane, non-intact skin or parenteral contact with the blood or bodily
fluids of another person or contact of an eye, mouth or other mucous
membrane, non-intact skin or parenteral contact with other potentially
infectious matter.
HAND SINK — A lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms or other portions of the body.
HOT WATER — Water that attains and maintains a temperature of 110° to
130° F.
INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART — Hand pieces, needles, needle
bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body
or may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body art procedure.
INVASIVE — Entry into the client's body either by incision or insertion of
any instruments into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means
intended to puncture, break, or otherwise compromise the skin or mucosa.
JEWELRY — Any ornament inserted into a newly pierced area, which must
be made of surgical implant grade stainless steel; solid 14k or 18k white
or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum; or a dense, low-porosity
plastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and has been
properly sterilized prior to use.
LIGHT COLORED — A light reflectance value of 70% or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any trailer, truck, car, van,
camper or other motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, a shed, tent, movable
structure, bar, home or other facility wherein, or concert, fair, party or
other event whereat, one desires to or actually does conduct body art
procedures.[Amended 6-12-2017]
OPERATOR — Any person who individually or jointly or severally with
others owns or controls an establishment but is not a body art practitioner.
PERMIT — Board approval in writing to either operate a body art
establishment or operate as a body art practitioner within a body art
establishment. Board approval shall be granted solely for the practice of
body art pursuant to these regulations. Said permit is exclusive of the
establishment's compliance with other licensing or permitting requirements
that may exist within the Board's jurisdiction.
§ 608-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-3
C:620
PERSON — An individual, any form of business or social organization
or any other nongovernmental legal entity, including but not limited to
corporations, partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, trusts
or unincorporated organizations.
PHYSICIAN — An individual licensed as a qualified physician by the Board
of Registration in Medicine pursuant to MGL c. 112, § 2.
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts
the client's unclothed body during a body art procedure, skin preparation of
the area adjacent to and including the body art procedure, or any associated
work area which may require sanitizing.
SANITARY — Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
SANITIZE — The application of a U.S. EPA registered sanitizer on a cleaned
surface in accordance with the label instructions.
SCARIFICATION — Altering skin texture by cutting the skin and controlling
the body's healing process in order to produce wounds which result in
permanently raised wheals or bumps known as keloids.
SHARPS — Any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or
accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including but not limited
to needle devices, lancets, scalpel blades, razor blades, and broken glass.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can
be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is
labeled with the international biohazard symbol.
SINGLE-USE ITEMS — Products or items that are intended for one-time,
one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including but
not limited to cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or
plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel
blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves.
STERILIZE — The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all
microbial life including highly resistant bacterial endospores.
TATTOO — The indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced by
insertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the
skin.
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under
the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to
puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa.
This term includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing.
TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — The same as "mobile body
art establishment."
THREE-DIMENSIONAL "3D" BODY ART OR BEADING OR IMPLANTATION
— The form of body art consisting of or requiring the placement, injection or
insertion of an object, device or other thing made of matters such as steel,
titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass or other inert materials beneath the
surface of the skin of a person. This term does not include body piercing.
§ 608-3 CHARTER § 608-3
C:621
ULTRASONIC CLEANING UNIT — A unit approved by the Board, physically
large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all
foreign matter from the instruments by means of high-frequency oscillations
transmitted through the contained liquid.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — A set of guidelines and controls published
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) as "Guidelines
for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers"
in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol.
38, No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During
Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures" in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40,
No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the
employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids
are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include
hand washing; gloving; personal protective equipment; injury prevention;
and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and
blood and body fluid contaminated products.
§ 608-4. Exemptions.
§ 608-5. Restrictions.
Physicians licensed in accordance with MGL c. 112, § 2, who perform
body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these
regulations.
A.
Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a presterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system are exempt from these
regulations.
B.
No tattooing, piercing of genitalia, branding or scarification shall be
performed on a person under the age of 18.
A.
Body piercing, other than piercing the genitalia, may be performed on
a person under the age of 18 provided that the person is accompanied
by a properly identified parent, legal custodial parent or legal guardian
who has signed a form consenting to such procedure. Properly
identified shall mean a valid photo identification of the adult and a birth
certificate of the minor.
B.
C. No body art shall be performed upon an animal.
The following body piercings are hereby prohibited: piercing of the
uvula; piercing of the tracheal area; piercing of the neck; piercing of
the ankle; piercing between the ribs or vertebrae; piercing of the web
area of the hand or foot; piercing of the lingual frenulum (tongue web);
piercing of the clitoris; any form of chest or deep muscle piercings,
excluding the nipple; piercing of the anus; piercing of an eyelid,
whether top or bottom; piercing of the gums; piercing or skewering
of a testicle; so called "deep" piercing of the penis, meaning piercing
D.
§ 608-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-5
C:622
§ 608-6. Operation of body art establishments.
Unless otherwise ordered or approved by the Board, each body art
establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained to meet the
following minimum requirements:
through the shaft of the penis, or "trans-penis" piercing in any area
from the corona glandis to the pubic bone; so called "deep" piercing
of the scrotum, meaning piercing through the scrotum, or "transcrotal"
piercing; so called "deep" piercing of the vagina.
The following practices are hereby prohibited unless performed by
a medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts:
tongue splitting; braiding; three-dimensional beading/implementation;
tooth filing/fracturing/removal/tattooing; cartilage modification;
amputation; genital modification; introduction of saline or other liquids.
E.
Physical plant.
Walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces shall be smooth,
durable, free of open holes or cracks, light colored, washable, and
in good repair. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be maintained in
a clean condition. All procedure surfaces, including client chairs/
benches, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and
sanitized after each client.
(1)
Solid partitions or walls extending from floor to ceiling shall
separate the establishment's space from any other room used for
human habitation, any food establishment or room where food is
prepared, any hair salon, any retail sales, or any other such activity
that may cause potential contamination of work surfaces.
(2)
The establishment shall take all measures necessary to ensure
against the presence or breeding of insects, vermin, and rodents
within the establishment.
(3)
Each operator area shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of
floor space for each practitioner. Each establishment shall have an
area that may be screened from public view for clients requesting
privacy. Multiple body art stations shall be separated by a divider
or partition at a minimum.
(4)
The establishment shall be well ventilated and provided with an
artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 footcandles three
feet off the floor, except that at least 100 footcandles shall be
provided at the level where the body art procedure is being
performed, where instruments and sharps are assembled and all
cleaning areas.
(5)
All electrical outlets in operator areas and cleaning areas shall be
equipped with approved ground fault (GFCI) protected receptacles.
(6)
A.
§ 608-5 CHARTER § 608-6
C:623
A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold running
water under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist- or footoperated
controls, and supplied with liquid soap and disposable
paper towels stored in fixed dispensers shall be readily accessible
within the establishment. Each operator area shall have a hand
sink.
(7)
There shall be a sharps container in each operator area and each
cleaning area.
(8)
There shall be a minimum of one toilet room containing a toilet
and sink. The toilet room shall be provided with toilet paper, liquid
hand soap and paper towels stored in a fixed dispenser. A body art
establishment permanently located within a retail shopping center,
or similar setting housing multiple operations within one enclosed
structure having shared entrance and exit points, shall not be
required to provide a separate toilet room within such body art
establishment if Board-approved toilet facilities are located in the
retail shopping center within 300 feet of the body art establishment
so as to be readily accessible to any client or practitioner.
(9)
The public water supply entering a body art establishment shall
be protected by a testable, reduced-pressure backflow preventor
installed in accordance with 248 CMR 10, as amended from time to
time. [Amended 6-12-2017]
(10)
At least one covered, foot-operated waste receptacle shall be
provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles
in the operator area shall be emptied daily. Solid waste shall be
stored in covered, leak-proof, rodent-resistant containers and shall
be removed from the premises at least weekly.
(11)
At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in each body art
establishment for use in cleaning the establishment and proper
disposal of noncontaminated liquid wastes in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws. Said sink shall be of
adequate size, equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure and permit the cleaning of the establishment and any
equipment used for cleaning.
(12)
All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and
covered containers. Containers shall be kept in a secure area
specifically dedicated to the storage of all instruments and
supplies.
(13)
The establishment shall have a cleaning area. Every cleaning area
shall have an area for the placement of an autoclave or other
sterilization unit located or positioned a minimum of 36 inches from
the required ultrasonic cleaning unit.
(14)
Every cleaning area shall have a sink used exclusively for the
cleaning of instruments. Every instrument sink shall be of adequate
(15)
§ 608-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-6
C:624
size and equipped with hot and cold water under pressure so as to
permit the cleaning of instruments.
The establishment shall have a customer waiting area, exclusive
and separate from any workstation, instrument storage area,
cleaning area or any other area in the establishment used for body
art activity.
(16)
No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment
except service animals used by persons with disabilities (e.g.,
Seeing Eye dogs). Fish aquariums shall be allowed in waiting
rooms and nonprocedural areas.
(17)
Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where body
art is performed, with the exception of nonalcoholic fluids being
offered to a client during or after a body art procedure.
(18)
Requirements for single-use items, including inks, dyes and pigments.
Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for
any reason. After use, all single-use sharps shall be immediately
disposed of in approved sharps containers pursuant to 105 CMR
480.00.
(1)
All products applied to the skin, such as but not limited to body
art stencils, applicators, gauze and razors, shall be single use and
disposal.
(2)
(3) Hollow bore needles or needles with cannula shall not be reused.
All inks, dyes, pigments, solid core needles, and equipment shall be
specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and
shall be used according to manufacturer's instruction.
(4)
Inks, dyes or pigments may be mixed and may only be diluted
with water from an approved potable source. Immediately before
a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be
transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper
cups or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, these singleuse
cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded.
(5)
B.
Sanitation and sterilization measures and procedures.
All nondisposable instruments used for body art, including all
reusable solid core needles, pins and stylets, shall be cleaned
thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an appropriate soap
or disinfectant solution and hot water (to remove blood and tissue
residue) and shall be placed in an ultrasonic unit sold for cleaning
purposes under approval of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
and operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
(1)
After being cleaned, all nondisposable instruments used for body
art shall be packed individually in sterilizer packs and subsequently
(2)
C.
§ 608-6 CHARTER § 608-6
C:625
sterilized in a steam autoclave sold for medical sterilization
purposes under approval of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
All sterilizer packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or
internal temperature indicator. Sterilizer packs must be dated with
an expiration date not to exceed six months.
The autoclave shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according
to manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommended procedures for the operation of the autoclave must
be available for inspection by the Board. Autoclaves shall be
located away from workstations or areas frequented by the public.
(3)
Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall
demonstrate that the autoclave used is capable of attaining
sterilization by monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shall
be verified through an independent laboratory. The permit shall not
be issued or renewed until documentation of the autoclave's ability
to destroy spores is received by the Board. These test records shall
be retained by the operator for a period of three years and made
available to the Board upon request.
(4)
All instruments used for body art procedures shall remain stored
in sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body
art procedure. After sterilization, the instruments used in body art
procedures shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly
covered container reserved for the storage of such instruments.
(5)
Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has been
breached or after the expiration date without first repackaging and
resterilizing.
(6)
If the body art establishment uses only single-use, disposable
instruments and products, and uses sterile supplies, an autoclave
shall not be required.
(7)
When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, the
operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically
recognized sterile techniques to ensure that the instruments and
gloves are not contaminated.
(8)
Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent
and mechanically dried after each use. The cloth items shall be
stored in a dry, clean environment until used. Should such items
become contaminated directly or indirectly with bodily fluids, the
items shall be washed in accordance with standards applicable to
hospitals and medical care facilities, at a temperature of 160° F. or
a temperature of 120° F. with the use of chlorine disinfectant.
(9)
Posting requirements. The following shall be prominently displayed:
A disclosure statement, a model of which shall be available from
the Board. A disclosure statement shall also be given to each client,
(1)
D.
§ 608-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-6
C:626
advising him/her of the risks and possible consequences of body art
procedures.
The name, address and phone number of the Marshfield Board of
Health.
(2)
An emergency plan, including:
A plan for the purpose of contacting police, fire or emergency
medical services in the event of an emergency;
(a)
A telephone in good working order shall be easily available
and accessible to all employees and clients during all hours of
operation; and
(b)
A sign at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correct
emergency telephone numbers.
(c)
(3)
An occupancy and use permit as issued by the local building
official.
(4)
(5) Current establishment permit.
(6) Each practitioner's permit.
Establishment recordkeeping. The establishment shall maintain the
following records in a secure place for a minimum of three years, and
such records shall be made available to the Board upon request:
Establishment information, which shall include:
(a) Establishment name.
(b) Hours of operation.
(c) Owner's name and address.
(d) A complete description of all body art procedures performed.
An inventory of all instruments and body jewelry, all sharps,
and all inks used for any and all body art procedures, including
names of manufacturers and serial or lot numbers, if
applicable. Invoices or packing slips shall satisfy this
requirement.
(e)
A Material Safety Data Sheet, when available, for each ink and
dye used by the establishment.
(f)
(g) Copies of waste hauler manifests.
(h) Copies of commercial biological monitoring tests.
(i) Exposure incident report (kept permanently).
(j) A copy of these regulations.
(1)
E.
§ 608-6 CHARTER § 608-6
C:627
Employee information, which shall include:
(a) Full legal names and exact duties;
(b) Date of birth;
(c) Home address;
(d) Home/work phone numbers;
(e) Identification photograph;
(f) Dates of employment;
(g) Hepatitis B vaccination status; and
(h) Training records.
(2)
Client information.
Client information, which shall include:
[1] Name;
[2] Age and valid photo identification;
[3] Address of the client;
[4] Date of the procedure;
[5] Name of the practitioner who performed the procedure(s);
Description of procedure(s) performed and the location on
the body;
[6]
[7] A signed consent form as specified by § 608-7D(2); and
If the client is person under the age of 18, proof of parental
or guardian identification, presence and consent,
including a copy of the photographic identification of the
parent or guardian.
[8]
(a)
(b) Client information shall be kept confidential at all times.
(3)
Exposure control plan. Each establishment shall create, update,
and comply with an exposure control plan. The plan shall be
submitted to the Board for review so as to meet all of the
requirements of OSHA regulations, to include, but not limited to,
29 CFR 1910.1030, OSHA bloodborne pathogens standards, et
seq., as amended from time to time. A copy of the plan shall be
maintained at the body art establishment at all times and shall be
made available to the Board upon request.
(4)
No person shall establish or operate a mobile or temporary body art
establishment.
F.
§ 608-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-7
C:628
§ 608-7. Standards of practice.
Practitioners are required to comply with the following minimum health
standards:
A practitioner shall perform all body art procedures in accordance with
universal precautions set forth by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
A.
A practitioner shall refuse service to any person who may be under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
B.
Practitioners who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the
manufacturer directions for use and to applicable U.S. Food and Drug
Administration requirements. No practitioner shall use an ear-piercing
system on any part of the client's body other than the lobe of the ear.
C.
Health history and client informed consent. Prior to performing a body
art procedure on a client, the practitioner shall:
Inform the client, verbally and in writing, that the following health
conditions may increase health risks associated with receiving a
body art procedure:
(a) History of diabetes;
(b) History of hemophilia (bleeding);
History of skin diseases, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to
soaps, disinfectants, etc.;
(c)
History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or
other sensitivities;
(d)
(e) History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy;
Use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the
blood and/or interfere with blood clotting; and
(f)
(g) Any other conditions such as hepatitis or HIV.
(1)
Require that the client sign a form confirming that the above
information was provided, that the client does not have a condition
that prevents him or her from receiving body art, that the client
consents to the performance of the body art procedure and that
the client has been given the aftercare instructions as required by
Subsection L.
(2)
D.
A practitioner shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness,
conform to best standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes
when performing body art procedures. Before performing body art
procedures, the practitioner must thoroughly wash his or her hands
in hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry with
E.
§ 608-7 CHARTER § 608-7
C:629
disposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as necessary to
remove contaminants.
Each body artist shall provide proof of having received the complete
series of Hepatitis B vaccinations and have a current adult diphtheria/
tetanus series and booster(s). A record of the immunizations shall be
kept at the facility for review by the Board of Health.
F.
In performing body art procedures, a practitioner shall wear disposable
single-use gloves. Gloves shall be changed if they become pierced, torn,
or otherwise contaminated by contact with any unclean surfaces or
objects or by contact with a third person. The gloves shall be discarded,
at a minimum, after the completion of each procedure on an individual
client, and hands shall be washed in accordance with Subsection E
before the next set of gloves is put on. Under no circumstances shall
a single pair of gloves be used on more than one person. The use of
disposable single-use gloves does not preclude or substitute for handwashing
procedures as part of a good personal hygiene program.
G.
The skin of the practitioner shall be free of rash or infection. No
practitioner affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions,
weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall
work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which
there is a likelihood that that person could contaminate body art
equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or
pathogenic organisms.
H.
Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during
the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a
new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the
procedure resumes.
I.
Preparation and care of a client's skin area must comply with the
following:
Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall
be free of rash or any visible infection.
(1)
Before a body art procedure is performed, the immediate skin area
and the areas of skin surrounding where body art procedure is to
be placed shall be washed with soap and water or an approved
surgical skin preparation. If shaving is necessary, single-use
disposable razors or safety razors with single-service blades shall
be used. Blades shall be discarded after each use, and reusable
holders shall be cleaned and autoclaved after use. Following
shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be washed with soap
and water. The washing pad shall be discarded after a single use.
(2)
In the event of bleeding, all products used to stop the bleeding
or to absorb blood shall be single use and discarded immediately
after use in appropriate covered containers, and disposed of in
accordance with 105 CMR 480.00.
(3)
J.
§ 608-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-7
C:630
§ 608-8. Exposure incident report.
Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application of
stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to receive a body
art procedure with sterile gauze or other sterile applicator to prevent
contamination of the original container and its contents. The applicator
or gauze shall be used once and then discarded.
K.
The practitioner shall provide each client with verbal and written
instructions on the aftercare of the body art site.
The written instructions shall advise the client:
On the proper cleansing of the area which received the body
art;
(a)
To consult a health care provider for:
Unexpected redness, tenderness or swelling at the site of
the body art procedure;
[1]
[2] Any rash;
Unexpected drainage at or from the site of the body art
procedure; or
[3]
[4] A fever within 24 hours of the body art procedure; and
(b)
(c) Of the address and phone number of the establishment.
(1)
A copy shall be provided to the client. A model set of aftercare
instructions shall be made available by the Board.
(2)
L.
Contaminated waste shall be stored, treated and disposed in
accordance with 105 CMR 480.000, Storage and Disposal of Infectious
or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waste, State Sanitary
Code, Chapter VIII. A copy of a current contract with an infectious
waste hauler serving the body art establishment shall be provided to
the Board of Health.
M.
An exposure incident report shall be completed by the close of the
business day during which an exposure has or might have taken place
by the involved or knowledgeable body art practitioner for every
exposure incident occurring in the conduct of any body art activity.
A.
Each exposure incident report shall contain:
A copy of the application and consent form for body art activity
completed by any client or minor client involved in the exposure
incident;
(1)
A full description of the exposure incident, including the portion of
the body involved therein;
(2)
B.
§ 608-7 CHARTER § 608-8
C:631
§ 608-9. Injury, infection complication or disease reports.
A written report of any injury, infection complication or disease as a result
of a body art procedure, or complaint of injury, infection complication or
disease, shall be forwarded by the operator to the Board which issued the
permit, with a copy to the injured client within five working days of its
occurrence or knowledge thereof. The report shall include:
§ 608-10. Complaints.
§ 608-11. Application for body art establishment permit.
(3) Instrument(s) or other equipment implicated;
A copy of the body art practitioner license of the involved body art
practitioner;
(4)
(5) Date and time of exposure;
A copy of any medical history released to the body art
establishment or body art practitioner; and
(6)
Information regarding any recommendation to refer to a physician
or waiver to consult a physician by persons involved.
(7)
A. The name of the affected client.
B. The name and location of the body art establishment involved.
C. The nature of the injury, infection complication or disease.
The name and address of the affected client's health care provider, if
any.
D.
E. Any other information considered relevant to the situation.
The Board shall investigate complaints received about an establishment
or practitioner's practices or acts which may violate any provision of
the Board's regulations.
A.
If the Board finds that an investigation is not required because the
alleged act or practice is not in violation of the Board's regulations,
then the Board shall notify the complainant of this finding and the
reasons on which it its based.
B.
If the Board finds that an investigation is required, because the alleged
act or practice may be in violation of the Board's regulations, the Board
shall investigate, and if a finding is made that the act or practice
is in violation of the Board's regulations, then the Board shall apply
whatever enforcement action is appropriate to remedy the situation and
shall notify the complainant of its action in this matter.
C.
§ 608-8 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-11
C:632
§ 608-12. Application for body art practitioner permit.
No person may operate a body art establishment except with a valid
permit from the Board.
A.
Applications for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by and
available from the Board. An applicant shall submit all information
required by the form and accompanying instructions. The term
"application" as used herein shall include the original and renewal
applications.
B.
An establishment permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and for
no longer than one year unless revoked sooner by the Board.
C.
The Board shall require that the applicant provide, at a minimum, the
following information in order to be issued an establishment permit:
Name, address and telephone number of:
(a) The body art establishment;
(b) The operator of the establishment; and
(c) The body art practitioner(s) working at the establishment;
(1)
The manufacturer, model number, model year, and serial number,
where applicable, of the autoclave used in the establishment;
(2)
A signed and dated acknowledgement that the applicant has
received, read and understood the requirements of the Board's
body art regulations;
(3)
A drawing of the floor plan of the proposed establishment to scale
for a plan review by the Board, as part of the permit application
process;
(4)
(5) Exposure report plan; and
(6) Such additional information as the Board may reasonably require.
D.
E. The annual fee for the body art establishment permit shall be $250.
A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable from one
place or person to another.
F.
No person shall practice body art or perform any body art procedure
without first obtaining a practitioner permit from the Board. The annual
fee for the body art practitioner permit shall be $100.
A.
B. A practitioner shall be a minimum of 18 years of age.
A practitioner permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall
expire no later than one year from the date of issuance unless revoked
sooner by the Board.
C.
§ 608-11 CHARTER § 608-12
C:633
Application for a practitioner permit shall include:
(1) Name;
(2) Date of birth;
(3) Residence address;
(4) Mailing address;
(5) Phone number;
(6) Place(s) of employment as a practitioner; and
(7) Training and/or experience as set out in Subsection E below.
D.
Practitioner training and experience.
In reviewing an application for a practitioner permit, the Board
may consider experience, training and/or certification acquired in
other states that regulate body art.
(1)
Approved training.
Training for all practitioners shall be approved by the Board
and, at a minimum, shall include the following:
Bloodborne pathogen training program (or equivalent)
which includes infectious disease control; waste disposal;
hand-washing techniques; sterilization equipment
operation and methods; and sanitization, disinfection and
sterilization methods and techniques; and
[1]
Current certification in first aid and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR).
[2]
(a)
Examples of courses approved by the Board include
"Preventing Disease Transmission" (American Red Cross) and
"Bloodborne Pathogen Training" (U.S. OSHA).
(b)
Training/courses provided by professional body art
organizations or associations or by equipment manufacturers
may also be submitted to the Board for approval.
(c)
(2)
The applicant for a body piercing practitioner permit shall provide
documentation, acceptable to the Board, that he or she completed
a course on anatomy and physiology with a grade of C or better
at a college accredited by the New England Association of Schools
and Colleges, or comparable accrediting entity. This course must
include instruction on the integumentary system (skin).
(3)
The applicant for a tattoo, branding or scarification practitioner
permit shall provide documentation, acceptable to the Board, that
he or she completed a course on anatomy and physiology with a
grade of C or better at a college accredited by the New England
(4)
E.
§ 608-12 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-12
C:634
§ 608-13. Grounds for suspension, denial, revocation or refusal to
renew permit.
Association of Schools and Colleges, or comparable accrediting
entity. This course must include instruction on the integumentary
system (skin). Such other course or program as the Board shall
deem appropriate and acceptable may be substituted for the
anatomy course.
The applicant for all practitioners shall submit evidence
satisfactory to the Board of at least two years' actual experience in
the practice of performing body art activities of the kind for which
the applicant seeks a body art practitioner permit to perform,
whether such experience was obtained within or outside of the
commonwealth.
(5)
A practitioner's permit shall be conditioned upon continued compliance
with all applicable provisions of these rules and regulations.
F.
The Board may suspend a permit, deny a permit, revoke a permit or
refuse to renew a permit on the following grounds, each of which, in
and of itself, shall constitute full and adequate grounds for suspension,
denial, revocation or refusal to renew:
Any actions which would indicate that the health or safety of the
public would be at risk;
(1)
Fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit, or its
renewal;
(2)
Criminal conduct which the Board determines to be of such a
nature as to render the establishment, practitioner or applicant
unfit to practice body art as evidenced by criminal proceedings
resulting in a conviction, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere or
an admission of sufficient facts;
(3)
Any present or past violation of the Board's regulations governing
the practice of body art;
(4)
Practicing body art while the ability to practice is impaired by
alcohol, drugs, physical disability or mental instability;
(5)
Being habitually drunk or being dependent on, or a habitual user
of, narcotics, barbiturates, amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other
drugs having similar effects;
(6)
Knowingly permitting, aiding or abetting an unauthorized person
to perform activities requiring a permit;
(7)
Continuing to practice while his/her permit is lapsed, suspended,
or revoked;
(8)
A.
§ 608-12 CHARTER § 608-13
C:635
§ 608-14. Grounds for summary suspension of permit.
The Board may summarily suspend a permit pending a final hearing on
the merits on the question of revocation if, based on the evidence before
it, the Board determines that an establishment and/or a practitioner is an
immediate and serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The
suspension of a permit shall take effect immediately upon written notice of
such suspension by the Board.
§ 608-15. Procedure for hearings.
§ 608-16. Severability.
If any provision contained in the model regulations is deemed invalid for any
reason, it shall be severed and shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions.
§ 608-17. Effective date.
These rules and regulations shall be effective as of July 16, 2001.
Having been disciplined in another jurisdiction in any way by the
proper permitting authority for reasons substantially the same as
those set forth in the Board's regulations; and
(9)
Other just and sufficient cause which the Board may determine
would render the establishment, practitioner or applicant unfit to
practice body art.
(10)
The Board shall notify an applicant, establishment or practitioner in
writing of any violation of the Board's regulations for which the Board
intends to deny, revoke, or refuse to renew a permit. The applicant,
establishment or practitioner shall have seven days after receipt of such
written notice in which to comply with the Board's regulations. The
Board may deny, revoke or refuse to renew a permit if the applicant,
establishment, or practitioner fails to comply after said seven days
subject to the procedure outlined in § 608-15.
B.
C. Applicants denied a permit may reapply at any time after denial.
The owner of the establishment or practitioner shall be given written
notice of the Board's intent to hold a hearing for the purpose of
suspension, revocation, denial or refusal to renew a permit. This
written notice shall be served through a certified letter sent return
receipt requested or by constable. The notice shall include the date,
time and place of the hearing and the establishment owner's or
practitioner's right to be heard. The Board shall hold the hearing no
later than 21 days from the date the written notice is received.
A.
In the case of a suspension of a permit as noted in § 608-13, a hearing
shall be scheduled no later than 21 days from the date of the
suspension.
B.
§ 608-13 MARSHFIELD CODE § 608-17
C:636
Chapter 630
MARINA AND BOATING FACILITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boating and waterways — See Ch. 34.
§ 630-1. Authority; purpose.
In accordance with MGL c. 111, §§ 31 and 122, MGL c. 91, §§ 59 and 59B,
and MGL c. 90B, § 15, and under every other power thereto enabling, the
Marshfield Board of Health adopted the following regulation at its regularly
scheduled meeting held January 8, 1990, to further protect the public health
and safety of the residents of the Town of Marshfield. This regulation
will apply to marina moorings or other boating facilities as defined herein
serving watercraft and/or serving boats with holding tanks.
§ 630-2. Definitions.
As used in these regulations, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The duly elected members of the Board of Health in the Town of
Marshfield.
MARINA; BOATING FACILITIES — A location of safe refuge, moorage,
slippage, storage or anchorage for five or more vessels, which may supply
provisions, marine supplies, or chandlery, or at which these may be
obtained, and at which a fee may be charged for the use of these facilities
and/or services, and to include any or all wharfs, piers, pilings, dolphins,
floats, fixed or portable, or any boat facilities either private or public used
for the keeping of any vessels over five in number. This definition shall
include municipal boating facilities, piers and moorings. See current listing
of marinas/boating facilities supplied by the Harbormaster.
POTABLE WATER — A water supply of sufficient quantity and pressure that
the Board of Health or agent has determined, by requiring the water to
be tested, does not endanger the health of any potential user and is fit for
human consumption. A source shall be deemed potable which meets, at a
minimum, coliform testing. Other tests may be required, by the Board or
agent, if it is deemed necessary. The costs of all testing will be borne by the
applicant.
§ 630-3. Application for permit; inspections; general restrictions.
Effective on May 1, 1990, application for permit by all marinas located
in the Town of Marshfield shall be made in writing on a form provided
by the Board of Health. Current specifications will be available after
this date. The nonrefundable fee for such permit shall be set annually.
A.
§ 608-17 CHARTER § 630-3
C:637
(See permits for marinas, boating facilities, and Town pier on current
fee schedule.)
An annual inspection shall be made by the Board's agent prior to
issuance of the permit. All marinas in the Town must have an annual
permit issued by the Board of Health. In order to obtain a permit the
marina, boating facility or Town pier must provide the following where
the Board or its agent determines it is applicable:
An adequate waste oil retention facility which complies with the
provisions of MGL c. 21, § 52A, and the Marshfield Board of
Health's Waste Oil Retention Facility Policy dated February 1, 1988.
The retention facility is required where a marina/boating facility
performs engine repairs and is licensed to sell gasoline/oil, to
include any municipal boating facility or pier. Any storage facility
shall be permitted by the Fire Department in accordance with
its established policy and will be subject to periodic inspections
to ensure continued compliance. All state, federal and local
requirements should be met.
(1)
Adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities for the use of the
occupants of the watercraft. (MGL c. 91, § 59B)
(2)
(3) A potable supply of water.
An adequate supply of trash or garbage receptacles with covers
and/or lids with a sufficient collection schedule. Such schedule
shall be posted in a prominent location.
(4)
All marinas must have a holding tank and/or pump-out facility for
the collection of sewage waste. Such holding tanks must meet all
state, federal and local requirements and current specifications
based on best management practices, including but not limited
to MGL c. 91, §§ 59 and 59B, and Title 5 Policy Memorandum
No. 89-1 and No. 87-7. The contents of the holding tank shall
be disposed of in such a manner as not to be discharged into
or near any waters of the municipality and shall be removed by
a pumper currently licensed by the Board of Health. Disposal of
sewage waste must be to an adequate approved sewage treatment
facility. Documentation of proper disposal is a requirement of the
permit. This subsection does not preclude more than one marina
from utilizing a single pump-out facility if the marinas are located
in the same general vicinity and obtain special Board of Health
permission in accordance with § 630-7 of this regulation.
(5)
B.
The discharge of oil, raw or inadequately treated fish, garbage or debris
of any sort into the waters, shores or beaches of the Town is prohibited.
C.
In 1988 the United States and Commonwealth of Massachusetts
regulated the use of antifouling paints which contain tributyltin (TBT)
in accordance with the U.S. Public Law 100-350 Stat 605 Organotin
Antifouling Paint Control Act of June 16, 1988.
D.
§ 630-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 630-3
C:638
§ 630-4. Time frame for compliance.
The requirements of this regulation where deemed applicable by the Board
of Health must be met at all marinas, moorings, and boating facilities as
defined herein on or before October 1, 1990.
§ 630-5. Permit required; conditions.
Both the U.S. and commonwealth regulations prohibit the use of
antifouling paints on vessels of 25 meters (82 feet) or less.
Aluminum hulled boats are excepted.
(1)
Hosing, washing or removal of layers of paint containing TBT will
transfer it to the area around the boat and has the potential to find
its way into the aquatic environment.
(2)
To decrease this risk the Board of Health will not permit any
hosing, washing or removing paint from vessels coated with
antifouling paints containing TBT. These vessels include aluminumhulled
boats, boats longer than 25 meters or boats whose owners/
operators/servicers have applied paints containing TBT in defiance
of the U.S. and commonwealth statutes.
(3)
Houseboats used as either a permanent or temporary residence are
prohibited from docking unless they receive prior written approval from
the Board of Health.
E.
The Board requires the use of nonchemical, biodegradable or enzymatic
products in boat holding tanks and porta-toilets. The above is one
requirement of ultimate disposal of the effluent at the Marshfield
wastewater treatment facilities.
F.
In addition to an annual inspection, the Board or its agent may make
periodic inspections of any marina to determine whether a pollution
violation exists.
G.
All marinas must hold a valid permit from the Board of Health to
operate in the Town of Marshfield. Permits shall be issued on or about
January 1 each year. Inspections shall be made on or about October
15 through November 15 each year. Each applicant will be charged an
annual nonrefundable marina/boating facility permit fee mentioned in
§ 630-3 which shall be paid in October for the permit period beginning
the following January. [Amended 6-12-2017]
A.
No marina shall operate without a valid permit from the Board of
Health. The annual permit is not transferable. A permit may be revoked
in accordance with § 630-8 of this regulation. A permit will be issued
for a specified number of total boats. Expansions will only be allowed
under § 630-7.
B.
§ 630-3 CHARTER § 630-6
C:639
§ 630-6. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates the provisions of this regulation shall be punished for the
first offense by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200 and for a
subsequent offense by a fine of not less than $300. For the purpose of this
regulation, each day or part thereof of any violation shall be considered a
separate offense.
§ 630-7. Variance; waiver; special permission.
§ 630-8. Revocation, modification of suspension of variance, waiver,
special permission or permit. [Amended 6-12-2017]
Any variance, waiver, special permission or permit may be revoked,
modified or suspended, in whole or part, by a majority vote of the Board,
only after the holder thereof has been notified in writing by the Board or the
Board's agent and has been given an opportunity to be heard at a hearing.
§ 630-9. Expansions of marinas.
A request for an expansion of the number of permitted boats will be made
in writing and accompanied by a nonrefundable expansion request fee.
In addition to the request a plan for increasing the size of the pump-out
facility must also be submitted by a registered professional engineer and
documentation of destination of sewage disposal.
§ 630-10. Independent consultant review.
If the Board, in the exercise of its discretion, deems it necessary to hire
an independent expert consultant for any issue relative to this regulation,
including but not limited to plan review, engineering information,
determination of environmental impacts, and interpretation of data, the
entire fee for the consultant will be paid for by the applicant. The mutually
agreed upon consultant will be hired by the Marshfield Board of Health. The
The Board of Health may vary the application of any provision of this
regulation, by a majority vote of the Board, when in its opinion the
enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, provided that the
decision of the Board shall not conflict with the spirit of this regulation
and will provide the same amount of environmental protection. The
applicant must request a variance, waiver or special permission in
writing on a form provided by the Board of Health.
A.
Any variance, waiver, or special permission shall be granted or denied
in writing, on this same form, and should contain a brief statement of
the reason for denial.
B.
A copy of each variance shall be kept in the Board of Health office and
available to the public during normal business hours while in effect.
C.
A nonrefundable variance filing fee shall be charged per application.
(See marina variance filing fee on current fee schedule.)
D.
§ 630-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 630-10
C:640
applicant will pay the fee to the Board of Health, which in turn will pay the
consultant. If requested, the consultant may qualify as a special employee of
the Town by a vote of the Selectmen. The consultant's fee shall not exceed
the prevailing rate for such service in the metropolitan Boston area.
§ 630-11. Severability; when effective; filing.
If any provision of this regulation is declared unlawful by a valid judgment
or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this regulation. This regulation
shall take effect upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Town of Marshfield and shall be filed with the Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Water Pollution Control, in Boston
and Lakeville.
Chapter 645
SANITARY SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 223.
§ 645-1. Authority.
§ 645-2. Definitions. (Section 1)
In accordance with the provisions of Article 1, Regulation 2, of the
State Sanitary Code and under the authority of MGL c. 111, § 131, and
any other powers thereto enabling, the Board of Health of Marshfield
hereby adopts the following regulations relative to the disposal of
sanitary sewage in unsewered areas as supplements to Title 5 of the
State Environmental Code to be effective as of April 21, 2006.
A.
All section numbers are derived from the sections of Title 5 to which
they apply.75
B.
(1.1) The following abbreviations are used herein:
(1) SEC: Refers to the State Environmental Code.
A.
(1.2) The following definitions are in place of those shown in SEC Title
5, Regulation 1:
ABOVEGROUND SEPTIC SYSTEM — A system where any part of the
leaching facility (including pits, fields, chambers, pipes, stone or
peastone) is installed above the natural grade of the land on the lot.
B.
75.Editor's Note: These numbers are now indicated in parentheses.
§ 630-10 CHARTER § 645-2
C:641
Access manholes by themselves do not cause a septic system to be
considered an aboveground septic system.
APPLICANT — The person named on the disposal works construction
permit application as the owner of the property which is the site of the
proposed septic system.
BOARD — Board of Health in the Town of Marshfield, Massachusetts,
or its agent.
DEWATERED PERCOLATION TEST — A percolation test done in
accordance with the procedures outlined in Title 5, Section 15.03(5),
except that some or all of the four feet of naturally occurring pervious
soil is saturated by groundwater and some temporary dewatering of
the soil is necessary so the water can drain away from the soil and a
standard percolation test can be performed.
GROUNDWATER MONITORING WELL — Piping placed in the ground
for the purpose of obtaining groundwater elevations or samples for
testing.
MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION — The height of the
groundwater table when it is at its maximum level or elevation. (See
SEC Title 5, Regulation 3.3, of these local rules.)76
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY — A water supply of sufficient quantity and
pressure to meet the needs of the occupants of the dwelling, lot or
building, connected with a public water system or with any other source
that the Board of Health or agent has determined, by requiring the
water to be tested, does not endanger the health of any potential user
and is fit for human consumption. A source shall be deemed potable
which meets, at a minimum, all the current primary drinking water
standards. Other tests may be required, by the Board or agent, if it is
deemed necessary.
PRIVATE DRINKING WATER WELL —
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, repair or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. "Substantial improvement" does not, however, include
either:
Any privately owned well supplying water for human consumption
to any individual dwelling or building.
(1)
Any well, pit, pipe, excavation, shaft, spring casing, hole or other
source of water to be used as a potable private drinking water
supply.
(2)
76.Editor's Note: See § 645-4A.
§ 645-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 645-2
C:642
§ 645-3. General requirements. (Section 2)
WATER TABLE MAP — A map showing piezometric elevations of the
water table compiled from known water table elevations in wells,
borings, ponds, streams and wetlands. It shows general groundwater
flow direction from high to low elevations.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety codes which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and
which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;
or
(1)
Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure.
Note 1: The following items can be excluded from the cost of
improvement or repair: plans, specifications, survey, permits, and
other items which are separate from or incidental to the repair of
the damaged or improved building, i.e., debris removal/cartage.
Note 2: The latest Assessors' structure value may be used,
provided that the Assessors certify that said value is based on
100% valuation, less depreciation.
(2)
(2.4) Application for disposal works construction permit (supplements
SEC Title 5, Regulation 2.4).
An application for a construction permit shall be submitted on a
form supplied by the Board of Health and shall be obtained at the
office of the Board of Health.
(1)
Application requirements for all new construction, repairs to all
systems and in all cases where fill is to be used:
A plan of the lot must be submitted by a registered professional
engineer or registered sanitarian, signed, dated and stamped
with the seal of the person responsible for the design. The plan
must be drawn to scale not less than one inch equals 40 feet
and contain the following information:
[1] Lot dimensions.
Location of street, house, garage, outbuildings, and
driveway.
[2]
[3] Location of sewage system and expansion area.
[4] Dimensions of sewage system.
[5] Location of water lines and gas lines.
[6] Locations of observations pits and percolation tests.
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 645-2 CHARTER § 645-3
C:643
Sources of water supply within 300 feet of the sewage
system. In all cases where there are existing dwellings or
structures on abutting properties, applicants for a disposal
works construction permit shall make inquiry of those
abutters to the property or properties to ascertain the
presence or absence of a private well on such properties.
The applicant shall supply this documentation to the Board
and the Department of Public Works when applying for a
disposal works construction permit.
[7]
Pertinent elevations, including elevation of road, cellar
floor, top of foundations, garage floor, and elevation
schedule for sewage disposal system, including invert
elevations at house foundation, entrance to septic tank,
entrance to distribution box, beginning of each leaching
line, end of each leaching line, and bottom of leaching pit,
trench or bed. Accompanying this schedule, the proposed
final ground elevation at each of the called-for points along
the disposal system shall be shown.
[8]
Sufficient additional elevations must be shown, including
final grades at each or the four corners of the building, to
indicate clearly how the surface drainage on the property
is to be handled. Plan must be designed to drain the
property satisfactorily to prevent adverse drainage to
adjoining property.
[9]
All present elevations must be shown at true spot
elevations. All proposed changes in elevation must be
shown in the form of two-foot contour lines, clearly
showing the proposed change in topography.
[10]
A benchmark must be established and maintained until
after the final inspection by the design engineer. Its
location must be shown in the plan.
[11]
Watercourses, streams, brooks, ponds, lakes and the
twelve-foot tide line within 200 feet. Requirement by
Engineering Department: the benchmark shall be on mean
sea level or an elevation obtained from the Engineering
Department.
[12]
A detail and sketch of any proposed retaining wall. All
proposed retaining walls four feet in height or greater
must be designed and certified by a structural engineer.
[13]
A statement as to whether the lot is located in the
Marshfield Water Resource Protection District or any
Interim Wellhead Protection District for a Zone II.
[14]
Any other pertinent information which the Board of Health
may require.
[15]
§ 645-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 645-3
C:644
Application shall be made before percolation tests,
groundwater determination, and other on-site inspections are
witnessed or performed by the Board of Health. All data from
observation pits, percolation tests, and groundwater
determinations shall be entered directly on the application
form at the time such tests and observations are witnessed by
the Board of Health. The representative of the Board of Health
shall date and sign the results of the tests which he witnesses.
(b)
Any permit granted will not be valid if conditions set forth in the
application have changed prior to or during actual construction of
the sewage disposal system.
(3)
No permit will be issued until an adequate supply of water is
assured. If a municipal well is the source, all applicants for a
disposal works construction permit may be required to submit a
written statement to the Board of Health, from the Department of
Public Works, as to the availability of an adequate supply of water
in sufficient quantity to provide adequate pressure to the occupants
of the proposed building or dwelling. The applicant may also be
required to provide a statement from the Fire Department that
adequate fire flow will be provided to the dwelling or building. If
a private well is the source, the well must be dug and the water
tested before a permit will be issued.
(4)
Sewage system must be installed under the direct supervision of
the designing engineer. At the time of final inspection he must
submit a letter stating that this system has been installed according
to his plan and provide measurements of tie-ins or an "as-built" plan
of the system.
The "as built" must include final contours for any plans in
which the original contours over and around the septic system
leaching area and/or any components of the system have been
changed, or were designed to be changed. The "as built" must
include distances from the septic system and/or any
component of the system to the property line, in all cases
where the distance from the septic system or component is
less than 25 feet from the property line. "As builts" must be
submitted to the Board of Health office no later than 30 days
after the design engineer completes the final inspection of the
septic system.
(a)
Special conditions for variances. All Title 5 variances, local
upgrades, or local variances that are granted by the Board
of Health with conditions that limit or prohibit increases in
design flow or otherwise limit or prohibit alterations or repairs
to the structure shall be subject to the following requirement
prior to issuance of a certificate of compliance: The variance
or upgrade form, with special conditions specified, must be
(b)
(5)
§ 645-3 CHARTER § 645-3
C:645
recorded at the Registry of Deeds. Proof of recording must be
presented to the Board of Health.
(2.4h) Disposal systems with design flow in excess of 5,000 gallons per
day.
Purpose. To protect the groundwater used for drinking water
purposes from contamination which may result from concentrated
sewage disposal.
(1)
Applicability. All proposed subsurface disposal systems with design
sewage flows of 5,000 gallons per day or greater per lot.
(2)
Procedure. The applicant(s) must demonstrate, by written report,
to the satisfaction of the Board of Health that current drinking
water standards will be met at the downgradient property limit and
that current surface water quality standards will not be violated at
downgradient lakes, ponds and streams due to the effluent from the
system.
The written report shall be based upon the following scope of
work:
[1] Geologic borings.
Water table map (one-foot interval contours) showing
groundwater flow direction.
[2]
Projections of downgradient concentrations of nitratenitrogen
(or other chemicals as requested by the Board
of Health). Projections of downgradient water quality will
be determined utilizing two-dimensional solute transport
models and input variables approved by the Board of
Health. Currently approved models include: USGS
Konikow and Bredegoeft (1978) and Random Walk,
Prickett and Lonquist (1981). Other models may be
approved by the Board upon request.
[3]
(a)
Currently approved input variables include:
Transmissivity to be determined by on-site pump test
(minimum of four hours).
[1]
Aquifer thickness to be determined by on-site boring
locations of confining layers and estimated plume
thickness.
[2]
[3] Dispersivity: determined by site-specific testing.
Hydraulic gradient as determined by site-specific water
table map.
[4]
[5] No retardation factor.
(b)
(3)
B.
§ 645-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 645-3
C:646
[6] Sewage flows as determined by Title 5 design flows.
Applicants who receive permits under this section shall install
a minimum of three downgradient and one upgradient
groundwater monitoring wells. Groundwater flow direction
will be determined from the USGS (1987) water table map
and from site-specific observation wells where necessary. Wells
will be constructed of two-inch threader flush joint PVC pipes
with locking caps. Groundwater samples will be obtained on
an annual basis utilizing a bailer following standard well
evaluation procedures (three well volumes will be removed
prior to sampling).
(c)
Evacuation is most easily accomplished using a gasoline pump
centrifugal. Water samples will be tested by a state-certified
laboratory on an annual basis for nitrate-nitrogen, ammonianitrogen,
Kjedahl nitrogen, total phosphorus, chloride, specific
conductance and volatile organic compounds (see separate
current listing). Results are to be reported to the Marshfield
Board of Health and shall meet Massachusetts Class I
groundwater standards and appropriate advisory levels for
organic chemicals at the downgradient property boundary.
Baseline samples of all applicable testing parameters will be
required. In the event that water quality standards are
violated, the following action will be undertaken by the septic
system owner:
Report test results to the Marshfield Board of Health
within 48 hours by certified mail.
[1]
Resample and retest monitoring wells for the parameters
which were above the water quality standards within five
days.
[2]
Notify the downgradient property owners who have a
private drinking water well within 48 hours of the second
testing round, if the results are above the current advisory
levels, by certified mail.
[3]
Decrease wastewater flows or increase the level of
treatment within 45 days. Notify the Board of Health of
these remedial measures.
[4]
Initiate any remedial actions deemed necessary by the
Board of Health.
[5]
All costs of complying with this section will be borne by the
applicant.
[6]
(d)
C. (2.4i) Perimeter, curtain, subsurface or french drains.
§ 645-3 CHARTER § 645-3
C:647
§ 645-4. Location. (Section 3)
The effectiveness of a perimeter drain system must be
demonstrated prior to the issuance of the disposal works
construction permit. The effect of attempting to lower the ground
or perched water table shall be monitored by installation of at least
one upgradient and one downgradient groundwater monitoring
well. The effectiveness of the underdrains shall be demonstrated by
taking ground monitoring well readings one time during the month
of March and one time during the month of April, for a period of
two high-water seasons. All groundwater monitoring well readings
must be observed by the Board's agent in order to be considered
valid groundwater readings. A separate fee will be charged for
each site visit (see separate current fee schedule for site work by
agent beyond inspection of septic system charged per inspection).
(1)
A perimeter, french, subsurface or curtain drain shall not serve
more than one lot and shall not be allowed on more than three
sides of a lot. They shall not cause accumulated water to drain
onto any abutting properties or public or private road. All work
shall be performed at the applicant's own expense and at their own
risk. This monitoring does not guarantee issuance of the disposal
works construction permit, either at the time of monitoring or at
completion, since the Board does not give conditional pre-approval
in matters relative to sewage disposal.
(2)
In order to propose a perimeter, french, curtain, or subsurface
drain system the groundwater table in question must be perched
in a relatively impermeable soil layer, have no vertical upward flux
component and be moving in a well-defined direction. If the drain
meets these criteria then the drain must be placed upgradient
of the proposed sewage system location, be of sufficient length
and geometry to intercept all groundwater affecting the location,
be keyed into the impeding layer upon which the groundwater is
perched, and have a positive discharge to the surface or to soil from
the location in question.
(3)
(2.5.3) General policy. Any reconstruction, alteration or repair of a
building to an extent of 50% or more of the assessed value of the
building shall be treated by this Board as new construction, to which
all Title 5 and Marshfield Board of Health rules and regulations for the
disposal of sanitary sewage apply.
D.
E. (2.7.1) Repealed January 24, 1991.
(2.9) Fees (supplements SEC Title 5, Regulation 2.9). See separate
current fee schedule.
F.
(2.23) All sewage disposal systems must be located in their entirety on
one lot or parcel of land, it being the same lot or parcel on which the
facility producing the sewage is located.
G.
§ 645-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 645-4
C:648
(3.3) Subsoil and groundwater determination (adds to SEC Title 5,
Regulation 3.3). The Board of Health shall require that one or more
observation pits be dug to a depth of four feet below the bottom of
the proposed leaching facility to determine the maximum groundwater
elevation and the elevation of any impervious material. The Board may
also require additional test holes in the area reserved for expansion of
the disposal field.
A.
(3.4E) Leaching requirements. For new construction, if any percolation
test in the primary or reserve area is equal to or exceeds 20 minutes per
inch, a minimum of four percolation tests and four observation holes
shall be performed.
B.
(3.5L) Percolation tests.
In the event the Board's agent encounters soil conditions other
than coarse sand, additional percolation tests may be requested by
the Board or its agent to determine the consistency and naturally
pervious soil beneath the entire proposed leaching and reserve
areas.
(1)
The Board reserves the right to request additional percolation tests
at any time prior to the issuance of the disposal works construction
permit. The reasons for additional testing shall be provided to the
applicant in writing upon request.
(2)
C.
(3.5M) Dewatered percolation test.
The practice of conducting dewatered percolation tests will only be
allowed by a majority vote of the Board.
(1)
The Board may require consultant review, in accordance with
Section 15.28 of these regulations,77 to assess the engineering
aspects of the dewatered percolation test, to include but not be
limited to the following: site-specific soil conditions, groundwater
information, the destination of any discharged groundwater and
safety factors.
(2)
D.
(3.5N) Percolation tests. The validity of a percolation test will not
be limited to any specific number of years by the Board of Health.
Percolation test will not be required to be repeated to determine its
validity unless any of the following is applicable:
(1) The soil has been altered in any way.
Title 5 or the Marshfield rules and regulations are amended to
change any aspect pertaining to percolation tests.
(2)
E.
F. (3.7.1) Distances.
77.Editor's Note: See § 645-6G.
§ 645-4 CHARTER § 645-4
C:649
No disposal facilities shall be closer than the distances stated to
the components listed in the following table. The distance shall be
increased where required by conditions peculiar to a location.
Component
Septic
Tank
Reserve
Area
Leaching
Facility
Building
Sewer Privy
Drinking water
well or suction
line
50 — 200 (3) 200
Water supply
line (pressure)
(b) — (b) (b) (b)
Property line 10 — 10 — 50
Dwelling 10 — 20 — 50
Surface water
supplies of
tributaries to
reservoirs
including open
and subsurface
drains
200 — 200 200 200
Watercourse
(see Title 5
definition)
75* 100 100 75* 100
Leaching catch
basin or dry
well
— — 25 — —
* 100 feet from sewage disposal systems of a multiple dwelling.
** Downhill slope. The applicant must be able to meet the slope
requirements on the lot for which the permit is applied for, not
including any adjacent property unless a valid slope easement
is obtained. This must be reviewed by the Town's legal counsel
prior to issuance of the disposal works construction permit.
(3) Ten feet if constructed of durable corrosion-resistant material
with watertight joints laid in Class B bedding, or 50 feet if any
other type of pipe is used.
(b) Disposal facilities must be installed at least 10 feet from and 18
inches below water supply lines. Whenever sewer lines must
cross water supply lines, both pipes shall be constructed of
mechanical joint cast-iron pipe and shall be pressure tested to
assure watertightness.
(1)
[3.7(6)] The lowest point of the leaching facility of any sewage disposal
system located in a flood hazard zone (as defined on the Federal Flood
Insurance Rate Maps) shall not be located below the flood elevation of
the applicable zone.
G.
§ 645-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 645-5
C:650
§ 645-5. Building sewer in unsewered areas. (Section 4)
§ 645-6. Minimum construction requirements for disposal fields.
(Regulation 15)
(4.2.1) All piping for the entire septic system shall be of Schedule 40
grade or greater.
A.
(4.5) Grade (replaces second sentence of SEC Title 5, Regulation 4.5).
A grade of 1/4 inch per foot is required.
B.
[15.02(19)] Maintenance.
Septic tank, leaching field and cesspool cleaners shall be
prohibited from being used by the homeowner or the sanitary
pumper unless the product is contained on the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection's list of allowed additives
titled "Septic System Additives Allowed for Use Under Title 5." Any
pumper found using the above chemicals to treat any portion of a
septic system shall be subject to license revocation or suspension
by the Board of Health.
(1)
The Board of Health recommends pumping the septic tank every
two to three years.
(2)
A.
[15.05(10)] Septic tanks. A septic tank shall be located no further than
75 feet from the building it is intended to serve. The length of pipe
between the septic tank and the leaching facility shall not exceed 75
feet unless all the following criteria are met:
(1) Class "C" bedding.
(2) SDR 35 PVC piping.
Installation shall be under the direct supervision and inspection of
the engineering firm and the Board's agent.
(3)
An inspection fee will be assessed to the applicant (see current fee
schedule for site work by agent beyond inspection of septic system
charged per inspection).
(4)
B.
[15.05(11)] Septic tank filters and vents. All septic tanks shall be
equipped with a Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
approved effluent filter, such as the Zabel, Polylok or other equivalent
equal. All septic systems equipped with vents shall utilize a vent filter
to mask odors, if any occupied building is located within 100 feet of the
septic system.
C.
[15.05(12)] Tight tanks. All tight tanks approved by the Board of Health
and DEP shall be subject to a twenty-four-hour test for determining that
the tank is watertight. An agent of the Board shall make inspections as
required to ensure that the tank is watertight.
D.
§ 645-5 CHARTER § 645-6
C:651
§ 645-7. Variance from local rules and regulations. (Regulation 20)
The following requirements apply to all variances from these rules and
regulations:
(15.6.1) Expansion area (adds to SEC Title 5, Regulation 15.6). An
additional area shall be reserved for future expansion or replacement
of the disposal fields. The Board of Health shall require observation pits
and percolation tests to be taken in this expansion area.
E.
(15.27) Severability.
If any provision of this regulation is declared unlawful by a valid
judgment of decree or any court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this
regulation.
(1)
This regulation shall take effect upon publication in a newspaper in
the Town and shall be filed with DEP in Lakeville and Boston.
(2)
F.
(15.28) Consultant review. If the Board in the exercise of its discretion
reasonably deems it necessary to hire an independent expert consultant
for any issue relative to the installation of any portion of the subsurface
sewage disposal system, to include but not be limited to plan review,
performance of the percolation tests (dewatered or standard),
interpretation of soil logs, engineering information and groundwater
data, the entire fee for the consultant will be paid by the applicant.
The applicant will pay the Board of Health, which in turn will pay the
consultant. Such fee shall not be more than the prevailing rate for such
review in the Boston metropolitan area.
G.
A. Must be requested in writing.
B. Must be granted, in writing, by a majority vote of the Board.
A copy must be maintained in the permanent files, at the Board of
Health office, and available to the public during normal business hours.
C.
A separate fee shall be charged per application (see current fee
schedule).
D.
If a variance is requested from any portion of these regulations the
applicant must demonstrate to the Board by clear and convincing
evidence, supplied by an expert consultant, that there will be no
adverse effect on the environment or the public health and safety if
the variance is given. The consultant shall be mutually agreed upon by
the Board and the applicant. All consulting costs shall be borne by the
applicant.
E.
F. A variance filing fee will be charged (see current fee schedule).
Any variance so granted may be revoked, modified or suspended only
in accordance with SEC Title 5, Regulation 21.
G.
§ 645-6 MARSHFIELD CODE § 645-8
C:652
§ 645-8. Title 5 inspections. (Regulation 21)
Chapter 652
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 238.
§ 652-1. Authority.
In accordance with the authority vested in the Town of Marshfield Board
of Health by MGL c. 111, §§ 31A and 31B, and every other power thereto
enabling, the regulations set forth hereinafter are promulgated.
§ 652-2. Definitions.
As used in these regulations, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESS — The implementation of a recycling program which provides the
opportunity to recycle for residents, tenants, or occupants of multifamily
units five units and above and commercial businesses. The recycling
program must be as convenient as trash collection whenever possible.
The Board of Health reserves the right to request a soil evaluation as
part of any Title 5 inspection to assist in determining the seasonal high
groundwater determination.
A.
Upgrading of substandard on-site sewage disposal systems.
Septic systems consisting of one cesspool shall be upgraded to
conform to 310 CMR 15.00, the State Environmental Code, Title
5, Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary
Sewage, and the Town of Marshfield requirements.
(1)
Cesspools with an overflow system or leaching pit(s) may continue
but will require further evaluation by the Board of Health as
specified by the following procedure: A cesspool with a leaching
pit/system will require that a soil evaluation be conducted by a
licensed soil evaluator to determine the seasonal high water
determination. Systems with any part of the soil absorption area
below the seasonal high groundwater shall constitute a failure. This
regulation shall apply to any septic system inspection conducted in
accordance with 310 CMR 15.301 of the State Environmental Code,
Title 5. This regulation shall also be strictly enforced during the
building permit application process.
(2)
B.
§ 645-8 CHARTER § 652-2
C:653
BUSINESS OWNERS AND MANAGERS — Individuals or managers of
commercial businesses, responsible for providing waste management
services for their businesses, located in the Town of Marshfield.
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS RECYCLING PLAN — The plan required by the
Board of Health to be submitted by the business owner or manager or
property manager of any office building, retail, wholesale establishments,
restaurant, nonprofit organizations and industrial businesses. The plan will
identify how they are complying with the requirement to provide access
to recycling for their businesses, establishments and organizations. (See
Appendix F.)78
COMMERCIAL WASTE — Nonhazardous waste generated by businesses,
such as office buildings, retail, wholesale establishments, restaurants and
industrial businesses. It does not include waste generated by single-family
or multifamily homes and apartments.
DESIGNATED HAULER — A permitted company in the business of
collecting and transporting recyclables and solid waste.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Public Health or his/her duly authorized
representative.
DROPOFF LOCATION — The transport and deposit of recyclable materials
to a Board of Health approved location.
FACILITY — A licensed solid waste disposal or handling facility approved or
licensed by the Department of Environmental Protection.
GREEN OR BLUE BOX or HOUSEHOLD RECYCLING CONTAINER — A
rectangular plastic container of approximately 14 to 18 gallons, designed to
be used as a curbside setout container for recyclable materials.
HAULER REPORTING FORMS — The forms required by the Board of Health
to be submitted for multifamily and commercial business recycling
collection programs by the permitted and contracted hauling company.
(Reference Appendix C.)79
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING UNIT — Any building or portion that contains
living facilities (which provide for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation)
of five households or more.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING AGREEMENT FORM — The form required by the
Board of Health to be submitted by each property owner or manager of a
multifamily building or complex which identifies how they are complying
with the requirement to offer their tenants/residents access to a recycling
program. Also it is an agreement with the Marshfield Board of Health on the
loan of wheeled carts and responsibility of property owners and managers.
(See Appendix B.)80
78.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file with the Board of Health.
79.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file with the Board of Health.
80.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file with the Board of Health.
§ 652-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 652-2
C:654
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING RECYCLING PLAN — The plan required by the
Board of Health to be submitted by each property owner or manager of
a multifamily housing complex which identifies how they are complying
with the requirement to provide their tenants with access to a recycling
program. (See Appendix D.)81
MULTIPLE COMMUNITY LOADS — Mixed paper or commingled containers
that have been collected from two or more municipalities.
PERMITTEE — Any person(s) or company which has applied for and
obtained the appropriate permit to collect refuse within the corporate limits
of Marshfield, Massachusetts.
RECYCLABLES — Those items listed in Appendix A.82
REFUSE COLLECTION VEHICLE — Any vehicle used for the transport of
solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — Useless, unwanted or discarded solid, liquid or contained
gaseous material resulting from commercial, industrial, municipal or
household activities that is abandoned by being disposed or incinerated
or is stored, treated or transferred pending such disposal, incineration or
other treatment, but does not include:
Hazardous wastes or regulated recyclable materials as defined and
regulated pursuant to 310 CMR 30.00;
A.
Sludge or septage which is land applied in compliance with 310 CMR
32.00;
B.
Wastewater treatment plant residuals or sludge ash from publicly or
privately owned wastewater treatment plants which is treated and
disposed at a site regulated pursuant to 314 CMR 12.00;
C.
D. Septage, as defined and regulated pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31D;
E. Sewage;
Ash produced from the combustion of coal when reused as prescribed
pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 150A;
F.
G. Solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows;
H. Solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage;
Source, special nuclear or by-product material as defined by the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended;
I.
Those materials and by-products generated from and commonly reused
within an original manufacturing process; and
J.
81.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file with the Board of Health.
82.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 652-2 CHARTER § 652-2
C:655
WASTE BANS — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts has promulgated
waste bans which restrict the disposal of certain recyclable items at solid
waste landfills, transfer stations and incinerators in Massachusetts (310
CMR 19.017). (See Appendix E.)83
WHEELED CART — A container of 65 to 68 gallons to 95 to 100 gallons for
recyclable materials.
§ 652-3. General provisions.
§ 652-4. Mandatory recycling.
Compostable or recyclable materials when composted or recycled in a
facility or operation not required to be assigned pursuant to 310 CMR
16.05(2) to (4).
K.
Any persons engaged in the collection of solid waste in the Town of
Marshfield shall remove the same to an approved location or facility
in accordance with these rules and regulations, as well as all other
applicable rules and regulations.
A.
The permittee shall provide recycling service to allow compliance with
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection solid waste bans and any other item deemed feasible by the
Board of Health. Items required by the Town to be recycled are set forth
in Appendix A.84 In servicing establishments generating commercial
waste, the permittee may limit recycling service to paper products,
as listed in Appendix A. Appendix A is subject to amendment and
revision by the Board of Health and the commonwealth as additional
rules and regulations may be promulgated. The Board of Health may
amend Appendix A upon written notice to all permittees following
public hearing after reasonable notice to all permittees and current
applicants.
B.
Purpose and intent. The Town of Marshfield now participates in a
municipal managed recycling program for households from one to four
units, and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts has promulgated waste
bans which restrict the disposal of certain recyclable items at solid
waste landfills, transfer stations and incinerators in Massachusetts
(310 CMR 19.017). The restricted materials are: lead batteries, leaf
waste and yard waste, white goods, recyclable aluminum, metals, and
glass bottles and jars, all grades of recyclable paper, single polymer
plastics, and cathode ray tubes in televisions and computers.
Compliance with the waste bans may be accomplished through
reducing the amount of solid waste to the fullest and promoting public
support for recycling and composting. (Reference Appendix E.)85
A.
83.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file with the Board of Health.
84.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
85.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file with the Board of Health.
§ 652-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § 652-4
C:656
Declaration. Be it declared by the Marshfield Board of Health that
the following policies are hereby adopted with respect to efficient
management of solid waste, for the promotion of health and welfare of
its citizens and for the protection of the environment; hereby declares
its goal of requiring all multifamily housing and commercial businesses
in the Town to implement recycling collection programs.
B.
Establishment of program. There is hereby established in the Town
of Marshfield a program for the mandatory separation of recyclable
materials from trash, which shall apply to all multifamily dwellings that
are five units and above and commercial businesses in the Town.
C.
Mandatory separation of recyclable materials. It shall be mandatory
in multifamily housing in the Town of Marshfield to separate all
designated recyclable materials from other trash in accordance with
the provisions in this section.
Buildings with five or more dwelling units. Materials to be collected
include the following: mix paper which includes newspaper,
corrugated cardboard, white paper, junk mail, magazines, catalogs,
telephone books, cereal boxes (paper board), plastic containers No.
1 to No. 7, unbroken glass containers, clear, green and brown, steel
(tin) cans and aluminum cans and foil.
(1)
Commercial businesses: cardboard [also known as old corrugated
cardboard (OCC)]. Owners are required to contract with their
private hauler for the collection and recycling of cardboard and are
responsible for program cost. Cardboard is a recyclable material
and is a waste ban prohibited material.
(2)
D.
Collection of recyclable materials. The Board of Health will provide
recycling wheeled carts, as long as the Department of Environmental
Protection provides/awards municipal grants for recycling wheeled cart
program. The wheeled carts come in the following sizes: 60 to 68
gallons or 90 to 100 gallons for multifamily dwelling units in those
multifamily complexes which complete a Marshfield Board of Health
Multifamily Housing Recycling Agreement. (Reference Appendix C.)86
E.
Containers; educational materials; recycling plan. The Town of
Marshfield shall retain ownership of its wheeled carts, and the building
manager or owner(s) shall take proper care to protect such containers
from loss or damage. If the containers are lost or stolen, it is the
responsibility of the owner(s) or manager of the building to obtain
a suitable replacement within 10 days in accordance with rules and
regulations issued by the Board of Health under this section.
All recycling containers and receptacles shall be placed at
designated recycling collection areas by 7:00 a.m. on the same
collection day as trash pickup. The property owner will set up a
recycling collection area next to the trash collection location or
(1)
F.
86.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file with the Board of Health.
§ 652-4 CHARTER § 652-4
C:657
another location with the approval of the Board of Health and the
hauler shall mutually agree upon recycling collection schedules
and collection locations.
Upon placement of recyclables in recycling containers, such
recyclables shall become property of the private haulers.
(2)
Tenants will be provided with the following information by the
Board of Health:
(a) Reasons to reduce and recycle solid waste.
(b) List of materials collected.
Preparation instructions for all recyclable materials in order to
meet the processing requirements.
(c)
Collection methods and location of designated recycling
collection site.
(d)
Residential recycling contact person or private hauling
company, including name, address and phone number.
(e)
(3)
The Board of Health and the property owner(s) or managers for
multifamily buildings will provide recycling educational materials.
(4)
Property owner(s) and managers will provide the Board of Health
with a multifamily housing recycling plan which indicates how
they will provide their tenants access to a recycling program. This
recycling plan will be done for each property for which the property
owner(s) and manager(s) are responsible. Each recycling plan will
cover the following items:
(a) Program contact person and phone number.
(b) Location of recycling containers.
(c) Frequency of collection.
(d) Name and phone number of hauler under contract.
(e) Any educational information provide to tenants.
(5)
Recyclable materials must be collected from each property at least
once every two weeks. Recycling containers with adequate
capacity must be provided.
(6)
Commercial businesses are required to establish an on-site
recycling program for cardboard, also known as old corrugated
cardboard (OCC), and identify their designated recycling hauler.
(7)
Business owner/manager and private hauler operations.
Schedules and locations. The commercial business and the hauler
shall mutually agree upon recycling collection schedules and
(1)
G.
§ 652-4 MARSHFIELD CODE § 652-4
C:658
§ 652-5. Permit procedure for solid waste collectors.
pickup locations. The Town is not responsible for any problems,
unauthorized collections, liabilities, or any other difficulties that
arise between the hauler and the business.
Promotion and education. A business subject to this requirement is
responsible for notifying and continually educating its employees
on recycling of cardboard, and by posting guidelines on preparing
cardboard boxes for recycling as required by private haulers.
(2)
Containers provided by haulers for recycling of materials shall be
clearly labeled in English and in other languages if appropriate,
including indicating the materials to be placed in the container
and the word "Recycle" or "Recyclable" or the "Chasing Arrows"
recycling symbol.
(3)
Containers used to collect the recyclable materials should have
adequate capacity and durability to function efficiently and meet
the spatial constraints of the building. The type of containers used
for collection of recyclables will be established between the owner/
manager and the hauler.
(4)
Containers located outdoors shall be covered or otherwise secured
to prevent materials from blowing, leaking or falling out and to
protect the materials from the elements and vector populations.
The building property owner/manager shall maintain all recycling
areas in a clean, sanitary and litter-free manner.
(5)
Indoor common area collection/storage areas shall be established
in accordance with appropriate Town of Marshfield fire and/or
safety codes.
(6)
Recycling containers at multifamily buildings shall be placed in a
location or locations at least as convenient to tenants as the trash
receptacles, insofar as is practical given space limitations.
(7)
All persons collecting solid waste in the Town of Marshfield shall obtain
a permit from the Board of Health prior to commencing with collection.
A.
At the time of application or as otherwise specified, the applicant shall
submit to the Board of Health the following:
A nonrefundable permit fee of $200 together with proof of
property/liability insurance as required in § 652-6;
(1)
A list of the residential, municipal and commercial/industrial
customers, by street address, serviced by the applicant for each
route (provided within 30 days of permitting). Said list shall remain
confidential to the Board for Town purposes only;
(2)
A description of the refuse collection vehicle(s) to be used,
including the make, model, year, type and size of compactor,
(3)
B.
§ 652-4 CHARTER § 652-5
C:659
§ 652-6. Insurance.
§ 652-7. Operational procedures.
registration number and the company name appearing on the
vehicle(s);
Copies of all area Board of Health hauler permits held by applicant;
and
(4)
Names of all drivers to be employed by the applicant and current
applicable driver's license numbers and expiration dates.
(5)
The Board of Health reserves the right to require all refuse collection
vehicles which are to be used in Marshfield to have affixed on them
any markings concerning authorization to conduct refuse collection
transportation and disposal of solid waste.
C.
The Board of Health will review applications for permits and will
respond to applicants within 30 days.
D.
Applicants have the right to appear before the Marshfield Board of
Health at a hearing to discuss their application by filing such hearing
request in writing with the Board.
E.
Each applicant shall furnish to the Board of Health certificates from
an insurance company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts showing the applicant carries public liability insurance
in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for the injury or death of more
than one person, and $50,000 for damage to property. Certificates of
insurance shall be furnished each year upon renewal of permit.
A.
The applicant shall make certain that the above insurance policy is not
canceled prior to notification of the Board of Health. This notification
shall be not less than 30 days prior to such cancellation.
B.
The permit will be valid for a period of not more than one year,
renewable annually on the first day of June, subject to review and
approval by the Board of Health.
A.
No permit shall be transferable except with the written approval of the
Board of Health.
B.
The permittee shall provide recycling service to allow compliance with
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection solid waste bans and any other item deemed feasible by the
Board of Health, as set forth in Appendix A attached hereto.
C.
The permittee shall provide approved recyclable containers at a cost
determined by the permittee.
D.
The tonnage of refuse and recyclables, or a reasonable estimation
thereof, that the applicant has collected during each three-month
E.
§ 652-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 652-7
C:660
period of the license shall be submitted to the Board of Health
quarterly, within one month following said three-month period. The
tonnage of refuse and recyclables shall be listed on weight slips or tare
weights, on hauler's letterhead. In cases of consolidated loads, divide
the load by the percentage of households or businesses participating in
Marshfield commercial, residential (including multifamily) or municipal
solid waste/recycling program. Failure to provide this required
information within the time period specified may result in revocation,
suspension, or modification of this permit. This information shall be
required after the permittee has operated for three months in the Town
of Marshfield. Required customer lists shall be submitted to the Board
of Health on a quarterly basis and shall indicate any changes in the
number of customers served. All new customers shall be indicated, as
well as those customers who have terminated their agreements with the
collector.
The permittee shall collect solid waste from its customers in Marshfield.
Recyclables shall be placed at curbside or another approved location,
on specified days, in their own reusable containers.
F.
The permittee shall refuse to collect any commercial/industrial,
municipal or residential wastes if there is any indication that the
material is not solid waste according to the definition provided in
§ 652-2 of these regulations, or if it is not properly packaged or
bundled. The permittee shall notify such customers of the reason(s) for
refusal to collect the waste. The permittee shall notify the Board of
Health of any customer who continues with repeated offenses. Three
offenses may constitute justifiable reason for termination of services by
the permittee. Notification of such must be made to the Board of Health
within two weeks of said termination.
G.
The permittee shall take all reasonable care in solid waste collection.
Solid waste shall not be scattered about the streets or onto private
property. Solid waste which is spilled shall be immediately picked up by
the permittee and removed with other wastes.
H.
The Board of Health reserves the right to inspect collection vehicles
and loads at reasonable times in order to ensure that they comply with
all applicable state and local laws, bylaws and regulations.
I.
Any violation of these regulations or any other applicable laws or
regulations by the permittee will be grounds for suspension,
modification or revocation of said permit.
J.
The permittee shall provide at least one day, annually, for the collection
of bulk items such as, but not limited to, couches, chairs, mattresses,
etc.
K.
The individuals empowered to enforce the provisions of these
regulations are any authorized agent of the Board of Health, any
member of the Board of Health or any police officer of the Town.
L.
§ 652-7 CHARTER § 652-7
C:661
§ 652-8. Collection arrangements; indemnification.
§ 652-9. Suspension, modification or revocation of permits.
Any solid waste/recyclables collection permit may be suspended, modified
or revoked by the Board of Health upon receipt of evidence satisfactory
to the Board that the permittee has not conformed to the requirements
of these regulations or such further regulations as may be adopted or to
any applicable state or federal statute, regulation, rule or order regarding
transportation or disposal of solid waste concerning the collection and
disposal of rubbish. Appeals of such suspension, modification or revocation
may be directed to the Board of Health within 10 business days of said
suspension, modification or revocation.
§ 652-10. Severability.
Each of these regulations shall be construed as separate to the end that
if any regulation, clause or phase thereof should be held invalid for any
reason, the remainder of the regulation and all other regulations shall
continue to be in force.
§ 652-11. Variances.
Permittees shall provide their customers with a list of acceptable waste
types and recyclables according to § 652-2 of these regulations and
with a list or description of proper packaging or bundling methods
of the same. This will ensure fewer incidents of refusal by permittee
to collect wastes and will provide for a more efficient and economic
system of waste collection/disposal and recycling.
M.
Permittees shall enter into arrangements for the collection of refuse
and recyclables with individual residents, the municipality and
commercial/industrial customers of the Town, in which the permittee
will be paid directly by the customer.
A.
The permittee agrees to indemnify the Town from any loss that may
arise from the improper treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous
wastes collected within the Town.
B.
A. Each variance must be requested in writing.
Each variance that is granted must be in writing by a majority vote of
the Board.
B.
A copy must be maintained in the permanent files, at the Board of
Health office, and must be available to the public during normal
business hours.
C.
D. A variance filing fee will be charged (see current fee schedule).
If a variance is requested from any portion of these regulations, the
applicant must demonstrate to the Board by clear and convincing
E.
§ 652-7 MARSHFIELD CODE § 652-11
C:662
§ 652-12. Phase-in of regulations.
All permittees shall provide recycling service in accordance with these
regulations, for recyclable items outlined in Appendix A, beginning on the
following dates:
Chapter 670
TOBACCO AND SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Smoking — See Ch. 232.
evidence that there will be no adverse effect on the environment or the
public health and safety if the variance is given.
Any variance so granted, after notice and hearing, may be revoked,
modified or suspended by a majority vote of the Board at a Board of
Health meeting.
F.
A. July 1, 2000: paper products.
B. September 1, 2000: glass.
C. November 1, 2000: metal cans and plastics.
§ 652-11 CHARTER § 652-12
C:663

ARTICLE I
Tobacco Control
[Adopted effective 9-1-2015]
§ 670-1. Findings and intent.
Whereas:
There exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoking causes
cancer, respiratory and cardiac diseases, negative birth outcomes,
and irritations to the eyes, nose and throat;87
(1)
Among the 15.7% of students nationwide who currently smoke
cigarettes and were less than 18 years old, 14.1% usually obtained
them by buying them in a store (i.e., convenience store,
supermarket, or discount store) or gas station;88
(2)
Nationally in 2009, 72% of high school smokers and 66% of middle
school smokers were not asked to show proof of age when
purchasing cigarettes;89
(3)
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has concluded
that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine or heroin90 and the Surgeon
General found that nicotine exposure during adolescence, a critical
window for brain development, may have lasting adverse
consequences for brain development;91
(4)
A Federal District Court, in a 2006 decision upheld by the United
States Supreme Court, found that Phillip Morris, RJ Reynolds and
other leading cigarette manufacturers violated federal
racketeering laws, in part, because they "spent billions of dollars
every year on their marketing activities in order to encourage
young people to try and then continue purchasing their cigarette
products in order to provide the replacement smokers they need to
(5)
A.
87.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2012), Health Effects of Cigarette
Smoking Fact Sheet. Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistice/
fact_sheets/health_effects/effects_cig_smoking/index.htm.
88.CDC (2009), Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance Summaries [Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report (MMWR) 2010: 59, 11 (No. SS-55)]. Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/
HealthyYouth/yrbs/index.htm.
89.CDC Office of Smoking and Health, National Youth Tobacco Survey, 2009. Analysis by the
American Lung Association (ALA), Research and Program Services Division using SPSS
software, as reported in "Trends in Tobacco Use," ALA Research and Program Services,
Epidemiology and Statistics Unit, July 2011. Retrieved from: www.lung.org/finding-cures/
our-research/trend-reports/Tobacco-Trend-Report.pdf.
90.CDC (2010), How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for
Smoking-Attributable Disease. Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/
sgr/2010.
91.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2014. The Health Consequences of
Smoking - 50 Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and
Health, p. 122. Retrieved from: http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-ofprogress/
full-report.pdf.
§ 670-1 CHARTER § 670-1
C:665
survive" and that these companies were likely to continue targeting
underage smokers;92
Despite state laws prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to
minors, access by minors to tobacco products is a major public
health problem;
(6)
Research finds that raising the minimum legal drinking age to
21 has reduced alcohol consumption among youth and protected
drinkers from long-term negative outcomes in adulthood, including
alcohol and other drug dependence;93
(7)
More than 80% of all adult smokers begin smoking before the age
of 18, and more than 90% do so before leaving their teens;94
(8)
Many non-cigarette tobacco products, such as cigars and cigarillos,
can be sold in a single "dose"; enjoy a relatively low tax as
compared to cigarettes; are available in fruit, candy and alcohol
flavors; and are popular among youth;95
(9)
Sales of flavored little cigars increased by 23% between 2008
and 2010,96 and the top three most popular cigar brands among
African-American youth aged 12 to 17 are the flavored and low-cost
Black and Mild, White Owl, and Swisher Sweets;97
(10)
The federal Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act
(FSPTCA), enacted in 2009,98 prohibited candy- and fruit-flavored
cigarettes, largely because these flavored products were marketed
to youth and young adults,99 and younger smokers were more likely
to have tried these products than older smokers;100
(11)
92.United States v. Phillip Morris, Inc., RJ Reynolds Tobacco Co., et al., 449 F.Supp.2d 1
(D.D.C. 2006) at Par. 3301 and Pp. 1605-07.
93.DeJong W, Blanchette J 2013. "Case Closed: Research Evidence on the Positive Public
Health Impact of the Age 21 Minimum Legal Drinking Age in the United States." J. Stud.
Alcohol Drugs, Supplement 17, 108 - 115, 2014.
94.SAMHSA, Calculated based on data in 2011 National Survey on Drug Use and Health.
95.CDC (2009), Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance Summaries (MMWR 2010: 59, 12, note 5).
Retrieved from: http:www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss5905.pdf.
96.Delnevo, C., Flavored Little Cigars memo, September 21, 2011, from Neilson market
scanner data.
97.SAMSHA, Analysis of data from the 2011 National Survey on Drug Use and Health.
98.21 U.S.C. § 387g.
99.Carpenter CM, Wayne GF, Pauly JL, et al. 2005. "New Cigarette Brands with Flavors that
Appeal to Youth: Tobacco Marketing Strategies." Health Affairs. 24(6): 1601-1610; Lewis
M and Wackowski O. 2006. "Dealing with an Innovative Industry: A Look at Flavored
Cigarettes Promoted by Mainstream Brands." American Journal of Public Health. 96(2):
244-251; Connolly GN. 2004. "Sweet and Spicy Flavours: New Brands for Minorities and
Youth." Tobacco Control. 13(3): 211-212; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon
General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 537, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/
reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf.
100. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among
Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center
for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p.
§ 670-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § 670-1
C:666
Although the manufacture and distribution of flavored cigarettes
(excluding menthol) is banned by federal law,101 neither federal nor
Massachusetts laws restrict sales of flavored non-cigarette tobacco
products, such as cigars, cigarillos, smokeless tobacco, hookah
tobacco, and electronic devices and the nicotine solutions used in
these devices;
(12)
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the U.S. Surgeon
General have stated that flavored tobacco products are considered
to be "starter" products that help establish smoking habits that can
lead to long-term addiction;102
(13)
Data from the National Youth Tobacco Survey indicates that more
than 2/5 of U.S. middle and high school smokers report using
flavored little cigars or flavored cigarettes;103
(14)
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has reported
that electronic cigarette use among middle and high school
students doubled from 2011 to 2012;104
(15)
Nicotine solutions, which are consumed via electronic or batteryoperated
delivery smoking devices such as electronic cigarettes,
are sold in dozens of flavors that appeal to youth, such as cotton
candy and bubble gum;105
(16)
The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection has
classified liquid nicotine in any amount as an "acutely hazardous
waste" (310 CMR 30.136);
(17)
In a lab analysis conducted by the FDA, electronic cigarette
cartridges that were labeled as containing no nicotine actually had
(18)
539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/ preventing-youth-tobacco-use/fullreport.
pdf.
101. 21 U.S.C. § 387g.
102. Food and Drug Administration. 2011. Fact Sheet: Flavored Tobacco Products, www.fda.gov/
downloads/TobaccoProducts/ProtectingKidsfromTobacco/FlavoredTobacco/
UCM183214.pdf; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing
Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta:
U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
Smoking and Health, p. 539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/ preventing-youthtobacco-
use/full-report.pdf.
103. King BA, Tynan MA, Dube SR, et al. 2013. "Flavored-Little-Cigar and Flavored-Cigarette
Use Among U.S. Middle and High School Students." Journal of Adolescent Health. [Article
in press], www.jahonline.org/article/S1054-139X%2813%2900415-1/abstract.
104. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2013. "Electronic Cigarette Use Among
Middle and High School Students — United States, 2011-2012," Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report (MMWR) 62(35): 729-730.
105. Cameron JM, Howell DN, White JR, et al. 2013. "Variable and Potentially Fatal Amounts of
Nicotine in E-cigarette NicotineSolutions." Tobacco Control. (Electronic publication ahead
of print.) http://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/early/2013/02/12/
tobaccocontrol-2012-050604.full; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012.
Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General.
Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office
on Smoking and Health, p. 549, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youthtobacco-
use/full-report.pdf.
§ 670-1 CHARTER § 670-1
C:667
low levels of nicotine present in all cartridges tested, except for
one;106
According to the CDC's youth risk behavior surveillance system,
the percentage of high school students in Massachusetts who
reported the use of cigars within the past 30 days went from 11.8%
in 2003 to 14.3% in 2011;107
(19)
Survey results show that more youth report that they have smoked
a cigar product when it is mentioned by name than report that they
smoked a cigar in general, indicating that cigar use among youth is
underreported;108
(20)
In Massachusetts, youth use of all other tobacco products,
including cigars, rose from 13.3% in 2003 to 17.6% in 2009, and
was higher than the rate of current cigarette use (16%) for the first
time in history;109
(21)
Research shows that increased cigar prices significantly decreased
the probability of male adolescent cigar use and a ten-percent
increase in cigar prices would reduce use by 3.4%;110
(22)
Nicotine levels in cigars are generally much higher than nicotine
levels in cigarettes;111
(23)
Nonresidential roll-your-own (RYO) produce inexpensive
cigarettes, promote the use of tobacco resulting in a negative
impact on public health and increased health care costs, and
severely undercut the evidence-based public health benefit of high
tobacco prices;
(24)
The sale of tobacco products is incompatible with the mission of
health care institutions because these products are detrimental to
the public health and their presence in health care institutions
(25)
106. Food and Drug Administration, Summary of Results: Laboratory Analysis of Electronic
Cigarettes Conducted by FDA, available at: http://www.fda.gov/newsevents/
publichealthfocus/ucm173146.htm.
107. CDC (2011) Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance Summaries [MMWR 2012: 87 (No SS-61)].
Retrieved from: www.cdc.gov; and CDC (2003), Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance
Summaries [MMWR 2004: 53, 54 (No. SS-02)].
108. 2010 Boston Youth Risk Behavior Study: 16.5% of Boston youth responded that they had
ever smoked a fruit or candy flavored cigar, cigarillo or little cigar, while 24.1% reported
ever smoking a "Black and Mild" cigar.
109. Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Data Brief, Trends in Youth Tobacco Use in
Massachusetts, 1993-2009. Retrieved from: http://www.mass.gov/Eeohhs2/docs/dph/
tobacco_control/adolescent_tobacco_use_youth_trends_1993_2009.pdf.
110. Ringel, J., Wasserman, J., & Andreyeva, T. (2005) Effects of Public Policy on Adolescents'
Cigar Use: Evidence from the National Youth Tobacco Survey. American Journal of Public
Health, 95(6), 995-998, doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2003.030411 and cited in Cigar, Cigarillo and
Little Cigar Use among Canadian Youth: Are We Underestimating the Magnitude of this
Problem?, J. Prim. P. 2011, Aug: 32(3-4): 161-70. Retrieved from: www.nebi.nim.gov/
pubmed/21809109.
111. National Institute of Health (NIH), National Cancer Institute (NCI) (2010). Cigar Smoking
and Cancer. Retrieved from: http://www.cancer.govb/cancertopics/factsheet/Tobacco/
cigars.
§ 670-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § 670-1
C:668
§ 670-2. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted to the
Marshfield Board of Health by MGL c. 111, § 31, which states "Boards of
health may make reasonable health regulations."
§ 670-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
BLUNT WRAP — Any tobacco product manufactured or packaged as a wrap
or as a hollow tube made wholly or in part from tobacco that is designed or
intended to be filled by the consumer with loose tobacco or other fillers.
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR — A distinguishable taste or aroma, other than
the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint or wintergreen, imparted
or detectable either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product
or component part thereof, including but not limited to tastes or aromas
relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert,
alcoholic beverage, herb or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco
product shall be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because
of the provision of ingredient information or the use of additives or
flavorings that do not contribute to the distinguishable taste or aroma of the
product.
CIGAR — Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any
substance containing tobacco with or without a tip or mouthpiece not
otherwise defined as a cigarette under MGL c. 64C, § 1, Paragraph 1.
COMPONENT PART — Any element of a tobacco product, including but not
limited to the tobacco, filter and paper, but not including any constituent.
undermines efforts to educate patients on the safe and effective use
of medication, including cessation medication;
Educational institutions sell tobacco products to a younger
population which is particularly at risk for becoming smokers and
such sale of tobacco products is incompatible with the mission of
educational institutions that educate a younger population about
social, environmental and health risks and harms;
(26)
The Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has held that "...[t]he
right to engage in business must yield to the paramount right of
government to protect the public health by any rational means."112
(27)
Now, therefore it is the intention of the Marshfield Board of Health to
regulate the sale of tobacco products.
B.
112. Druzik et al v. Board of Health of Haverhill, 324 Mass. 129 (1949).
§ 670-1 CHARTER § 670-3
C:669
CONSTITUENT — Any ingredient, substance, chemical or compound, other
than tobacco, water or reconstituted tobacco sheet, that is added by the
manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacturing
or packaging of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke
constituent.
DISTINGUISHABLE — Perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Any public or private college, school,
professional school, scientific or technical institution, university or other
institution furnishing a program of higher education.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust or
other organized group of individuals that uses the services of one or more
employees.
FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any tobacco product or component
part thereof that contains a constituent that has or produces a
characterizing flavor. A public statement, claim or indicia made or
disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person
authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public
statements concerning such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has
or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence
that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product.
HEALTH CARE INSTITUTION — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or trust or any person or group of persons that provides health
care services and employs health care providers licensed, or subject to
licensing, by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under MGL
c. 112 or a retail establishment that provides pharmaceutical goods and
services and is subject to the provisions of 247 CMR 6.00. Health care
institutions include, but are not limited to, hospitals, clinics, health centers,
pharmacies, drugstores, doctor offices, optician/optometrist offices and
dentist offices.
LIQUID NICOTINE CONTAINER — A bottle or other container of liquid
nicotine or other substance containing nicotine that is sold, marketed, or
intended for use in a tobacco product, as defined herein. The term does not
include a container containing nicotine in a cartridge that is sold, marketed,
or intended for use in a tobacco product, as defined herein, if the cartridge
is prefilled and sealed by the manufacturer and not intended to be opened
by the consumer or retailer.
MINIMUM LEGAL SALES AGE (MLSA) — The age an individual must be
before that individual can be sold a tobacco product in the municipality.
NONRESIDENTIAL ROLL-YOUR-OWN (RYO) MACHINE — A mechanical
device made available for use (including to an individual who produces
cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, or roll-your-own
tobacco solely for the individual's own personal consumption or use) that
is capable of making cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products. Roll-
§ 670-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 670-3
C:670
your-own machines located in private homes used for solely personal
consumption are not nonresidential RYO machines.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of
tobacco products who applies for and receives a tobacco product sales
permit or any person who is required to apply for a tobacco product sales
permit pursuant to these regulations, or his or her business agent.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, including but not limited to an owner,
operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any establishment,
business or retail store.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment that is not required to
possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for
sale, but not for resale, tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia, in
which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and in which the entry
of persons under the minimum legal sales age is prohibited at all times, and
maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products as required
to be issued by the Marshfield Board of Health.
SCHOOLS — Public or private elementary or secondary schools.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may select a
tobacco product, as defined herein, without assistance from an employee or
store personnel.
SMOKE CONSTITUENT — Any chemical or chemical compound in
mainstream or sidestream tobacco smoke that either transfers from any
component of the tobacco product to the smoke or that is formed by the
combustion or heating of tobacco, additives or other component of the
tobacco product.
SMOKING BAR — An establishment that primarily is engaged in the retail
sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the premises
and is required by MGL c. 270, § 22, to maintain a valid permit to operate
a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue.
"Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those establishments that
are commonly known as "cigar bars" and "hookah bars."
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested
by any other means, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, little
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, or electronic cigarettes,
electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah, or other similar
products, regardless of nicotine content, that rely on vaporization or
aerosolization. "Tobacco product" includes any component or part of a
tobacco product. "Tobacco product" does not include any product that has
been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration either as
a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical purposes and which is
being marketed and sold or prescribed solely for the approved purpose.
§ 670-3 CHARTER § 670-3
C:671
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated or mechanical self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses or makes cigarettes or any other tobacco products, as defined
herein.
§ 670-4. Tobacco sales to persons under minimum legal sales age
prohibited.
No person shall sell tobacco products or permit tobacco products, as
defined herein, to be sold to a person under the minimum legal sales
age or, not being the individual's parent or legal guardian, give tobacco
products, as defined herein, to a person under the minimum legal sales
age. The minimum legal sales age in Marshfield is 21.
A.
Required signage.
In conformance with and in addition to MGL c. 270, § 7, a copy
of MGL c. 270, § 6, shall be posted conspicuously by the owner or
other person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to
sell tobacco products at retail. The notice shall be provided by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health and made available
from the Marshfield Board of Health. The notice shall be at least
48 square inches and shall be posted conspicuously by the permit
holder in the retail establishment or other place in such a manner
so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the
floor. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products at retail shall conspicuously post
any additional signs required by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health.
(1)
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at retail shall
conspicuously post signage provided by the Marshfield Board of
Health that discloses current referral information about smoking
cessation.
(2)
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at retail shall
conspicuously post a sign stating that "The sale of tobacco
products, including e-cigarettes, to someone under the minimum
legal sales age of 21 years is prohibited." The notice shall be
no smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches and shall be posted
conspicuously in the retail establishment or other place in such a
manner so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the floor.
(3)
B.
§ 670-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § 670-4
C:672
§ 670-5. Tobacco product sales permit.
Identification. Each person selling or distributing tobacco products, as
defined herein, shall verify the age of the purchaser by means of a valid
government-issued photographic identification containing the bearer's
date of birth that the purchaser is 21 years old or older. Verification is
required for any person under the age of 27.
C.
All retail sales of tobacco products, as defined herein, must be face
to face between the seller and the buyer and occur at the permitted
location.
D.
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco products, as
defined herein, within the Town of Marshfield without first obtaining a
tobacco product sales permit issued annually by the Marshfield Board
of Health. Only owners of establishments with a permanent, non-mobile
location in Marshfield are eligible to apply for a permit and sell tobacco
products, as defined herein, at the specified location in Marshfield.
A.
As part of the tobacco product sales permit application process, the
applicant will be provided with the Marshfield regulation. Each
applicant is required to sign a statement declaring that the applicant
has read said regulation and that the applicant is responsible for
instructing any and all employees who will be responsible for tobacco
product sales regarding federal, state and local laws regarding the sale
of tobacco and this regulation.
B.
Each applicant who sells tobacco products is required to provide proof
of a current tobacco retailer license issued by the Massachusetts
Department of Revenue, when required by state law, before a tobacco
product sales permit can be issued.
C.
The fee for a tobacco product sales permit shall be determined by the
Marshfield Board of Health annually.
D.
A separate permit is required for each retail establishment selling
tobacco products, as defined herein.
E.
Each tobacco product sales permit shall be displayed at the retail
establishment in a conspicuous place.
F.
A tobacco product sales permit is nontransferable. A new owner of
an establishment that sells tobacco products, as defined herein, must
apply for a new permit. No new permit will be issued unless and until
all outstanding penalties incurred by the previous permit holder are
satisfied in full.
G.
Issuance of a tobacco product sales permit shall be conditioned on
an applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic inspections of his/her
retail establishment to ensure compliance with this regulation.
H.
§ 670-4 CHARTER § 670-5
C:673
§ 670-6. Sale of flavored tobacco products prohibited; exception.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any
flavored tobacco product, except in smoking bars and retail tobacco stores.
§ 670-7. Sale of blunt wraps prohibited.
No person or entity shall sell or distribute blunt wraps in Marshfield.
§ 670-8. Free distribution and coupon redemption.
No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any free samples of
tobacco products, as defined herein. No means, instruments or devices that
allow for the redemption of any tobacco products, as defined herein, for
free or cigarettes at a price below the minimum retail price determined by
A tobacco product sales permit will not be renewed if the permit
holder has failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to appeal
the fines has expired and/or has not satisfied any outstanding permit
suspensions.
I.
A tobacco product sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder
has sold a tobacco product to someone under § 670-4A three times
within the previous permit year and the time period to appeal has
expired and/or has not satisfied any outstanding permit suspensions.
The violator may request a hearing in accordance with § 670-15D.
J.
Maximum number of tobacco product sales permits. At any given time,
there shall be no more than 26 tobacco product sales permits issued
in Marshfield. No permit renewal will be denied based on the
requirements of this subsection, except that any permit holder who
has failed to renew his or her permit within 30 days of expiration will
be treated as a first-time permit applicant. Applicants who purchase
a business that holds a current tobacco product sales permit at the
time of the sale of said business may apply, within 60 days of such
sale, for the permit held by the seller if the buyer intends to sell
tobacco products, as defined herein. New applicants for permits who
are applying at a time when the maximum number of permits have been
issued will be placed on a waiting list and will be eligible to apply for
a permit on a first-come-first-served basis as issued permits are either
not renewed or are returned to the Board of Health.
K.
A tobacco product sales permit shall not be issued to any new applicant
for a retail location within 500 feet of a public or private elementary or
secondary school as measured by a straight line from the nearest point
of the property line of the school to the nearest point of the property
line of the site of the applicant's business premises. Applicants who
purchase an existing business that holds a current tobacco product
sales permit at the time of the sale of said business may apply, within 60
days of such sale, for the permit held by the seller if the buyer intends
to sell tobacco products, as defined herein.
L.
§ 670-5 MARSHFIELD CODE § 670-8
C:674
the Massachusetts Department of Revenue shall be accepted by any permit
holder.
§ 670-9. Out-of-package sales.
§ 670-10. Self-service displays.
All self-service displays of tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited. All humidors, including but not limited to walk-in humidors,
must be locked.
§ 670-11. Vending machines.
All vending machines containing tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited.
§ 670-12. Nonresidential roll-your-own machines.
All nonresidential roll-your-own machines are prohibited.
§ 670-13. Sale of tobacco products by health care institutions
prohibited.
No health care institution located in Marshfield shall sell or cause to be sold
tobacco products, as defined herein. No retail establishment that operates
or has a health care institution within it, such as a pharmacy, optician/
optometrist or drugstore, shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products, as
defined herein.
§ 670-14. Sale of tobacco products by educational institutions
prohibited.
No educational institution located in Marshfield shall sell or cause to be
sold tobacco products, as defined herein. This includes all educational
institutions as well as any retail establishments that operate on the property
of an educational institution.
The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, in any
form other than an original factory-wrapped package is prohibited,
including the repackaging or dispensing of any tobacco product, as
defined herein, for retail sale. No person may sell or cause to be sold
or distribute or cause to be distributed any cigarette package that
contains fewer than 20 cigarettes, including single cigarettes.
A.
A retailer of liquid nicotine containers, where liquid nicotine is an
"acutely hazardous waste" as identified in 310 CMR 30.136, must
comply with the provisions of 310 CMR 30.000 and must provide the
Marshfield Board of Health with a written plan for disposal of said
product, including disposal plans for any breakage, spillage or
expiration of the product.
B.
§ 670-8 CHARTER § 670-15
C:675
§ 670-15. Violations and penalties; suspension or revocation of
permit.
It shall be the responsibility of the establishment, permit holder and/or
his or her business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this
regulation. The violator shall receive:
(1) In the case of a first violation, a fine of $300.
In the case of a second violation within 36 months of the date of
the current violation, a fine of $300 and the tobacco product sales
permit shall be suspended for seven consecutive business days.
(2)
In the case of three or more violations within a thirty-six-month
period, a fine of $300 and the tobacco product sales permit shall be
suspended for 30 consecutive business days.
(3)
In the case of four violations or repeated, egregious violations of
this regulation within a thirty-six-month period, the Board of Health
shall hold a hearing in accordance with Subsection D and may
permanently revoke a tobacco product sales permit.
(4)
A.
Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this regulation shall
result in the suspension of the tobacco product sales permit for 30
consecutive business days.
B.
In addition to the monetary fines set above, any permit holder who
engages in the sale or distribution of tobacco products while his or her
permit is suspended shall be subject to the suspension of all Board of
Health issued permits for 30 consecutive business days.
C.
The Marshfield Board of Health shall provide notice of the intent to
suspend or revoke a tobacco product sales permit, which notice shall
contain the reasons therefor and establish a time and date for a
hearing, which date shall be no earlier than seven days after the date
of said notice. The permit holder or its business agent shall have an
opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of the
Board of Health's decision and the reasons therefor in writing. After
a hearing, the Marshfield Board of Health shall suspend or revoke
the tobacco product sales permit if the Board of Health finds that a
violation of this regulation occurred. For purposes of such suspensions
or revocations, the Board shall make the determination
notwithstanding any separate criminal or noncriminal proceedings
brought in court hereunder or under the Massachusetts General Laws
for the same offense. All tobacco products, as defined herein, shall be
removed from the retail establishment upon suspension or revocation
of the tobacco product sales permit. Failure to remove all tobacco
products, as defined herein, shall constitute a separate violation of this
regulation.
D.
§ 670-15 MARSHFIELD CODE § 670-16
C:676
§ 670-16. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by the
noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, or by
filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue. Each day any violation
exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 670-17. Enforcement.
§ 670-18. Severability.
If any provision of this regulation is declared invalid or unenforceable, the
other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full force
and effect.
§ 670-19. Effective date.
This regulation shall take effect on September 1, 2015.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the Marshfield Board of
Health or the Marshfield police.
A.
Any resident who desires to register a complaint pursuant to this
regulation may do so by contacting the Marshfield Board of Health or
its designated agent(s) and the Board shall investigate.
B.
§ 670-16 CHARTER § 670-19
C:677

ARTICLE II
Smoking in Workplaces and Public Places
[Adopted effective 9-1-2015]
§ 670-20. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to protect the health of the employees and
general public in the Town of Marshfield.
§ 670-21. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated under the authority granted to the
Marshfield Board of Health pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31, that "[b]oards
of health may make reasonable health regulations." It is also promulgated
pursuant to MGL c. 270, § 22(j), which states in part that "[n]othing in
this section shall permit smoking in an area in which smoking is or may
hereafter be prohibited by law including, without limitation: any other
law or...health...regulation. Nothing in this section shall preempt further
limitation of smoking by the commonwealth...or political subdivision of the
commonwealth."
§ 670-22. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following words shall have the following
meanings, unless the context requires otherwise:
COMPENSATION — Money, gratuity, privilege, or benefit received from
an employer in return for work performed or services rendered.
E-CIGARETTE — Any electronic device, not approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration, composed of a mouthpiece,
heating element, battery and/or electronic circuits, that provides a
vapor of liquid nicotine to the user, or relies on vaporization of any
liquid or solid nicotine. This term shall include such devices whether
they are manufactured as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes or under any
other product name.
EMPLOYEE — An individual or person who performs a service for
compensation for an employer at the employer's workplace, including
a contract employee, temporary employee, and independent contractor
who performs a service in the employer's workplace for more than a de
minimus amount of time.
EMPLOYER — An individual, person, partnership, association,
corporation, trust, organization, school, college, university or other
educational institution or other legal entity, whether public, quasipublic,
private, or nonprofit, which uses the services of one or more
employees at one or more workplaces, at any one time, including the
Town of Marshfield.
ENCLOSED — A space bounded by walls, with or without windows or
fenestrations, continuous from floor to ceiling and enclosed by one or
A.
§ 670-20 CHARTER § 670-22
C:679
§ 670-23. Smoking prohibited.
§ 670-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
more doors, including but not limited to an office, function room or
hallway.
SMOKING (or SMOKE) — The lighting of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other tobacco product or possessing a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other tobacco or non-tobacco product designed to be combusted and
inhaled.
WORKPLACE — An indoor area, structure or facility, or a portion
thereof, at which one or more employees perform a service for
compensation for an employer; other enclosed spaces rented to or
otherwise used by the public; and where the employer has the right or
authority to exercise control over the space.
Terms not defined herein shall be defined as set forth in MGL c.
270, § 22, and/or 105 CMR 661. To the extent any of the definitions
herein conflict with MGL c. 270, § 22, and 105 CMR 661, the definition
contained in this regulation shall control.
B.
It shall be the responsibility of the employer to provide a smoke-free
environment for all employees working in an enclosed workplace as
well as those workplaces listed in Subsection C below.
A.
Smoking is hereby prohibited in Marshfield in accordance with MGL c.
270, § 22 (commonly known as the "Smoke-Free Workplace Law").
B.
Pursuant to MGL c. 270, § 22(j), smoking is also hereby prohibited in:
(1) Nursing homes.
(2) Hotels, motels, and bed-and-breakfasts (B&Bs).
(3) Public transportation and bus and taxi waiting areas.
C.
The use of e-cigarettes is prohibited wherever smoking is prohibited
per MGL c. 270, § 22, and § 670-23C of this regulation.
D.
An owner, manager, or other person in control of a building, vehicle or
vessel who violates this section, in a manner other than by smoking in
a place where smoking is prohibited, shall be punished by a fine of:
(1) One hundred dollars for the first violation;
Two hundred dollars for a second violation occurring within two
years of the date of the first offense; and
(2)
Three hundred dollars for a third or subsequent violation occurring
within two years of the second violation.
(3)
A.
§ 670-22 MARSHFIELD CODE § 670-24
C:680
§ 670-25. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be illegal or
against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the legality of
any remaining paragraphs or provisions.
§ 670-26. Effect on other regulations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 670-23 of this regulation, nothing in this
regulation shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable fire, health or
other regulations so as to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by
such fire, health or other regulations.
§ 670-27. Effective date.
This regulation shall be effective as of September 1, 2015.
Each calendar day on which a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
B.
This regulation shall be enforced by the Board of Health and its
designees.
C.
Violations of § 670-23B shall be disposed of by a civil penalty using the
noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, without an enabling ordinance or bylaw. The disposition of fines
assessed shall be subject to MGL c. 111, § 188.
D.
Violations of § 670-23A, C and D may be disposed of by a civil penalty
using the noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in
MGL c. 40, § 21D.
E.
If an owner, manager or other person in control of a building, vehicle
or vessel violates this regulation repeatedly, demonstrating egregious
noncompliance as defined by regulation of the Department of Public
Health, the Board of Health may revoke or suspend any Board of Health
issued permit to operate and shall send notice of the revocation or
suspension to the Department of Public Health.
F.
Any person may register a complaint to initiate an investigation and
enforcement with the Board of Health, the local inspection department
or the equivalent.
G.
§ 670-24 CHARTER § 670-27
C:681
Chapter A900
GENERAL LAW ACCEPTANCES
§ A900-1. Sections of Massachusetts General Laws accepted by
Town.
Chapter 32B.
– Blue Cross – Blue Shield; Town
will pay 50% of premiums for
active employees
Question on ballot
3-11-1961
§ 8A Certain portion of dividends to go
back to employees
Question on ballot
5-1-1976
§ 9A Town will pay 50% for retired
employees
Question on ballot
3-21-1964
§ 9D Town will pay 50% for deceased
retired employee spouses
Question on ballot
3-21-1970
§ 16 Make another medical coverage
available, i.e., an HMO
Voted by Selectmen
2-28-1983
§ 18 Medicare extension plans;
mandatory transfer of retirees
Art. 21, April 2004
ATM
§§ 56 to 59 Pensions regarding veterans Voted by Selectmen
4-28-1971
A.
Chapter 33.
§ 59 Acceptance allows a DPW
employee during time of service
as a member of a reserve
component of the armed forces to
receive pay without loss of
ordinary remuneration and be
entitled to the same leaves of
absence or vacation with pay
given to other employees
Art. 3, 4-27-2009
STM
B.
Chapter 40.
§ 4G Increasing the amount the Town
can spend without going to bid
to $4,000
Art. 11, 9-19-1988
STM, p. 53
§ 5,
Subsection 12
Accepting gift of Marshfield
Servicemen's Auxiliary
Association to erect a memorial
Art. 38, 1947 ATM, p.
67
§ 5B Establishment of stabilization
fund
Art. 17, 1964 ATM, p.
39
C.
§ 670-27 MARSHFIELD CODE § A900-1
C:682
§ 6B Uniforms for fire and police Art. 67, 1960 ATM, p.
39
§ 6C Removal of snow and ice from
private ways
Question on ballot,
3-6-1954, p. 103
§ 6H Repairs of private ways Art. 55, 1963 ATM, p.
147; repealed by Art.
10, 1979, p. 18
§ 6J Authorizing rainwear and work
clothes for certain employees
Art. 25, 1965 ATM, p.
27
§ 6K Regarding uniforms for public
health nurses
Art. 81, 1971 ATM, p.
49
§ 8A Established Industrial
Development Commission
Art. 36, 1961 ATM, p.
25
§ 8C Established a Conservation
Commission to consist of 5
members
Art. 57, 1961 ATM, p.
29
§ 8C Conservation Commission from 5
to 7 members
Art. 32, 1962 ATM, p.
29
§ 8D Established Historical
Commission
Art. 62, 1965 ATM, p.
37
§ 8G Mutual aid Art. 33, 1990 ATM, p.
40
§ 8J Regarding establishment of
Disability Commission
Art. 17, 11-14-1994,
p. 12 of 1995 Annual
Report
§ 13D To establish a fund for future
payment of accrued liabilities for
compensated absences due
employees
Art. 3, 10-22-2012
STM
§ 15C Designation of scenic roads:
South River Street, Ferry Street,
Church Street, Summer Street,
Spring Street, Highland Street,
Union Street, Parsonage Street,
Winslow Cemetery Road, Pine
Street, School Street
Art. 80, 1974 ATM, p.
48
§ 15C Designation of scenic roads:
Acorn Street, Canal Street,
Forest Street, Old Main Street,
Old Ocean Street, Old Plain
Street, Pleasant Street, Pudding
Hill Lane, Webster Street,
Winslow Street
Art. 57, 1976 ATM, p.
42
§ A900-1 CHARTER § A900-1
C:683
§ 22A Increasing penalty for parking in
handicapped spaces to not more
than $100
Art. 35, 1988 ATM, p.
38
§ 22D Regulations regarding removal
and storage of vehicles illegally
parked or standing on public
ways
Art. 37, 1988 ATM, p.
38
§ 39K Enterprise accounts for solid
waste, wastewater, water/sewer
Arts. 26, 27 and 28,
1990 ATM, p. 39
§§ 42A to
42F
Water rates to bear interest and
be a lien on property
Art. 45, 1982 ATM, p.
34
§§ 42G, 42H
and 42I
Authorized assessment of
betterments for water extension
Art. 38, 1959, p. 82
§ 42J Will allow property owners that
qualify to defer water usage
charges
Art. 8, October 2005
STM
§ 57 Regarding nonissuance of
licenses or permits to those with
unpaid taxes
Art. 27, 1986 ATM, p.
26
Chapter 40A.
§ 8 Regarding minimum time lapse of
2 years after unfavorable action
by Town Meeting on proposed
zoning before same proposal can
be submitted again to Town
Meeting
Art. 75, 1963, p. 150
D.
Chapter 41.
§ 4A Authorizing the Board of Health
to appoint members of medical
and dental clinic
Art. 16, 1945 ATM,
p. 74
§ 38A Establishment of Town Collector Art. 41, 1954 ATM,
p. 98
§ 41B Payment of public employees by
direct bank credits
Art. 28, 2001 ATM
§§ 69C, 69D,
69E and 69F
Authorized Department of Public
Works with Commissioners
Question 1, Annual
Town Election
3-21-1970, elected
3-20-1971, p. 54
§ 73 Established Selectmen as Board
of Survey
Art. 16, 1948 ATM
§ 81A Provides for a Planning Board Art. 35, 1956 ATM,
p. 99
E.
§ A900-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § A900-1
C:684
§§ 81F to 81J Approval of subdivision plats Art. 18, 1941 ATM,
p. 89
§ 91A Appoint constables instead of
electing them
Art. 35, 1962 ATM,
p. 30
§ 97A Police Department established
under Chief
Art. 25, 1961 ATM,
p. 24
§ 100F Authorizing indemnification for
harbormasters against certain
acts and claims
Art. 82, 1971 ATM,
p. 49
§ 100G Funeral and burial expenses for
active members of Police and Fire
Departments
Art. 12, 1976 ATM,
p. 59
§§ 108A and
108C
Established Personnel Board Art. 21, 1963 ATM,
p. 139
§ 108L Quinn Bill, incentive pay for
police officers
Art. 7, 1997 ATM, p.
27
§ 110A Town Hall closed Saturdays Art. 11, 2012 ATM,
p. 16
Chapter 59.
§ 5, cl. 17C Liberalizes property tax
exemptions of surviving spouses
and minor children and persons
over age 70
Art. 46, 1982 ATM,
p. 34
§ 5, cl. 17D Property tax exemptions
regarding widows or orphans
Art. 9, 1986 STM, p.
56
§ 5, cl. 37A
and 41B
Property tax exemptions
regarding over 70
Art. 8, 1986 STM, p.
56
§ 5, cl. 41C Liberalizes requirements the
blind and elderly must meet in
order to qualify for property tax
exemptions
Art. 44, 1984 ATM,
p. 31
§ 5, cl. 54 Allowing the Town to exempt
$2,000 of fair cash value on
personal property accounts to be
taxed beginning with fiscal year
2013
Allowing the Town to exempt
$10,000 of fair cash value on
personal property accounts to be
taxed beginning with fiscal year
2019
Art. 21, 4-23-2012
ATM
Art. 23, 4-23-2018
ATM
F.
§ A900-1 CHARTER § A900-1
C:685
§ 5L National guardsmen and
reservists deployed outside the
state to defer payment of their
property taxes up to 180 days
after that service without interest
or penalties
Art. 26, 2007 ATM
§ 57C Property tax collected on
quarterly basis
Art. 25, 1990 ATM,
p. 39
Chapter 60.
§ 15B Establish Tax Title Collection
Revolving Account
Art 15, 4-24-2017
ATM
§ 23B Certificate of liens; fee schedule Art. 13, October 2002
STM
§ 79 Sale of land of low value Art. 32, 1948 ATM, p.
71
G.
Chapter 80.
Betterments Act Art. 53, 1955 STM,
p. 111
§ 13B Betterments deferral and
recovery agreements;
application; recordation; lien
Art. 6, April 2004
STM
H.
Chapter 83.
§§ 16A
through 16F
Sewer bills treated same as real
estate bills by collector, subject
to interest and becoming a lien
Art. 1, 1981, p. 40
§ 16G Deferral of charges Art. 7, April 2004
STM
I.
Chapter 90.
§ 18A Pedestrian regulations Art. 17, 1973 ATM, p.
49
§ 20A 1/2 Enforcement of parking
violations
Art. 5, 1981 ATM, p.
40
§§ 20C and
20D
Regarding visible parking tags Art. 45, 1970 ATM, p.
33
§ 22C Disposition of abandoned motor
vehicles
Art. 6, 1966 ATM, p.
46
J.
K. Chapter 91.
§ A900-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § A900-1
C:686
§ A900-2. Various other chapters and sections accepted by Town.
Ch. 31, § 48 Police and Fire Departments
under civil service
Annual Town
Election, 1962, pp.
43-44
Ch. 44, § 8, cl. 5 Borrowing outside the debt limit
for water mains
Ch. 44, § 17 Borrowing in anticipation of
revenue
Ch. 44, § 53D Establishment of revolving fund
for conducting a self-supporting
Recreation Department
Art. 7, 1981 ATM, p.
32; revoked
4-22-2013 ATM by
Art. 5
Ch. 44, § 53F Permission to enter into
compensating balance
Art. 24, 1990 ATM, p.
39
Ch. 44B, §§ 3 to
7
Community Preservation Act at
5%
Art. 10, 2001 ATM,
Question 1 on 2001
ballot
Ch. 48, §§ 42, 43
and 44
Establishment of Fire
Department under Chief
Art. 31, 1957 STM, p.
103
Ch. 48, § 36A Appointment by Fire Chief of call
men to regular firemen
Art. 8, 1962 ATM, p.
61
Ch. 48, § 58E Residency requirements for
members of Fire Department
Art. 10, 1976 ATM, p.
58
Ch. 58, § 7A Acceptance of State Assessment
System
Art. 20, 1971 ATM, p.
29
Ch. 60A, § 1, 2nd
and 3rd
sentences
Regarding distinctive plates to
POWs without fee
Art. 41, 1986 ATM, p.
30
Ch. 64G, § 3A Imposes local room occupancy
excise tax at 4%
Art. 38, 1986 ATM, p.
28
Ch. 64L, § 2 Authorizing the imposition of a
local sales tax upon the sale of
restaurant meals in the statutory
amount of .75% on meals
originating within the Town
Art. 10, 4-27-2015
ATM
§ 11 State improvement of waterways
§ 29 Indemnify state public works
liability and appropriation of
same
Art. 40, 1945 ATM, p.
78
§ A900-1 CHARTER § A900-2
C:687
Ch. 64N, § 3 Imposes a local sales tax upon
the sale or transfer of marijuana
or marijuana products by a
marijuana retailer operating
within the Town to anyone other
than a marijuana establishment
at a rate of 3% of the total sales
price received by the marijuana
retailer as a consideration for the
sale of marijuana or marijuana
products, or at any higher rate as
authorized by law
Art. 13, 4-23-2018
ATM
Ch. 71, § 40 Increasing teacher compensation Arts. 9 and 10, 1985
ATM, p. 42
Ch. 71, § 71F Create a revolving fund for
nonresident or foster care
students tuition
Art. 15, 4-24-2006
STM
Ch. 82, § 24 Eminent domain land damages Art. 36, 1948 ATM, p.
72
Ch. 85, §§ 11A
and 11B
Regarding bicycle regulations Art. 61, 1965, p. 37
Ch. 94, §§ 120
and 120A
Requiring slaughter license Art. 31, 1945, p. 77
Ch. 128, Revised
§§ 41 and 45
County aid to agriculture
Ch. 139, §§ 1, 2
and 3
Re: burned and dilapidated
buildings
Art. 30, 1956, p. 99
Ch. 140, § 139 Free dog licenses for residents
over 70 years of age
Art. 18, April 2003
ATM
Ch. 140, § 147A Setting regulations for licensing
and keeping of dogs
Art. 36, 1988, p. 38
Ch. 143, §§ 4
through 12
Control of dangerous buildings
by Building Inspector
Art. 30, 1945, p. 74
Ch. 145 Regarding tenement houses in
Town of Marshfield
Art. 52, 1954, p. 96
Ch. 147, § 17B Police get 40-hour week and
8-hour day
Art. 11, 1963, p. 139
Ch. 148, § 26C Regarding smoke or heat
detectors
Art. 3, 1976, p. 57
Ch. 148, § 26E Regarding smoke or heat
detectors in residential buildings
Art. 34, 1990 ATM, p.
40
Ch. 148, § 26G Regarding sprinkler systems Art. 6, 1983, p. 29
§ A900-2 MARSHFIELD CODE § A900-2
C:688
Ch. 148, § 26H Regarding sprinkler systems in
lodging or boarding houses
Art. 36, 1990 ATM, p.
40
Ch. 148, § 261 Regarding sprinkler systems in
multi-dwellings
Art. 41, 1991 ATM, p.
30
Ch. 148, § 56 Relative to licensing open-air
parking spaces
Art. 3, 1957, p. 93
Ch. 175, § 110 Accident insurance for Fire
Department
Art. 54, 1951, p. 94
Ch. 234, § 1 Exempting firefighters from
serving on jury duty
Art. 81, 1984, p. 49
§ A900-3. Acts and chapters accepted by Town.
Acts of 1910,
Ch. 130, §§ 7
and 2
Providing for a 9-member
Advisory Committee
Art. 33, 1914
(between pp. 72 and
73)
Acts of 1920,
Ch. 405, § 10
Water surplus
Acts of 1928,
Ch. 396, § 2
Water surplus Art. 43, 1945, p. 78
Acts of 1931,
Ch. 112
Mosquito control (first year) Art. 9, 1946, p. 74
Acts of 1941,
Ch. 487
Public Safety Committee Art. 15, 1945, p. 74
Acts of 1943,
Ch. 157
War emergency power to
appropriate money for bus service
Art. 11, 1945, p. 74
Acts of 1943,
Ch. 564
Required information on tax bills
Acts of 1945,
Ch. 56
Authorizing Water Commissioners
to act as Sewer Commissioners
Art. 23, 1946, p. 75
Acts of 1945,
Ch. 56
Water Commissioners unable to
dually serve as Sewer
Commissioners
Art. 55, 1960, p. 30
Acts of 1945,
Ch. 635, § 3
Authorizing advance payment to
those going on vacation
Art. 4, 1948, p. 94
Acts of 1946,
Ch. 563
Shore protection Art. 3, 1946, p. 87
Acts of 1947,
Ch. 8
Provide adequate transportation
and avoid discontinuance of such
service
Art. 14, 1947, p. 64
Acts of 1947,
Ch. 621
Harbor improvements — dredging
§ A900-2 CHARTER § A900-3
C:689
Acts of 1950,
Ch. 820
Increasing certain pensions Art. 56, 1951, p. 94
Acts of 1951,
Ch. 781
Increasing certain pensions Art. 47, 1952, p. 87
Acts of 1952,
Ch. 624
Increasing certain pensions $100
per year
Art. 24, 1953, p. 96
Acts of 1953,
Ch. 387
Pension increase for employees
with 15 years or more of service
Art. 10, 1954, p. 93
Acts of 1955,
Ch. 670
Increasing certain pensions $200
per year
Art. 17, 1956, p. 97
Acts of 1956,
Ch. 401
Regarding protection for civil
defense volunteers while
operating Town-owned vehicles
Art. 39, 1957, p. 105
Acts of 1963,
Ch. 214
Control of Cedar Grove Cemetery
to Town of Marshfield
Art. 67, 1963, p. 148
Acts of 1963,
Ch. 383
Enforcement of Marine Fisheries
Laws by local police
Art. 53, 1964, p. 36
Acts of 1965,
Ch. 595
Control of Marshfield Hills
Cemetery to Town of Marshfield
Art. 17, 1965, p. 47
Acts of 1969,
Ch. 781
Regarding annuity to Robert E.
McGowan, Police Department
Art. 44, 1970, p. 33
Acts of 1975,
Ch. 808
Zoning Enabling Act Art. 48, 1978, p. 24
Acts of 1977,
Ch. 639; MGL c.
71, § 71E
Authorizing Treasurer to deposit
to separate accounts all receipts
received by the School Committee
for adult education, etc.
Art. 47, 1978, p. 24
Acts of 1988,
Ch. 245
Allows Town to complete
unfinished subdivisions
Art. 27, 1991, p. 26
Acts of 1989,
Ch. 653, § 40
Taxation of improvements
constructed between January 1
and June 30
Art. 47, 1991, p. 33
Acts of 1990,
Ch. 291
Enhanced 911 Art. 34, 1991, p. 29
Acts of 1994,
Ch. 235
Rights of certain firefighters and
police officers
Art. 58, 1997, p. 43
Acts of 2006,
Ch. 79
Adding a new § 23D to MGL c. 39
to be applicable to all types of
adjudicatory hearings held by any
Town board, committee or
commission
Art. 1, 10-3-2006
STM
§ A900-3 MARSHFIELD CODE § A900-3
C:690
Acts of 2008,
Ch. 479
Establish an Other Post
Employment Benefits Liability
Trust Fund and transfer $10,000
to the fund
Art. 9, 4-27-2009
STM
Chapter A901
TOWN MEETING RULES
§ A901-1. Rules.
The conduct of Marshfield's Town Meeting is dictated by federal and
state law, the Town's Charter and bylaws, local tradition, and then the
publication titled "Town Meeting Time."
A.
The Moderator shall preside over Town Meeting, decide all questions of
order and procedure, and announce the results of all votes.
B.
The Moderator may call for a voice vote, standing vote, show of hands,
roll-call vote or secret ballot. A motion for any of these voting methods
may be made at any time during the discussion phase of an article
by a recognized voter. If the results of a voice vote or a show of
hands vote are questioned by seven voters standing immediately after
the announced vote, a standing vote will be taken without debate. A
majority of the voters must approve any motion for a roll-call vote or
a vote by secret ballot. No voter will be subject to declaring his vote
before said vote is called.
C.
All matters shall be decided by a majority vote unless a two-thirds or
greater vote is required. If more than a majority vote is required, the
Moderator shall announce the required percentage for passage before
calling for the vote.
D.
In order for Town Meeting to act on or discuss an article, a motion
must be made. The Moderator will call for a motion on each article. If
no motion is made after the second call, the Moderator will pass over
the article and move on to the next article. In order to bring back a
passed over article for discussion, a motion for reconsideration must be
approved by a majority vote.
E.
A motion may be reconsidered once by a majority vote. No further
reconsideration will be permitted unless the Moderator determines that
there has been a significant procedural error or that there is new
information likely to affect the vote. There will be no reconsideration
of a vote either on a subsequent evening or after 10:30 p.m. on the
evening of the vote in question.
F.
Articles may be postponed by a majority vote or advanced by approval
of the Moderator and a two-thirds vote.
G.
§ A900-3 CHARTER § A901-1
C:691
To address Town Meeting, a speaker must first be recognized by the
Moderator then give his or her name and address for the record. No
speaker will be recognized while another person is speaking except
to raise a point of order, which is used to question a ruling of the
Moderator or the conduct of the Town Meeting. Points of order are not
to address the subject matter being discussed.
H.
The Moderator may set time limits on all presentations and may
terminate debate on a motion when he deems it appropriate. Debate
on a motion may also be terminated by a recognized voter moving the
question, which, if accepted by the Moderator as not being premature,
shall be voted on without discussion or debate. A motion to move the
question requires a two-thirds vote for passage. The Moderator may set
limits on the number of times a voter can speak on an article.
I.
Articles in the warrant give notice of the subjects to be discussed
at Town Meeting and establish the parameters of matters that can
be debated and acted upon. Amendments, motions, and/or debate
determined by the Moderator, with the advice of Town Counsel, to be
beyond the scope of the articles may not be permitted.
J.
Only two amendments to a motion may be on the floor at any particular
time. Generally, amendments shall be voted on in the order made and
prior to the vote on the motion to be amended. Amendments over 10
words must be submitted to the Moderator in writing and, if over 50
words, sufficient copies must be available at the entrance of the hall
before the start of that particular session.
K.
Consideration of differing dollar amounts to be appropriated shall be
voted on in descending order, the largest number first, until an amount
gains approval.
L.
Nonvoters will be seated in a special section unless permission is
granted by the Town Meeting to be seated elsewhere. Nonvoters may
be allowed to address the Town Meeting with permission of the
Moderator unless a majority of voters choose to deny such a privilege.
M.
A resolution is a nondebatable, nonbinding motion on any matter calling
for a consensus of the Town Meeting. If a resolution is over 10 words,
it must be submitted to the Moderator in writing and, if over 50 words,
sufficient copies must be available at the entrance of the hall to those
attending.
N.
O. No new business will be taken up after 10:30 p.m. on any evening.
When justice or order requires, the Moderator may make exceptions
to these rules as he/she, in his/her discretion, deems it appropriate
under the circumstances and with the concurrence of the majority of
the voters.
P.
Q. The Town Clerk shall report to Town Meeting on signage.
§ A901-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § A901-1
C:692
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of General Bylaws to 2017 Code
Article/Title From General Bylaws Location in 2017 Code
Art. 1, Town Meetings Ch. 5, Art. I
Art. 2, Fine Ch. 161, Art. I
Art. 3, Certain Powers of Town Officers Ch. 5, Art. II
Art. 4, Financial Ch. 95, Art. I
Art. 5, The Advisory Committee Ch. 52, Art. I
Art. 6, Peeping Tom Ch. 180, Art. II
Art. 7, Police Regulations Ch. 180, Art. I
Art. 8, Junk Dealers and Collectors Ch. 134, Art. I
Art. 9, Regulations of Vehicles for Hire Ch. 278
Art. 10, Shellfish Regulation Ch. 226
Art. 11, Bath Houses Ch. 25
Art. 12, Discharging Rifles Ch. 98, Art. I
Art. 13, Selling Wood and Timber Ch. 201, Art. I
Art. 14, Balance Accounts Ch. 95, Art. II
Art. 15, Annual Audit Ch. 95, Art. III
Art. 16, Selling Surplus Property Ch. 201, Art. II
Art. 17, Selling Beach and Meadow Lots Ch. 201, Art. III
Art. 18, Moving Buildings Ch. 40
Art. 19, Hydrants Ch. 101, Art. I
Art. 20, Earth Removal Ch. 70
Art. 21, Installing Wires Ch. 76
Art. 22, Door to Door Solicitation Ch. 184, Art. I
Art. 23, Coasting Ch. 180, Art. III
Art. 24, Council for the Aging Ch. 52, Art. II
Art. 25, Town Collector Ch. 95, Art. IV
Art. 26, Laying of Water Pipes Ch. 285, Art. I
Art. 27, Animal Control Ch. 16, Art. II
Art. 28, No Hunting in Designated Areas Ch. 98, Art. II
Art. 29, No Filling of Open Ditches Ch. 64
Art. 30, Peddler's License Ch. 184, Art. II
Art. 31, Keeping Junk Ch. 134, Art. II
§ A901-1 CHARTER § DT-1
C:693
Article/Title From General Bylaws Location in 2017 Code
Art. 32, Waterways Ch. 34
Art. 33, Gas Permits Ch. 195, Art. I
Art. 34, Removal of Vehicles for Snow Removal Ch. 275, Art. I
Art. 35, Digging up of Public Ways Ch. 250, Art. III
Art. 36, New Driveway Connections Ch. 250, Art. I
Art. 37, Wetlands Protection Ch. 294
Art. 38, No Fires on Beach Ch. 101, Art. II
Art. 39, Water on Public Street or Private Way Ch. 250, Art. VI
Art. 40, Motor Vehicles on Bridle Path Ch. 275, Art. II
Art. 41, No Salt Zone Ch. 250, Art. V
Art. 42, Town Engineer Ch. 170, Art. II
Art. 43, Selectman/Assessor Ch. 170, Art. I
Art. 44, Barriers Around Excavated Land Ch. 86
Art. 45, Acceptance of Streets Ch. 250, Art. IV
Art. 46, Town Hall Management Ch. 5, Art. III
Art. 47, Smoke Detectors Ch. 101, Art. III
Art. 48, Boat Launching at Public Piers Superseded 2008; see Ch.
34
Art. 49, Dog Late Fee Ch. 16, Art. I
Art. 50, Coin-Operated Devices Repealed 4-28-2014 STM
by Art. 7
Art. 51, Resolutions Ch. 5, Art. IV
Art. 52, Temporary Repair of Private Ways Ch. 250, Art. II
Art. 53, Risk Management and Insurance
Program
Ch. 95, Art. V
Art. 54, Sewer Rules and Regulations Ch. 223
Art. 55, Trash Disposal Fee Ch. 238, Art. I
Art. 56, Capital Budget Ch. 95, Art. VII
Art. 57, Fuel Storage Tanks Ch. 101, Art. IV
Art. 58, Waterway Speed Superseded 2008; see Ch.
34
Art. 59, Numbering of Buildings Ch. 43
Art. 60, Non-renewal of Licenses with
Outstanding Taxes
Ch. 145, Art. I
Art. 61, Underground Storage Tanks Ch. 101, Art. V
Art. 62, Underground Storage Tanks Ch. 101, Art. V
Art. 63, Fire Alarm/Lock Box Ch. 101, Art. VI
§ DT-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § DT-1
C:694
Article/Title From General Bylaws Location in 2017 Code
Art. 64, Jet Skis Superseded 2008; see Ch.
34
Art. 65, Anti-Noise Ch. 180, Art. IV
Art. 66, Water Conservation Ch. 285, Art. II
Art. 67, Municipal Due Dates Ch. 95, Art. VI
Art. 68, Disposal of Restricted Material Ch. 238, Art. II
Art. 69, Personal Use of Town Owned Vehicles Ch. 170, Art. III
Art. 70, Dumping into Rivers, Creeks and
Channels
Ch. 238, Art. III
Art. 71, Sealer of Weights and Measures Ch. 290
Art. 72, Board of Health Rules and Regulations
Section 1, Noncriminal Civil Disposition Ch. 161, Art. II
Section 2, Eliminating Public Exposure to
Tobacco Smoke in Public Places
Ch. 232
Art. 73, Violations of Scenic Roads Act Ch. 250, Art. VII
Art. 74, Handicapped Parking Ch. 275, Art. III
Art. 75, Street Opening Permits Ch. 250, Art. VIII
Art. 76, Carbon Monoxide Detectors Ch. 101, Art. VII
Art. 77, Indemnification of Certain Retired
Police Officers and Firefighters
Ch. 170, Art. IV
Art. 78, Community Preservation Committee Ch. 52, Art. III
Art. 79, Obstruction of Seawalls Ch. 217
Art. 80, Drug Testing Ch. 170, Art. V
Art. 81, Buying/Selling Property by Town
Official(s)
Ch. 201, Art. IV
Art. 82, Water Restriction Bylaw Ch. 285, Art. III
Art. 83, Municipal Storm Drain System Ch. 246
Art. 84, Dumpsters Ch. 238, Art. IV
Art. 85, Right to Farm Ch. 89, Art. I
Art. 86, Eminent Domain Ch. 80
Art. 87, Demolition of Historically Significant
Buildings or Structures
Ch. 118, Art. I
Art. 88, Entry Upon Premises and Removal of
Combustible Materials
Ch. 101, Art. VIII
Art. 89, Open Burning Ch. 101, Art. IX
Art. 90, Piling Snow on Fire Protection Devices
Prohibited
Ch. 101, Art. X
§ DT-1 CHARTER § DT-1
C:695
Article/Title From General Bylaws Location in 2017 Code
Art. 91, Shut Off, Disconnect, Obstruction,
Removal or Destruction of a Fire Protection
Device
Ch. 101, Art. XI
Art. 92, Personnel Classification and
Compensation Bylaw
Ch. 188
Art. 93, Public Consumption of Marijuana or
Tetrahydrocannabinol
Ch. 180, Art. V
Art. 94, Stretch Energy Code Ch. 253
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ballot
question
4-30-2011 Charter amendment Charter
ATM Art. 21 4-23-2012 Accept MGL c. 59, § 5, cl.
54
Ch. A900
STM Art. 3 10-22-2012 Accept MGL c. 40, § 13D Ch. A900
STM Art. 6 4-22-2013 Capital budget
amendment
Ch. 95, Art. VII
STM Art. 11 4-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 5 4-22-2013 Revoke acceptance of
MGL c. 44, § 53D
Ch. A900
ATM Art. 8 4-22-2013 Personnel Ch. 188
ATM Art. 12 4-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 20 4-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
STM Art. 6 11-4-2013 Boating and waterways
amendment
Ch. 34
STM Art. 10 11-4-2013 Personnel amendment Ch. 188
STM Art 7 4-28-2014 Repeal of Art. 50, Coin-
Operated Devices, of the
General Bylaws
Repealer only
ATM Art. 10 4-28-2014 Public consumption of
marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol
Ch. 180, Art. V
ATM Art. 15 4-29-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 16 4-29-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
§ DT-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § DL-1
C:696
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 17 5-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 26 4-28-2014 Seat belts for school
buses
Disapproved by
Attorney General
ATM Art. 28 4-28-2014 Community Preservation
Committee amendment
Ch. 52, Art. III
STM Art. 3 10-27-2014 Personnel amendment Ch. 188
STM Art. 6 10-27-2014 Sale of surplus or
abandoned property
amendment
Ch. 201, Art. II
STM Art. 8 10-27-2014 Stretch Energy Code Ch. 253
STM Art. 16 10-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
STM Art. 17 10-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
STM Art. 18 10-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
STM Art. 19 10-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
STM Art. 20 10-27-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 9 4-27-2015 Personnel amendment Ch. 188
ATM Art. 10 4-27-2015 Accept MGL c. 64L, § 2 Ch. A900
ATM Art. 14 4-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 15 4-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 16 4-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 17 4-27-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 18 4-27-2015 Scenic roads amendment Ch. 250, Art. VII
Board of
Health
9-1-2015 Tobacco control Ch. 670, Art. I
Board of
Health
9-1-2015 Smoking in workplaces
and public places
Ch. 670, Art. II
STM Art. 7 10-26-2015 Boating and waterways
amendment
Ch. 34
STM Art. 8 10-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
STM Art. 9 10-26-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
STM Art. 15 4-25-2016 Personnel amendment Ch. 188
ATM Art. 9 4-25-2016 Personnel amendment Ch. 188
ATM Art. 20 4-25-2016 Dumpsters amendment Ch. 238, Art. IV
STM Art. 5 10-24-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
STM Art. 2 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
ATM Art. 9 4-24-2017 Approve codification of
General Bylaws
Ch. 1, Art. I
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:697
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM Art. 10 4-24-2017 Approve amendments to
General Bylaws
Ch. 1, Art. I
ATM Art. 11 4-24-2017 Approve codification of
Zoning Bylaw
Ch. 305
ATM Art. 12 4-24-2017 Approve amendments to
Zoning Bylaw
Ch. 305
ATM Art. 15 4-24-2017 Accept MGL c. 60, § 15B Ch. A900
ATM Art. 17 4-24-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 305
Board of
Health
6-12-2017 Approve codification of
regulations
Ch. 600, Art. I
Conservation
Commission
6-20-2017 Approve codification of
regulations
Ch. 500, Art. I
Planning
Board
7-24-2017 Approve codification of
regulations
Ch. 400, Art. I
STM Art. 16 10-16-2017 Water: Unpaid Charges
and Termination of
Service
Ch. 285, Art. IV
STM Art. 17 10-16-2017 Sewers Amendment Ch. 223
STM Art. 18 10-16-2017 Solid Waste: Trash
Disposal Amendment
Ch. 238, Art. I
STM Art. 20 10-16-2017 Boating and Waterways
Amendment
Ch. 34
ATM, Art. 8 4-23-2018 Finance and Budget:
Revolving Funds
Ch. 95, Art. VIII
ATM, Art. 13 4-23-2018 Accept MGL c. 64N, § 3 Ch. A900
ATM, Art. 15 4-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 305
ATM, Art. 16 4-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 305
ATM, Art. 17 4-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 305
ATM, Art. 18 4-23-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 305
ATM, Art. 23 4-23-2018 Accept MGL c. 59, § 5 Ch. A900
ATM, Art. 24 4-23-2018 Wetlands Protection
Amendment
Ch. 294
ATM, Art. 25 4-23-2018 Wetlands Protection
Amendment
Ch. 294
ATM, Art. 28 4-23-2018 Fires and Fire
Prevention: Hydrants
Amendment
Ch. 101, Art. I
ATM, Art. 34 4-23-2018 Plastic Bag Reduction Ch. 191
§ DL-1 MARSHFIELD CODE § DL-1
C:698
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Planning
Board
8-13-2018 Fee Schedule
Amendment
Ch. 420
STM, Art.
18
10-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 305
STM, Art.
19
10-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 305
STM, Art.
20
10-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 305
STM, Art.
21
10-15-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 305
Conservation
Commission
10-30-2018 Wetlands Protection
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 505
§ DL-1 CHARTER § DL-1
C:699

ZONING
305 Attachment 2
Town of Marshfield
Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations
Zone Use
Minimum
Lot Area2
(square
feet)
Width
and
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Lot Depth
(feet)
Minimum Yards
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Stories
Maximum
Building
Area
Minimum
Open Space
Area
Front
(feet)
Side
(feet)
Rear
(feet)
R-1 Any permitted use 43,560 125 150 40 20 40 35 2.51
15% 50%
R-2 Any permitted use 20,000 100 120 40 15 40 35 2.51
25% 40%
R-3 Any permitted use 10,000 80 100 15 15 30 35 2.51
40% 30%
RB a. Residential use 20,000 125 150 40 15 40 35 2.5 25% 40%
b. Other use 20,000 125 150 40 15 40 255
1
5
40% 30%
OP Any permitted use 20,000 125 100 40 20 40 25 2 40% 30%
B-1 Any permitted use 10,000 100 100 5 None 10 35 3 None None
B-2 Any permitted use 20,000 150 150 40 154
40 35 2.5 40% 20%
B-33 Any permitted use 5,000 80 80 20 5 15 35 2.5 40% 20%
B-43 Any permitted use 10,000 100 100 10 5 15 35 2.5 60% 20%
I-1 Any permitted use 40,000 150 150 40 20 40 65 2 None 30%
A Any permitted use 20,000 125 100 40 20 40 35 3 40% 30%
NOTES:
1
In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the height may be increased to three stories if the minimum front yard is increased by 14 feet and the minimum side
yard is increased by five feet.
2 For lots partially within the Inland Wetlands or the Coastal Wetlands District, the application of the minimum lot areas set forth in this table shall be
governed by the regulations of Article XIII.
3 Except as noted in § 305-6.08.
4 The minimum side yard setback may be reduced or eliminated as noted in § 305-11.11 of the bylaw.
5 Buildings may be increased by 1.5 stories (maximum 35 feet) for a residential unit above the first floor.
305 Attachment 2:1 08 - 01 - 2017

ZONING
305 Attachment 1
Town of Marshfield
Table of Use Regulations
[Amended 5-1-2008 ATM by Art. 22; April 2010 ATM by Art. 22; April 2011 ATM;
4-22-2013 ATM by Arts. 12 and 20; 4-29-2014 ATM by Art. 15; 5-5-2014 ATM by Art. 17;
10-27-2014 STM by Art. 17; 10-26-2015 STM by Art. 9; 4-23-2018 ATM by Arts. 15 and 18; 10-15-2018 STM by Art. 20;
10-19-2020 STM by Art. 14; 4-26-2021 ATM by Arts. 9 and 10]
KEY:
S = Special Permit Required
P = Use Permitted
— = Prohibited Use
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
Principal Uses
Residential
1. One-family detached dwelling P P P P — S P P — — — — P P
2. Open space residential development (see
§ 305-11.04)
S S S S — — — — — — — — S —
3. Age-restricted adult village (see § 305-11.08) S S S S — — — — — — — S S —
4. Small-scale ground-mounted wind energy
conversion facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
5. Building-mounted wind energy conversion
facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
6. Mixed-use building (see § 305-13.05, Brant
Rock Village Overlay District)
— — — — — — — — — — — — — S
7. Dwelling, mixed-use — — — — — — — — — — — S — —
305 Attachment 1:1 Supp 6, Apr 2021
MARSHFIELD CODE
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
Community Facilities
1. Church or other religious purposes P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
2. Educational purposes which are religious
sectarian, denomination or public
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
3. Nursery school P P P P — — — — — — — S S —
4. Public park, conservation area and preserved
open spaces including areas for passive
recreation, but not including active
recreational facilities
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
5. Nonprofit recreational facility, not including a
membership club
S S S S S — S S — — S S S S
6. Country, hunting, fishing, tennis, or boating
club
S S S S — — S S — S S S S S
7. Day camp or other camp for children S S S S — — — — — — — P — —
8. Town building except public works
equipment garage
P P P P P P P P — P P P S P
9. Cemetery S S S — — — — — — — — S — —
10. Public libraries, museums, historical
association or society, nonprofit cultural
institutions
P P P P P P P P P — — P S P
11. Hospital, sanitarium or philanthropic
institutions
S S S — — — — — — — — S — —
12. Nursing, rest or convalescent home not to
exceed 24 beds per acre
S S S S — S — — — — — S — —
13. Town equipment garage — S — S — P — — — P P P — —
14. Public utility including water filter plant,
sewage treatment facility and refuse facility
S S S S S S S S — S S S S S
15. Essential services P P P P P P P P P P P S S P
305 Attachment 1:2 Supp 6, Apr 2021
ZONING
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
16. Golf course or facility S S S — — — S S — — S S — S
17. Indoor athletic facilities including indoor
skating rinks
— — — — S S S — — S — S S —
18. Municipal utility-scale wind energy
conversion facility
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
19. Municipal building-mounted wind energy
conversion facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
20. Municipal small-scale ground-mounted wind
energy conversion facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
21. Medical marijuana facility (see § 305-12.05)*
only in the WRPD within the I-1 District
excluding the PMUD
— — — — — — — — — S — — S —
22. Recreational marijuana facility (see
§ 305-12.06)* only in the WRPD within the I-1
District excluding the PMUD
— — — — — — — — — S — — S —
23. Combined medical and recreational marijuana
facility (shall meet the requirements of both
§§ 305-12.05 and 305-12.06)* only in the WRPD
withing the I-1 District excluding the PMUD
— — — — — — — — — S — — S —
Agricultural
1. Agriculture, horticulture, and floriculture,
including marine agriculture and the catching
and taking of marine flora and fauna and the
seeding of catchment areas, except a
greenhouse or stand for retail sale
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
2. Year-round greenhouse or stand for wholesale
and retail sale of agricultural or farm products
raised primarily on the same premises
S S S P S — P — P P S P S(1) —
305 Attachment 1:3 Supp 6, Apr 2021
MARSHFIELD CODE
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
3. Temporary (not to exceed erection or use for
period exceeding 5 months in any 1 year)
greenhouse or stand for retail sale of
agricultural or farm products raised primarily
on the same premises
P P S P — — S — P P S P S(1) —
4. Raising and keeping of livestock, horses and
poultry, not including the raising of swine or
fur animals for commercial use
P P P S — — — — — — — — S(1) —
5. Commercial stables, kennels or veterinary
hospital in which all animals, fowl or other
forms of animal life are completely enclosed
in pens or other structures
S — — S S S — — S — — — S(1) —
6. Noncommercial forestry and growing of all
vegetation
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
7. Commercial forestry S S — — — — — — — S S S S(1) —
8. Year-round greenhouse or stand for wholesale
and retail sale of agricultural or farm products
— — — P — P — — — — — P —(1) —
(1) Applies only to lots under 5 acres in size.
Retail and Service
1. Retail establishment selling principally
convenience goods, including but not limited
to: food, drugs and proprietary goods (but not
including the sale of gasoline)
a. With a maximum floor area limitation of
8,000 square feet for any single
establishment
— — — — P S P P — — — S S P
b. With no limitation with respect to floor
area
— — — — S — — — — — — S S —
305 Attachment 1:4 Supp 6, Apr 2021
ZONING
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
2. Retail establishment selling general
merchandise, including but not limited to dry
goods, apparel and accessories, furniture and
home furnishings, home equipment, small
wares, and hardware and including discount
and limited price variety stores
a. With a maximum floor area limitation of
8,000 square feet for any single
establishment
— — — — P S S S — — — S S S
b. With no limitation with respect to floor
area
— — — — S — — — — — — — — —
3. Eating and drinking places not including
drive-in establishments
— — — S P P P P — — — S S P
4. Drive-in eating establishments — — — — S S — S — — — S S S
5. Sales by vending machines as a principal use — — — — P P — S — — — — P S
6. Establishment selling new or new and used
automobiles and trucks, new automobile tires
and other accessories, aircraft, motorcycles
and household trailers
— — — S — P — — — — — — — —
7. Establishment selling boats and boat
accessories
— — — — — P P P — — — — — P
8. Establishments selling or renting aircraft and
aircraft accessories or repairing aircraft
— — — — — S — — — — P — — —
9. Hotels and motels — — — S — S — — — S S S S —
10. Bank — — — P P P P P — — — S S P
11. Other personal and consumer service
establishment
— — — P P P P P — — — S S P
12. Funeral establishment — — — P P P — — P — — — S —
13. Membership club S S S P P P — P — — S S S P
305 Attachment 1:5 Supp 6, Apr 2021
MARSHFIELD CODE
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
14. Professional and business offices and services
a. With a maximum floor area limitation of
8,000 square feet for any single
establishment
— — — P P P S S P P P S S S
b. With no limitation with respect to floor
area
— — — — S S S — S S S S S —
15. Governmental offices and post offices — — — S P S S S S S P — S S
16. Gasoline sales, automotive repair, automobile
service station or garage (not including a
junkyard or open storage of abandoned
automobiles or other vehicles), and including
the sale of convenience goods, including but
not limited to food, drugs and proprietary
goods
— — — S — S S — — — — — — —
17. Boat marina or boat yard — — S — — — — P — — — — — P
18. Miscellaneous business repair — — — S P S — — — S — S S —
19. Motion-picture establishment outdoor — — — — — S — — — — — — S —
20. Motion-picture establishment indoor — — — — S S — S — — — S S S
21. Other amusement and recreation service,
outdoor, except amusement parks
— — — — — S — S — — — S S S
22. Other amusement and recreation service,
indoor, except coin-operated amusement
devices
— — — — S S — S — — — S S S
23a.Communications tower containing wireless
communications facilities (in compliance with
height requirements of § 305-6.02) (see
§ 305-11.12)
S S S S S P P P P P P S P P
23b.Other communications tower containing
wireless communications facilities (see § 305-
11.12)
S S — — — S — — — S S S — —
305 Attachment 1:6 Supp 6, Apr 2021
ZONING
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
24. Commercial parking lot (see Article VIII) — — S S P S P S — S S S S S
25. Filling of land or water area (see § 305-11.03) S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
26. Planned business development (see § 305-
11.05)
— — — — S S S S — — S S S S
27. Construction of drainage facilities (other than
essential services or damming up or relocating
any watercourse, water body or wetland)
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
28. Residential business — — — P — — — — — — — — — —
29. Adult entertainment — — — — — — — — — S — — S(1) —
30. Contractor-artist rental bay facilities
(including: workshop/light processing/light
assembling/office and storage)
— — — — S S — — — P — S S —
Wholesale, Transportation and Industrial
1. Removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel, quarry or
other earth material Now General Bylaws Chapter 70
2. Processing and treating of raw materials
including operations appurtenant to the
taking, such as grading, drying, sorting,
crushing, grinding and milling operations (see
§ 305-11.02)
— — — S S S — — — S S — — —
3. Construction industry including suppliers — — — P S P — — — P — S S —
4. Manufacturing — — — — — — — — — S — S S —
5. Bakery, laundry — — — — S P — — — — — S S —
6. Motor freight terminal and warehousing — — — — — — — — — S — S — —
7. Bus passenger terminal — — — — P P — — — P — P — —
8. Heliport — — — — — — — — — S P S — —
9. Airport and airport facilities — — — — — — — — — — P — — —
10. Other transportation services — — — — S S S S — S S S — S
305 Attachment 1:7 Supp 6, Apr 2021
MARSHFIELD CODE
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
11. Wholesale trade and distribution — — — — — S — — — S — S S —
12. Open storage of raw materials, finished
goods, or construction equipment and
structures for storing such equipment
— — — P — P — — — S — S — —
13. Research offices or establishments devoted to
research and development activities limited to
Biosafety Levels 1 and 2
a. With a maximum floor area limitation of
8,000 square feet for any single
establishment
— — — — — P — — P P P S S —
b. With no limitation with respect to floor
area
— — — — — S — — S S S S S —
14. Planned industrial development (see § 305-
11.06)
— — — — — — — — — S S S S —
15. Dry-cleaning plant — — — — S P — — — S — S — —
16. Automobile graveyards and/or junkyards — — — — — — — — — — — — —
17. Utility-scale wind energy conversion facility S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
18. Building-mounted wind energy conversion
facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
19. Small-scale ground-mounted wind energy
conversion facilities
S S S S S S S S S S — S S S
20. Renewable or alternative energy research and
development facilities in buildings 50,000
square per feet or greater
— — — — — — — — — P* — P* — —
21. Large-scale ground-mounted photovoltaic
installations producing 250 KW DC or greater
— — — — — — — — — P* SP — —
22. Micro-brewery/processing — — — — S — — — — P — P S —
305 Attachment 1:8 Supp 6, Apr 2021
ZONING
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
23. Processing and recycling of wood materials
(including: saw mills, cutting, shredding,
grinding, drying, sorting and storage with
accessory sales and rental of equipment)
— — — — S S — — — P — S S —
Accessory Uses
1. Home occupation (see § 305-11.07) S S S P P P P P — — — — S P
2. Private day nursery or kindergarten, provided
it shall not occupy more than 40% of the
gross floor area of the structure and there shall
be a minimum of 75 square feet of outside
play area for each enrolled child
P P P P — — — — — — — — P —
3. Accessory professional office of a licensed
medical or dental practitioner, lawyer,
engineer, optometrist or public accountant in
an existing dwelling
S S S P P P P P P — — — S P
4. Accessory building such as a greenhouse,
toolshed, private swimming pool, or similar
accessory structure, subject to provisions of
Article VI
P P P P P P P P — S P S P P
5. Accessory private garage for not more than 3
noncommercial motor vehicles, and, except
on a farm, not more than 1/2 ton rated or less
in size commercial motor vehicle
P P P P P P — P — — — — P P
305 Attachment 1:9 Supp 6, Apr 2021
MARSHFIELD CODE
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
6. Accessory storage of a trailer, unregistered
automobile, boat or accessory marine
agriculture equipment provided it shall either
be stored within a principal or accessory
building or not less than 25 feet from any
front lot line and 10 feet from any side lot line
and it shall not be used for dwelling or
sleeping purposes; maximum number: 2
trailers and autos and boats
P P P P P P — P — — — — P P
7. Accessory repair and storage facilities in any
retail sales or consumer established provided
it shall not occupy more than 25% of the
gross floor area
— — — P P — P P — — — — S P
8. Accessory outside storage clearly necessary to
the operation and conduct of a permitted
principal wholesale, transportation, industrial
and/or commercial use
— — — S S S S S — P P P S S
9. Accessory manufacturing use provided it shall
not occupy more than 25% of the gross floor
area of the building and it shall not be located
within 100 feet of any R District or within 50
feet of any street lot line
— — — P S P — — — P P P S —
10. Accessory building to a nonresidential
principal use occupied by a person employed
on the premises and his immediate family,
unless such structure is located in the rear of
the principal building and has no immediate
street frontage
— — — S P S P S — S S S P S
305 Attachment 1:10 Supp 6, Apr 2021
ZONING
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
11. Newsstand, barbershop, dining room or
cafeteria and similar accessory services only
for occupants or users thereof within a hotel,
office or industrial building, hospital
containing more than 50 sleeping rooms, or
transportation terminal facility
P P P P P P P P S P P S P P
12. Up to 2 lodging units in an existing dwelling P P P P S S S P — — — — P P
13. Accessory signs subject to the provisions of
Article VII
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
14. Accessory off-street parking and loading
spaces as required in Article VIII
P P P P P P P P P P P P S P
15. Licensed day-care centers P P P P P P P P P P P P S P
16. Trailers: To be used as a temporary office in
connection with a construction project
provided that the use is authorized by the
Board of Selectmen and further provided that
the trailer is not used for family habitation;
trailers to be parked and occupied for a period
of not more than 6 months by the owner of the
premises provided that the use is authorized
by the Board of Selectmen and further
provided that such owner is in the process of
constructing or reconstructing a house thereon
for his own occupancy and further provided
that there are suitable facilities for running
water and sanitary sewage disposal as
approved by the Board of Health and further
provided that not more than 1 6-month
extension is granted; trailers to be parked and
occupied for family use for a period of not
more than 10 days provided that the use is
authorized by the Board of Selectmen and
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
305 Attachment 1:11 Supp 6, Apr 2021
MARSHFIELD CODE
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
further provided that there are suitable
facilities for running water and sanitary
sewage as approved by the Board of Health;
for the purpose of this bylaw, a trailer shall be
defined to be any trailer-type body, whether
mobile or immobile
17. Agricultural: raising and keeping of livestock,
horses and poultry, not including the raising
of swine or fur-bearing animals for
commercial use
P P P P — — — — — — — — P —
18. Accessory noncommercial kennel upon any
lot occupied by an owner or tenant as a
dwelling house provided that all dogs kept on
such lot must be owned by the occupant
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
19. Accessory apartment (see § 305-11.09) S S S — S S — — — — — S P —
20. Accessory commercial parking lot to be
operated only during the time events are being
conducted on the property of the Marshfield
Fairgrounds, such parking lot to be used
solely for the purpose of providing parking
for persons attending the Marshfield Fair or
events on the Marshfield Fairgrounds
P P P P P P P — — — — P
21. Accessory barn: accessory barn for
noncommercial use for agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, and related storage
purposes
P S S — — — — — — — — — S —
22. Accessory communications tower to a
nonresidential use (in compliance with height
requirements of § 305-6.02) (see § 305-11.12)
S S S S S P P P P P P P P P
305 Attachment 1:12 Supp 6, Apr 2021
ZONING
Uses
Residential Business Industrial Overlay
R-1 R-2 R-3 RB B-1 B-2 B-3 B-4 OP I-1 A PMUD WRPD BRVO
23. Accessory communications tower to a
nonresidential use (not in compliance with
height requirements of § 305-6.02) (see
§ 305-11.12)
S S S — S — — — — S S — — —
24. Wireless communication facility (placed on
existing tower complying with § 305-6.02)
S S S S S P P P P P P S P P
25. Wireless communications facility (located on
a tower not in compliance with § 305-6.02 or
other nonresidential structure)
S S S S S S S S S S S S S S
26. Automatic teller machines, excluding drivethrough facilities
— — — — P P P P — — — P — P
27. Accessory photovoltaic installations over
parking lots
S S — — P P P P P P P P S S
NOTES:
* = Expedited permitting: The by-right site plan approval process administered by Board of Appeals for renewable or alternative energy research and
development facilities in buildings 50,000 square feet or greater shall be completed within one year of the date of submission of a complete application
package. All other locally required permits for renewable or alternative energy research and development facilities in buildings 50,000 square feet or
greater shall also be issued within one year of the date of submission of a complete application package.
305 Attachment 1:13 Supp 6, Apr 2021