Town of Needham
Massachusetts
General By-Laws
Charter
(Acts of 1971, C. 403 as amended by the
Act of the General Court.)
July 2019 Compilation
TOWN OF NEEDHAM
GENERAL BY-LAWS
ARTICLE 1 TOWN MEETING . . . . . . . 1
Section 1.1 Dates of Meeting . . . . . . . . . 1
Section 1.2 Notification . . . . . . . . . 1
Section 1.3 Votes (Roll Call) . . . . . . . . . 1
Section 1.4 Specific Requests By Moderator . . . . . . . 1
Section 1.5 Motions By Speakers . . . . . . . . 2
Section 1.6 Division of Motion . . . . . . . . 2
Section 1.7 Attorneys As Speakers . . . . . . . . 2
Section 1.8 Appropriations – Information Relative to Ballot Questions . . . . 2
Section 1.9 Election of Officers . . . . . . . . 2
Section 1.10 Finance Committee . . . . . . . . 3
Section 1.11 Personnel Board . . . . . . . . . 3
Section 1.12 Approval of Employee Contracts . . . . . . . 4
Section 1.13 Special Committees . . . . . . . . 4
Section 1.14 Town Meeting Warrants . . . . . . . . 4
ARTICLE 2 TOWN ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION . . . 5
Section 2.1 General . . . . . . . . . . 5
Section 2.2 Administration . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2.1 Operating Budget . . . . . . . . 6
2.2.2 Capital Improvement Budget . . . . . . 6
2.2.3 Town Counsel . . . . . . . . 7
2.2.4 Town Treasurer and Tax Collector. . . . . . . 7
2.2.5 Public Works Department . . . . . . . 8
2.2.5.1 Highways . . . . . . . 8
2.2.5.2 Sewers. . . . . . . . . 10
2.2.5.3 Miscellaneous . . . . . . . 10
2.2.5.4 Trench Safety . . . . . . . 10
2.2.5.5 Municipal Water Supply . . . . . . 10
2.2.5.6 Private Ways . . . . . . . 11 2.2.6 Information Technology. . . . . . . . 11
2.2.7 Departmental Revolving Funds . . . . . . 13
Section 2.3 Planning Board . . . . . . . . . 16
Section 2.4 Board of Appeals . . . . . . . . . 16
Section 2.5 Board of Health . . . . . . . . . 17
Section 2.6 Public Facilities . . . . . . . . . 17
2.6.1 Building Design and Construction Department . . . . 17
2.6.2 Permanent Public Building Committee . . . . . 17
Section 2.7 Special Committees And Commissions . . . . . . 20
2.7.1 Transportation Committee . . . . . . . 20
2.7.2 Future School Needs Committee . . . . . . 20
2.7.3 Community Preservation Committee . . . . . 21
Section 2.8 Public Library . . . . . . . . . 22
Section 2.9 Council On Aging . . . . . . . . 23
Section 2.10 Youth Commission . . . . . . . . 23
Section 2.11 Historical Commission . . . . . . . . 23
2.11.5 Demolition of Historical Buildings . . . . . . 24
ARTICLE 3 POLICE POWERS, AUTHORITY AND REGULATIONS . . . 26
Section 3.1 General . . . . . . . . . . 26
Section 3.2 Sale Of Food . . . . . . . . . 28
Section 3.3 Penalties For Improper Use Of Burglar Alarms . . . . . 28
Section 3.4 Handicapped Parking . . . . . . . . 29
Section 3.5 Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled Or Discarded Vehicles . . . . 30
Section 3.6 Fire Prevention . . . . . . . . . 31
3.6.1 Fire Lanes, and Vehicles Obstructing the Passage of Fire Apparatus . . 31
3.6.2 Penalties for Improper Use of Fire Alarms . . . . . 32
Section 3.7 Dog Regulations . . . . . . . . . 33
Section 3.8 Noise Regulations . . . . . . . 34
Section 3.9 Public Nuisance Regulation . . . . . . . 34
ARTICLE 4 LICENSES AND PERMITS . . . . . . 35
Section 4.1 Dog Licenses . . . . . . . . . 35
Section 4.2 Public Carriages and Taxis . . . . . . . 36
Section 4.3 Fees, Registration Applicable to Flammables . . . . . . 36
Section 4.4 General . . . . . . . . . . 37
4.4.1 Denial, Revocation or Suspension for Failure to Pay Municipal Taxes . . 37
ARTICLE 5 SIGN BY-LAW . . . . . . . . 38
Section 5.1 Authority and Objectives . . . . . . . . 38
Section 5.2 Definitions . . . . . . . . . 38
Section 5.3 Administration . . . . . . . . . 39
Section 5.4 General Regulations . . . . . . . . 41
Section 5.5 Permitted Signs . . . . . . . . . 42
Section 5.6 Violations . . . . . . . . . 45
ARTICLE 6 GENERAL WETLANDS PROTECTION . . . . . 45
Section 6.1 Purpose . . . . . . . . . . 45
Section 6.2 Jurisdiction . . . . . . . . . 45
Section 6.3 Exceptions . . . . . . . . . 45
Section 6.4 Application For Permits And Requests For Determination . . . . 46
Section 6.5 Notice Of Hearings . . . . . . . . 46
Section 6.6 Coordination With Other Boards . . . . . . . 47
Section 6.7 Permits, Determination And Conditions . . . . . . 47
Section 6.8 Regulations . . . . . . . . . 47
Section 6.9 Definitions . . . . . . . . . 47
Section 6.10 Security . . . . . . . . . . 48
Section 6.11 Enforcement . . . . . . . . . 49
Section 6.12 Burden Of Proof . . . . . . . . . 49
Section 6.13 Appeals . . . . . . . . . . 49
Section 6.14 Relation To The Wetlands Protection Act . . . . . . 49
Section 6.15 Effective Date . . . . . . . . . 49
ARTICLE 7 RESERVED . . . . . . . . 49
ARTICLE 8 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT OF TOWN BY-LAWS RULES
AND REGULATIONS . . . . . . . 49
Section 8.1 Penalties . . . . . . . . 50
Section 8.2 Enforcement . . . . . . . . 50
8.2.1 Criminal Complaint . . . . . 50
8.2.2 Non-Criminal Disposition . . . . . 50
8.2.2.1 Zoning By-Law . . . . . . 50
8.2.2.2 Sign By-Law . . . . . . 50
8.2.2.3 Demolition of Historical Buildings . . . . 50
8.2.2.4 Police Regulations . . . . . 50
8.2.2.5 Conservation Commission Regulations . . . 53
8.2.2.6 Fire Department Licenses And Permits . . . 53
8.2.2.7 Board Of Health Regulations . . . . 53
8.2.2.8 Board Of Selectmen Regulations . . . . 53
ARTICLE 9 LEGAL CONSTRUCTION OF GENERAL BY-LAW PROVISIONS . 54
Section 9.1 Definitions . . . . . . . . 54
Section 9.2 Effect Of General Law Amendments . . . . . 54
Section 9.3 Construction of Other Words And Phrases . . . . . 55
Section 9.4 Severability Clause . . . . . . . 55
1
ARTICLE 1
TOWN MEETING
SECTION 1.1 DATES OF MEETING
1.1.1 Annual Town Meeting for the election of officers and such other matters as may be voted on the official ballot shall be held on the second Tuesday in April of each year; and the Annual Town Meeting for the transacting of business shall be held on the first Monday in May of each year. If the business is not completed that day, an adjournment shall be taken to the next following Wednesday. If any business shall then remain unfinished, adjournment shall be taken to the next following Monday, with successive adjournments to the next following Wednesdays and Mondays until all business is completed, unless otherwise voted at one of the scheduled meetings.
1.1.2 If for any reason a State Primary or State Election should occur within 30 days before or immediately following the date established for the Annual Town Meeting, the Select Board, after consultation with the Town Clerk, may by proclamation postpone and schedule another day in the month of April for the Annual Town Election.
SECTION 1.2 NOTIFICATION
1.2.1 All Town Meetings shall be notified and warned by posting attested copies of the Warrant calling for the Town Meeting in not less than twenty public places in the Town at least seven days before the time of holding the Annual Town Meeting and at least fourteen days before any Special Town Meeting.
1.2.2 The Town Clerk shall cause to be delivered or mailed to each Town Meeting Member, at least seven days in advance, a copy of the Warrant for the Annual Town Meeting, held for the purpose of the transacting of business.
1.2.3 The Town Clerk shall cause to be delivered or mailed to each Town Meeting Member, at least fourteen days in advance, a copy of the Warrant for each Special Town Meeting.
1.2.5 The Town Clerk shall make available to any resident, upon request, a copy of the Warrant for each Town Meeting, and shall post a copy of each warrant on the official Town of Needham website.
1.2.6 The Town Clerk shall cause the titles and a synopsis of all Town Meeting Articles to be printed in a local newspaper.
SECTION 1.3 VOTES
1.3.1 If two-thirds vote of the Town Meeting is required by statute, a count shall not be taken unless it is deemed necessary by the Moderator in the fulfillment of the duties of the office.
1.3.2 A vote of the Town Meeting shall be taken by a roll call of the yeas and nays: (a) whenever requested by twenty-five of the Town Meeting members present, immediately following a voice vote, standing vote or vote by show of hands; (b) whenever such a roll call on the pending question is ordered by affirmative vote of a majority of the Town Meeting Members present and voting; or (c) whenever such a roll call is deemed necessary by the Moderator in the fulfillment of the duties of his office.
1.3.3 A motion to reconsider a warrant article in the warrant of a Town Meeting convened under such warrant may be adopted by a simple affirmative majority vote of said Town Meeting. A warrant article aforesaid which has once been reconsidered may not again be reconsidered, unless such further reconsideration is moved on behalf of the Select Board or Finance Committee and is adopted by a simple majority of Town Meeting.
SECTION 1.4 SPECIFIC REQUESTS BY MODERATOR
2
The Moderator may direct to any person in the hall a specific request by a Town Meeting Member for information pertaining to the question under consideration.
SECTION 1.5 MOTIONS BY SPEAKERS
Any speaker who addresses the merits of a matter shall not be permitted to place on the floor, immediately following the speaker's remarks, a motion to move the previous question or a motion to limit debate.
SECTION 1.6 DIVISION OF MOTION
If a motion under an article of the Town Warrant is susceptible of division, it shall be divided upon the request of twenty voters; and the questions shall be put separately on each part.
SECTION 1.7 ATTORNEYS AS SPEAKERS
Any person employed as an attorney by another interested in any matter under discussion at a Town Meeting shall disclose the fact of his employment before speaking.
SECTION 1.8 APPROPRIATIONS - INFORMATION RELATIVE TO BALLOT QUESTIONS
The Town Meeting may appropriate and authorize the expenditure of town funds for the purpose of providing the voters of the town with factual information relative to measures to be voted upon at elections in the town. Measures, as used in this section, shall both mean measures submitted to the voters for acceptance or rejection under the Town Charter, as amended, or any other law, but shall not include a new or revised charter or charter amendment proposed by a Charter Commission, or a measure requiring discussion in the Information for Voters published by the Secretary of the Commonwealth, or any measure placed upon the ballot by a state general law not relating to the organization, powers, duties, obligations and finances of the Town.
SECTION 1.9 ELECTION OF OFFICERS
1.9.1 The Town, at its annual town election of officers, shall in every year when the term of office of any incumbent expires, and except as otherwise provided by law, choose by ballot from its registered voters the following town officers for the following terms of office:
(a) Five Select Board Members for a term of three years.
(b) Seven members of the School Committee for a term of three years.
(c) A Moderator for a term of three years.
(d) A Town Clerk for a term of three years.
(e) Five members of the Park & Recreation Commission for a term of three years.
(f) Two Constables for a term of three years.
(g) Three Assessors for a term of three years.
(h) Three Commissioners of Trust Funds for a term of three years.
(i) Seven Trustees of the Needham Public Library for a term of three years.
(j) Five Trustees of Memorial Park for a term of three years.
3
(k) Five members of the Board of Health for a term of three years.
(l) Five members of the Planning Board for five year terms, so arranged that the term of not more than one member shall expire each year.
(m) Four members of the Needham Housing Authority for five year terms, so arranged that the term of not more than one member shall expire each year.
1.9.2 In all cases, except for the Planning Board and Housing Authority, where three or more members of a board or commission are to be elected for terms of more than one year, as nearly 1/3 as possible, shall be elected annually.
SECTION 1.10 FINANCE COMMITTEE
1.10.1 There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of nine registered voters, none of whom shall be Town officers, agents or employees (other than Town Meeting Members). The Moderator shall annually appoint three members to serve for three years. Said committee shall choose its own chairman and secretary. Vacancies on said committee may be filled at any time by the Moderator.
1.10.2 The Committee shall have access to all facts, figures, records and other information relating to all Town departments, boards, committees or officers; and when requested by the Committee, such information shall be furnished immediately by whomever it is requested, including the Town Manager and/or any department, board, committee, officer or employee. If not directly requested of the Town Manager, the Committee shall inform the Town Manager or the School Superintendent and/or their designees of such requests. The Town Manager shall report to the Finance Committee whenever the expenditures of any department are exceeding or are likely to exceed its appropriations.
1.10.3 The Finance Committee shall consider all matters of business included within the articles of any warrant for a Town Meeting, and shall, after due consideration, report thereon its recommendations as to each article that it finds to have a financial implication. The Committee shall report in print or otherwise to all Town Meetings. For the information of voters, the report of the Finance Committee to the Annual Town Meeting shall be printed, together with the motion substantially in the form to be proposed in connection with each article, in the warrant of said meeting. The Finance Committee’s recommendation on the operating budget shall be the Main Motion to be acted on by Town Meeting. In its motion, or motions, the Finance Committee shall divide the proposed appropriation for each department into a sufficient number of items to separate the major classifications of expenditures. The Finance Committee shall transmit to the Town Manager its initial draft proposed budget on or about the 22nd day of February, and its final proposed budget for publication in the Warrant by no later than the 15th day of March.
SECTION 1.11 PERSONNEL BOARD
1.11.1 The Town Moderator shall appoint the Personnel Board, consisting of five (5) persons for three (3) year overlapping terms. At least two members of the Personnel Board shall be qualified by reason of their experience as human resources executives. Any registered voter of the Town may be appointed to the Personnel Board, provided however, that no Town employee or Town elected official (other than a Town Meeting Member) shall be appointed.
1.11.2 The Personnel Board may retain such clerical and other assistance, and make such expenditures, as it deems necessary to the performance of its duties.
1.11.3 The Personnel Board shall advise the executive branch on strategic human resources and collective bargaining matters. The Personnel Board shall report to the Select Board and/or Town Meeting, as it deems appropriate as to the status of human resource administration in the Town. The Town Manager shall consult with the Personnel Board prior to appointing an assistant town manager/personnel director, or person performing said function regardless of title, in accordance with Section 20(d) of the Town Charter.
1.11.4 If an Article is inserted in the warrant for an Annual or Special Town Meeting with respect to the human resource system of the Town, a copy of such article shall be furnished to the Personnel Board by the Town Manager. The Personnel Board shall report its recommendation to Town Meeting with respect to such article.
4
1.11.5 The Personnel Board will consult with the Town Manager, the Select Board and the Finance Committee on a motion to propose appropriations to fund the cost items of collective bargaining agreements. The Personnel Board shall review such agreements and report its recommendations to Town Meeting. The Town Manager shall keep the Personnel Board informed as to the status of collective bargaining and the Personnel Board shall make recommendations to the Town Manager and Select Board, as it deems appropriate.
1.11.6 At the request of the Personnel Board, the Town Manager shall provide access to all facts, figures, records and other information pertaining to Town departments and positions to the extent that the release of such records is not inconsistent with privacy and confidentiality laws.
1.11.7 The Town Manager shall provide such advice, assistance and information to the Personnel Board as it may require for the discharge of its functions.
SECTION 1.12 APPROVAL OF EMPLOYEE CONTRACTS
1.12.1 When a collective bargaining agreement has been signed by the Town Manager and approved by the Select Board with any organization of Town employees under said Chapter 150E, the Town Manager shall provide to the Personnel Board and to the Finance Committee (1) a copy of said agreement, (2) a copy of the motion to be presented to the Town Meeting proposing an appropriation or appropriations to fund the cost items of said agreement (as defined in said Chapter 150E), and (3) any explanatory or other information relevant to said agreement which said Board or Committee may request. Said Board and said Committee shall report their respective recommendations to the Town Meeting as to whether or not the motion to appropriate for the funding of cost items in the collective bargaining agreement ought to be adopted.
1.12.2 The motion to be presented to the Town Meeting shall identify clearly the collective bargaining agreement to be funded and the amount or amounts to be appropriated in such a way that Town Meeting members will know what agreement is to be funded, how it is to be funded, and what is the grand total of the cost items to be funded in relation to said agreement. Prior to consideration by the Town Meeting of any motion to fund the cost items of a collective bargaining agreement, the employer shall provide Town Meeting members with a fair and concise summary of said agreements and information as to the amount of the appropriation or appropriations being requested to fund the same.
1.12.3 A motion to fund the cost items of a collective bargaining agreement, once introduced upon the floor of Town Meeting, shall be amendable only upon a motion to amend offered by or on behalf of the Select Board or the Finance Committee for the purpose of correcting an error. No other motion to amend shall be admissible. The motion to fund, so corrected if necessary, shall be voted or rejected by the Town Meeting. No motion in relation to collective bargaining agreement will be admissible which the Moderator, after consultation with Town Counsel, determines to be in contravention of M.G.L. Chapter 150E.
SECTION 1.13 SPECIAL COMMITTEES
1.13.1 Special committees established or continued by vote at an annual or special town meeting, and instructed to report to a subsequent annual town meeting, shall file their reports in writing with the Select Board not later than the first Monday of February preceding the Annual Town Meeting which they report, and said reports shall be printed and included as appendices to the report of the Finance Committee to the Town at the Annual Town Meeting.
1.13.2 The chairman of each temporary study committee established by the town meeting shall, upon the termination of the existence and the work of his committee, deposit with the Town Librarian the working papers and other material gathered or compiled by the committee in the course of its work. Subject to the approval of the Town Clerk and the requirements of M.G.L. Chapter 66, the Town Librarian may destroy that portion of the working papers and material having no substantial value, with the balance being deposited in the public administration collection.
SECTION 1.14 TOWN MEETING WARRANTS
The last date on which the Select Board shall receive articles, by petition or otherwise, for inclusion in the warrant for the next Annual Town Meeting shall be the first Monday in February. The Select Board are not prohibited from
5
inserting in the warrant for said Annual Town Meeting, after that date, articles which, in the Board's opinion, are of such importance to the welfare of the Town as to make their consideration at such meeting necessary or desirable.
ARTICLE 2
TOWN ADMINISTRATION AND ORGANIZATION
SECTION 2.1 GENERAL
2.1.1 Salaries. No elected Town officer shall hold a salaried position under a board of which such officer is a member. No contract for materials or property of any kind shall be made on behalf of the Town by any such board with any of its members.
2.1.2 Payment Over of Fees. On and after January 1, 1946, all Town officers, except constables, shall pay all fees received by them by virtue of their office, into the Town treasury.
2.1.3 Contract Procedures. The Town and all of its departments excluding the Board of Health, shall comply with the procurement procedures of General Laws Chapter 30B, as it may from time to time be amended. The Board of Health shall follow the procurement procedures of General Laws Chapter 30B with respect to the purchase and disposal of supplies and interests in real estate. The term "supplies" as used herein has the same meaning as defined in Section 2 of said Chapter 30B. No contract for an amount over $50,000 entered into by the Town shall be effective until it shall have been approved as to form by the Town Counsel. The Town Manager will notify the Select Board in writing when approving a contract in excess of $1,000,000.
Unless otherwise prohibited by law, the Town is authorized to solicit, award and enter into contracts for periods up to three years, including any renewal, extension or option provision, subject to annual appropriation. The Town is authorized to solicit, award and enter into certain types of contracts for periods exceeding three years but not to exceed the time period specified as follows, including any renewal, extension or option provisions:
YEARS
Appraisal Services for Revaluation . . . . . 5
Environmental studies and consultants . . . . 10
Hospital Service Agreements . . . . . 5
Incineration, composting garbage, recycling . . . . 20
Lease by the Town of private land or buildings . . . 10
Lease of any equipment . . . . . . 10
Lease of land from a public agency or authority for recreational purposes 99
Lease of Public Lands and buildings . . . . . 10
Lease of Public Lands and/or buildings for the installation of
solar photovoltaic facilities for electric generation . . . 30
Lease of Public Lands for historical and educational
purposes to a non-profit or charitable organization . . . 30
Lease of Public Lands for recreational purposes to a
Non-profit or charitable organization . . . . 20
Lease purchase of any equipment . . . . . 10
Lighting . . . . . . . . 10
Maintenance agreements for equipment, buildings or grounds . 5
Online Subscription Services . . . . . 10
Physicians Contracts . . . . . . 5
Purchase of oil and fuel . . . . . . 5
Purchase of power (or net metering credits) from solar photovoltaic
facilities installed on land leased or licensed from the Town . . 20
School transportation . . . . . . 5
Sewer and disposal contracts . . . . . 30
6
Software License and/or Maintenance Agreements . . . 10
Telecommunication Services . . . . . 5
Water studies . . . . . . . 10
Water supply . . . . . . . 20
Water supply construction . . . . . . 20.
2.1.4. Vacancies in Certain Appointive Offices.
2.1.4.1 Definitions
For the purposes of this Section 2.1.4 the following words shall have the following meanings:
a) appointive committee: A committee, commission or board of the town composed of members appointed by one or more appointing authorities and created by:
i) town by-law
ii) vote of Town Meeting
iii) vote of a committee, commission or board of the town, or
iv) interdepartmental agreement
b) Excessive absences: The failure to attend three or more consecutive meetings of the appointive committee.
c) Medical incapacity: The determination of a duly licensed medical doctor that the person is incapable of performing the duties of the office because of a lack of physical or mental capacity.
2.1.4.2 The appointing authority may remove and replace any person it has appointed to an appointive committee prior to the end of his or her term for excessive absences from committee meetings or because of medical incapacity, but only upon the written request of a majority of the remaining members of the appointive committee.
2.1.4.3 Before removing and replacing its appointee under Section 2.1.4 of these By-Laws, the appointing authority shall notify in writing the appointee of the appointing authority’s intent to remove him or her and its reasons therefor. Upon the written request of the appointee, the appointing authority shall hold a hearing under the provisions of the Open Meeting Law, G.L. Chapter 39, Section 23B prior to taking final action on the removal.
SECTION 2.2 ADMINISTRATION
2.2.1 Operating Budget. The Town Manager shall issue budget guidelines and instructions for all Town departments to submit their spending requests for the ensuing fiscal year. The Town Manager shall consult with the Finance Committee prior to the issuance of said guidelines and instructions. The Town Manager and/or his/her designee and the Finance Committee shall consult with each other throughout the Budget process. The Town Manager and School Superintendent will provide the Finance Committee with copies of their respective departmental spending requests on or before the 2nd Wednesday of December. Following receipt of these spending requests, the Finance Committee may begin its consideration of same, including the commencement of budget hearings. The Town Manager, after consultation with the Select Board and School Committee, shall not later than the 31st day of January, present to the Finance Committee a balanced budget recommendation in the form of an executive budget, which shall include the spending priorities of all Town departments for the ensuing fiscal year, including in addition thereto, the voted School Committee budget request if different than that contained in the proposed balanced budget. The Town Manager’s executive budget recommendation shall not be binding on the Finance Committee. Said executive budget recommendation shall include the estimates of Town revenues and proposed expenditures of all Town departments, including debt service and other amounts required to be raised for the ensuing fiscal year. The Town Manager may amend or otherwise revise revenue estimates as may be warranted. All such revisions shall be provided in writing to the Select Board, School Committee and Finance Committee.
2.2.2 Capital Improvement Budget
7
2.2.2.1 All boards, departments, committees, commissions and officers of the town shall annually, at the request of the Town Manager, submit to him or her in writing a detailed estimate of the capital expenditures required for the efficient and proper conduct of their respective departments and offices for the ensuing fiscal year and the four year period following thereafter. The Town Manager, after consultation with the Select Board, shall submit in writing to the Select Board a careful, detailed estimate of the recommended capital expenditures for the aforesaid periods, showing specifically the amount necessary to be provided for each office, department and activity and a statement of the amounts required to meet the debt service requirements or other indebtedness of the Town. The Select Board shall transmit a copy of the capital budget to the Finance Committee along with the Select Board recommendations relative thereto. The Select Board shall transmit the capital budget to the Finance Committee no later than the first Tuesday after the first Monday in January.
2.2.2.2 A capital expenditure is defined as the acquisition, construction, renovation, betterment or improvement involving land, public buildings and facilities; water and sewer system laterals, mains, and appurtenances; and equipment or vehicles; provided the cost is $25,000 or more and the improvement will have a useful life of five years or more; or any planning, feasibility, engineering or design study in preparation for such capital expenditures.
2.2.2.3 The Capital Improvement Plan shall include: (a) a list of all capital improvements proposed to be undertaken during the next five years, together with supporting data; (b) cost estimates, methods of financing, and recommended time schedule; and (c) the estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining any facility to be constructed or acquired. The first year of the Capital Improvements Program shall constitute the proposed capital improvements budget for the coming fiscal year and the ensuing four years of the plan are
included for planning purposes.
2.2.3 Town Counsel
The Select Board shall appoint a Town Counsel, who shall act as attorney and counsel for the Town and the various officers and boards thereof, to institute and prosecute suits in the name of the Town, to defend suits brought against the Town, and to compromise and settle suits and claims, unless otherwise ordered by special vote of the Town. Town Counsel shall have the authority to engage the services of attorneys to assist in carrying out the duties of the office.
2.2.4 Town Treasurer and Tax Collector
2.2.4.1 Town Treasurer. The Town Treasurer shall prosecute proceedings under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 60 for the foreclosure of the right to redeem lands purchased, taken or held by the Town for the nonpayment of taxes.
2.2.4.2 The Town Treasurer shall have the custody, management and sale of all lands held by the Town under a tax collector's deed, or a taking of land for taxes after the title of the Town has become absolute by the foreclosure of the right of redemption according to law, or under a deed to the Town by the owner of the equity of redemption given in lieu of foreclosure proceedings. The Town Treasurer is authorized and empowered with the approval of the Select Board, in the name and on behalf of the Town, to sell such lands at public auction or pursuant to the procedures permitted by M.G.L. Chapter 30B, and to execute, acknowledge and deliver proper deeds for that purpose. Notice of any sale by auction shall be published in a newspaper published in the Town for three consecutive weeks, the first publication to be not less than twenty-one days before the sale.
2.2.4.3 The provisions of the Sub-section 2.2.42 shall not apply to land which the Town has authorized to be used for municipal purposes. Prior to sale of such land, any person legally entitled thereto shall be granted the right to redeem property acquired by the Town as aforesaid, notwithstanding the foreclosure of the right of redemption, upon the payment of the amount due the Town, including the interest and costs. This right to redeem must be exercised within two years of the date when the title of the town has become absolute, either by the foreclosure of the right of redemption according to law, or by a deed to the Town by the owner of the equity of redemption given in lieu of foreclosure proceedings.
2.2.4.4 Interest Charges - Past Due Bills. The due dates for the payment of all municipal charges and bills shall be 30 days after the charge or bill is issued by the Town, unless otherwise specified by a general law or special act of the Commonwealth. Interest accrues at the same rate as charged on tax bills under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 59, Section 57. The Select Board shall have the authority to abate any such interest charges, in whole or in part.
8
2.2.4.5 Municipal/Changes Lien. The Town, acting through its Select Board, shall impose a lien on real property located within the Town for any solid waste disposal fee or charge which has not been paid by its due date, in accordance with the provisions of MGL Chapter 40 Section 58.
2.2.4.6 Tax Collector. The Collector of Taxes shall collect, under the title of Town Collector, all accounts due the Town.
2.2.5 Public Works Department
2.2.5.1 Highways
2.2.5.1.1 Assignment of Street Numbers. All buildings on or near the line of public or private ways shall be assigned a number or numbers by the Select Board, who shall assign odd numbers for one side of a way and even numbers for the opposite side of such way. Said assigned numbers, shall not be less than 4 inches high with ½ inch stroke, shall be placed in a conspicuous place on said building or buildings by the owner or occupant within thirty days from the time that notice is given by the Board to the owner or occupant of the number or numbers assigned to said building or buildings. On any building constructed or renovated after July 1, 2002 that is located so that it is more than 100 feet from the line of a public or private way to the building, a post or suitable marker bearing the assigned street number or numbers that conforms to this by-law shall be installed and maintained within ten feet of the line of the way near the entrance to the property thereof. Street numbers in existence as of the effective date of the By-law are not required to be replaced by the owner or occupant unless notified by said Board.
The owner and occupant of each building in the Town to which a number has been thus assigned shall maintain said number on said building at all times in such a manner that the number will be clear and conspicuous and the view of said number is not obstructed. Whoever violates the provisions of this subsection 2.2.5.2.1 shall be subject to a fine of not exceeding twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense under the non-criminal process authorized by MGL Chapter 40, Section 21D. Each day on which the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
2.2.5.1.2 Acceptance of New Streets. In connection with specifications for new streets and ways through private property:
(a) A plan and profile of every such street or way shall be filed in the office of the Director of Public Works, who shall approve or establish the grade thereof.
(b) Every street or way shall be at least forty feet in width and have a road bed not less than twenty feet in width.
(c) All loam shall be removed from the road bed to a depth of twelve inches below finished grade and from the sidewalk to a depth of six inches, or such greater depth as may be required by the Director of Public Works.
(d) The entire area of every new street shall be first cleared of all stumps, brush, roots, and like material and all trees not intended for preservation.
(e) All excavation or embankment work shall be brought accurately to a subgrade of not less than eight inches for the roadway and four inches for the sidewalk below finished grade, or such greater depth as the nature of the subsoil, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, may require.
(f) All corners of intersecting streets or ways shall be rounded as approved by the Director of Public Works.
(g) The bottom of the excavation and the top of the fill when completed, hereinafter known as the subgrade, shall be true to the lines, grades and cross-sections given by the Director of Public Works. After all drains have been laid and the subgrade has been shaped correctly, it shall be brought to a firm, unyielding surface by rolling the entire area with an approved three (3) wheeled roller, weighing not less than ten (10) tons. Any portion of the subgrade which is not accessible to a roller shall be thoroughly tamped by hand. All soft and yielding material and other portions of the subgrade which will not compact readily when rolled or tamped shall be removed and replaced with suitable material. All rock or boulders found in the excavation shall be taken away or broken off to a depth of not less than six (6) inches below the surface of the subgrade. The bottom of the base course shall be spread with
9
dry, clean 1 1/4-inch to 2 1/2-inch stone over the bottom course, in such a quantity that after being rolled there will be a depth of not less than 2 1/2 inches and not more than 3 inches, and then shall be rolled until the stone does not creep under action of the roller. One and three-fourth gallons of tar or asphalt binder shall then be applied to each square yard of road surface. Dry, clean 3/4-inch stone shall be spread evenly over the surface, rolled thoroughly; and there shall then be applied to this surface 1/2 gallon of asphalt binder per square yard, which shall be covered with dry, clean pea stone and rolled until a smooth, unyielding surface results.
2.2.5.1.3 Petition for Acceptance of New Streets. All streets to be accepted by the Town must be petitioned for not later than six months prior to the start of the Town Meeting at which such petition is to be acted upon. No streets shall be accepted by the Town unless constructed in compliance with the foregoing specifications.
2.2.5.1.4 Street Occupancy Permit. Except as herein provided, a Street Occupancy Permit, issued by the Director of Public Works, in such form and content as said Director may require, must be obtained before undertaking any work, including, without limitation, construction, repair, maintenance or reconstruction work, in, within or affecting a public way. The person responsible for such work or in charge of those performing such work shall review such work with the Director of Public Works and the Police Chief, or their designees, to determine whether or not such work will result in the disruption of the normal flow of traffic or cause a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. If the Director of Public Works and the Police Chief, or their designees, determine that such work will result in the disruption of a normal flow of traffic, or will create a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the person responsible for such work, or in charge of those performing such work, shall follow the safety precautions ordered by the Director of Public Works and the Police Chief, or their designees, including but not limited to, the hiring of a Needham Police Officer, under the existing regulations governing privately paid police details, to direct traffic and minimize the vehicle safety hazards connected with such work.
No work shall be commenced in, within or affecting a public way until those persons responsible for such work comply with the requirements of Sub-section 2.2.5.1.4. The Town of Needham is exempt from the requirements of this sub-section. Whoever violates the provisions of Sub-section 2.2.5.1.4 shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) each day being a separate offense.
The Chief of Police or Director of Public Works, or their respective designees, are hereby authorized to stop any work on any way conducted in violation of any provision of this sub-section.
2.2.5.1.5 Removal of Snow and Ice. The Director of Public works may, for the purpose of removing or plowing snow, or removing ice from any way, remove, or cause, to be removed to some convenient place, including a public garage, any vehicle interfering with such work, and impose liability for the cost of such removal and of resulting storage charges, if any, upon the owner of such vehicle.
2.2.5.1.6 Street Intersections. At each intersection of public or private streets or ways in the Town, there shall be a clearance area consisting of the triangular area formed by the side lines of the intersecting streets or ways and a line joining each side line at a point twenty-five (25) feet distant from the point of intersection or, in case of rounded corners, from the point at which the side lines would intersect if projected. In case of uncertainty as to the point of intersection of such projected side line, the Town Engineer shall certify the clearance area drawn in accordance with the foregoing provisions. No fence or other structure, shrubbery, foliage, hedge, tree or the like which interferes with sight lines across such clearance area and thereby limits or obstructs the view of vehicular traffic entering such intersection shall be erected, planted, maintained or allow to exist, provided, however, that Sub-section 2.2.5.12.6 shall not apply to buildings in violation of the Town Zoning By-Law.
2.2.5.1.7 Construction and Maintenance of Overhead Poles
Any person, firm, corporation or partnership, or their agents and employees, granted any license, permission or other authority to construct or maintain poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures upon, along, under or across any public way or ways, is forbidden from installing or constructing, and shall remove immediately, any poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures which are located on, along or across Chestnut street between its intersection with School Street and the railroad bridge at Needham Junction.
2.2.5.2 Sewers
10
2.2.5.2.1 The Department of Public Works may require house connections to sewer mains within five years after the laying of such mains. This provision shall apply only to mains laid after March 18, 1940.
2.2.5.2.2 Plans and descriptions of all common sewers belonging to the Town, with a true record of the charges of making and repairing said sewers and all assessments therefor, shall be kept in the Department of Public Works.
2.2.5.3 Miscellaneous
2.2.5.3.1 Wells, Cisterns and Cesspool Protection. The owner of any premises within the Town on which a well, cistern or cesspool is located, or, if the premises are in the exclusive possession of a person other than the owner, such person having possession of said premises, shall cause each such well, cistern or cesspool to be protected at ground level by masonry and a metal cover, or by such other substantial protective materials as may be approved by the Town's Director of Public Works.
The owner of premises within the Town on which a well, cistern or cesspool is located, or, if the premises are in the exclusive possession of a person other than the owner, such person having possession of said premises, shall cause each such well, cistern or cesspool, the use of which has been discontinued, to be filled in to ground level with material commonly used as fill, or, in the case of a well or cistern, with the approval of the Town's Director of Public Works, covered with masonry in a substantial and safe manner. Such filling or masonry work, as the case may be, shall be performed as to wells, cisterns, and cesspools, the use of which has been discontinued prior to the effective date of Sub-section 2.2.5.3.1, immediately following said effective date, and as to wells, cisterns, and cesspools, the use of which shall be discontinued subsequent to the effective date of Sub-section 2.2.5.3.1, immediately following such discontinuance of use.
2.2.5.4 Trench Safety
2.2.5.4.1 The Town Manager is authorized to designate a local permitting authority for issuing trench permits and/or licenses under the regulations promulgated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Safety and Division of Occupational Safety in accordance with Chapter 82A of the General Laws relative to excavation and trench safety.
2.2.5.4.2 A trench is defined as a subsurface excavation greater than three feet in depth and is fifteen feet or less between the soil walls as measured from the bottom.
2.2.5.4.3 The Select Board may, from time to time enact fees to cover the costs of processing said permits and for enforcement thereof.
2.2.5.4.4 The Select Board may, from time to time, and after a public hearing, enact local rules and regulations consistent with Chapter 82A relative to the trench permitting process, the standard and special conditions for issued permits, and the enforcement of issued permits.
2.2.5.4.5 The Town may perform temporary repairs to private property if such repairs are determined by the Director of Public Works to be required for public necessity, in accordance with regulations issue by the Select Board in accordance with Section 2.2.5.4.4. Said repairs shall be considered necessary to abate an immediate hazard.
2.2.5.5 Municipal Water Supply
2.2.5.5.1 Applicability
This section pertains to residences and commercial property and industry served by the Town’s water system.
2.2.5.5.2 Implementation of a Mandatory Non-essential Outdoor Water Use Restriction The Select Board or its designee shall have authority to implement a mandatory non-essential outdoor water use restriction in an effort to promote water conservation and to ensure compliance with the Water Management Act.
2.2.5.5.3 Backflow Prevention on Automatic Irrigation Systems All automatic irrigation systems connected to the municipal water system in the Town shall be protected from backflow events by the installation of a backflow prevention device approved by the Director of Public Works.
11
2.2.5.6 Private Ways
2.2.5.6.1 Snow and Ice Removal. The Town may remove snow and ice from such private ways within its limits for emergency vehicle access in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws and in accordance with regulations or policies issued by the Select Board. Such snow and ice removal may be limited to those private ways maintained in an acceptable condition and in accordance with standards determined by the Director of Public Works.
2.2.5.6.2 Barricades. Barricades installed on private ways that serve to deter prompt and appropriate emergency access shall be removed on order of the Fire Chief.
2.2.5.6.3 Temporary Repairs. The Town may perform temporary repairs to private ways if such repairs are determined by the Director of Public Works to be required for public necessity, in accordance with regulations or policies issued by the Select Board.
Said repairs shall be considered necessary to abate the immediate hazard caused by the defect and shall not be considered as maintenance of the private way nor shall the way be considered a public way. Drainage shall not be included as part of any such repairs, and the private way need not have been open to public use prior to the repairs being made.
Abutters to the private way may petition the Town to perform temporary repairs. In such cases, fifty one percent of the abutters to the private way must petition the Director of Public Works for the repairs to be made by the Town. Upon receipt of a petition and a determination of the necessity of such repairs, the Town shall provide the petitioners with a statement of the cost of such repairs. Within seven (7) days of receipt of the statement of cost, the petitioners shall be entitled to withdraw the petition. Unless the petition is withdrawn, the Town shall promptly make the repairs and the petitioners shall thereafter reimburse the Town for the cost of the repairs, if the repairs exceed $300. The reimbursement amount shall be equal to the petitioner’s pro rata share of the cost of repairs based on the ratio that each petitioner’s frontage bears to the total frontage of the petitioners on the private way. Betterment charges will not be assessed for such repairs.
If the cost of repairs does not exceed $300, no reimbursement will be required.
The Town shall not be liable for any damage to private property caused by such repairs, except as otherwise provided by law.
2.2.6 Information Technology
2.2.6.1 Purpose. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town of Needham that there shall be an Information Technology Center (within the Department of Finance) that shall be responsible for providing services and systems to all Town offices and departments. It is further declared that, subject to statutory provisions to the contrary, and insofar as practical, all data processing services and systems shall be centralized in the Information Technology Center.
2.2.6.2 Organization. There is hereby created a department of the Town government to be known as the Information Technology Center which shall be part of the Department of Finance of the Town. In addition, there shall be an advisory board as described below. The Center's operations shall be under the management and control of the Director of Finance. The Advisory Board shall serve in an advisory capacity for all long-range planning and capital acquisition functions.
2.2.6.3 Technology Advisory Board
(a) There shall be a Technology Advisory Board (hereinafter called the Board) consisting of five (5) regular members and four (4) ex officio members. The ex officio members shall be non-voting members.
(b) The regular members of the Board shall be appointed by the Select Board to staggered three-year terms. The regular members of the Board shall be residents of the Town who have knowledge and experience in telecommunications or information technology. No employee of the Town shall be a regular member of the Board. In the event that a vacancy occurs during a regular member’s three-year term, the Select Board shall, within ninety (90) days, appoint a successor to fill the balance of the unexpired term.
12
(c) The ex officio members of the Board shall be:
(i) the Town Manager or his or her designee,
(ii) the Town’s Director of Management Information Services,
(iii) the School Department’s Director of Financial Services, or a substitute designated by the Superintendent of Schools,
(iv) the School Department’s Director of Technology, or a substitute designated by the Superintendent of Schools.
(d) The role of the Board shall be (1) to provide technical assistance to all Town departments and the School Department in the formulation of technology plans and capital requests for voice, data and video systems; (2) to advise the Town Manager in the review of capital requests for voice, data and video systems, taking into consideration the goals of maximizing efficiency and cost effectiveness, minimizing unnecessary redundancy, and insuring, to the extent possible, the compatibility of each request with other existing or proposed systems; (3) to advise the Permanent Public Building Committee on the specifications to be considered for voice, data and video systems when constructing or renovating Town Facilities; (4) advise the Town Manager, Town Select Board, and Town Departments on matters relating to information technology policy, specifically with reference to issues of security, privacy, future technology and possible provision of government services through information technology; and (5) the advice will be delivered through a vote of the regular members and reported to the Town Manager, Town Select Board, and the Town Departments which requested the advice.
(e) The Board shall, annually in June, elect from among its regular members a chairman and vice-chairman, each of whom shall serve until a successor is duly elected. The chairman shall annually appoint a member to serve as secretary.
2.2.6.4 Information Technology Center
(a) The Town Manager may appoint a Director of Management Information Systems who shall supervise the daily operation of the Information Technology Center.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the Information Technology Center, through the Director of Finance and the Director of Management Information Systems, to provide data processing services for all Town offices and departments to the extent possible and practical. The Information Technology Center will attempt to accommodate all requests from all departments whenever economically feasible and within the limits of the equipment capability and capacity of the Town's resources.
(c) Each office or department of the Town utilizing any service provided by the Information Technology Center covered by Sub-section 2.2.6.4 shall have such control over the data supplied to, and received from, such center as such office or department finds necessary to conduct its own affairs.
(d) Security of data, issuance of reports, extracts from data files, form control, operations, commitments, costs of services (when appropriate or necessary), training and user approvals as they relate to the Information Technology Center shall be considered appropriate subjects covered by rules and regulations promulgated by the Director of Finance with the assistance of the Director of Management Information Systems and the Advisory Board.
2.2.6.5 Confidentiality
(a) Although municipal records are generally of a public nature, it is recognized that certain data to be processed through the Center are of a classified or confidential nature. The Department head of any board, commission or other official tribunal having control of such classified or confidential data shall notify the Director of Finance in writing of the classified or confidential nature of the data; and the Director of Finance shall take the necessary steps to protect such classified or confidential data.
(b) No person shall disclose or make known in any manner the contents or nature of any data while in the custody of the Center for processing, or any data originated by the Center, without the express consent of the Director of Finance or his duly authorized representatives, or without the express consent of the head of the department, board, commission or other official tribunal supplying the basic information; nor shall any person tamper with,
13
change, alter or destroy any data while in the custody of the Center, except in accordance with approved programs for processing the data. Whoever violates any provision of Sub-section 2.2.6.5 shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action.
Section 2.2.7 Departmental Revolving Funds
2.2.7.1 This By-Law establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by Town departments, boards, committees, agencies, or officers in connection with the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by Massachusetts General Law Chapter 44, Section 53E½.
2.2.7.2 A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and authorized by this By-Law without appropriation subject to the following limitations:
(a) Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
(b) No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
(c) The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by Town Meeting on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved during that fiscal year by the Select Board and Finance Committee.
2.2.7.3 Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this By-Law shall be credited to the general fund.
2.2.7.4 Except as provided in Massachusetts General Law Chapter 44, Section 53E½ and this By-Law, the laws, charter provisions, by-laws, rules, regulations, policies or procedures that govern the receipt and custody of Town monies and the expenditure and payment of Town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by this By-Law. The Town shall include a statement on the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to the fund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular report the town accountant provides the department, board, committee, agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
2.2.7.5 Authorized Revolving Funds
2.2.7.5.1 School Transportation Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the School Transportation Revolving Fund authorized for use by the School Committee.
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the School Transportation Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the fee-based transportation program receipts charged and received by the School Committee in connection with school transportation programs.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the School Committee may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the School Transportation Revolving Fund for pupil and other districtwide transportation activities in connection with school transportation programs. The costs associated for students bussed and not charged a fee will be funded through a regular budget appropriation or other funding source.
Fiscal Years The School Transportation Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.2 Needham Transportation Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Needham Transportation Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Health and Human Services Department.
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the Needham Transportation Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the fees the transportation program charged and received by the Health and Human Services Department in connection with the services.
14
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the Health and Human Services Department may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Needham Transportation Revolving Fund for transportation provided to seniors and other users of the service in connection with Health and Human Services transportation program
Fiscal Years The Needham Transportation Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.3 Water Conservation Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Water Conservation Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Department of Public Works.
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the Water Conservation Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the receipts from sale of water conservation devices and program fees charged and received by the Department of Public Works in connection with water conservation programs.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the Department of Public Works may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Water Conservation Revolving Fund for the purchase, resale, and promotion of water conservation devices and outreach programs to encourage water conservation in connection with promotion of water conservation and sale of devices to conserve water.
Fiscal Years The Water Conservation Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.4 Home Composting Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Home Composting Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Department of Public Works.
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the Home Composting Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the receipts from sale of composting bins charged and received by the Department of Public Works in connection with the promotion of home composting.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, Department of Public Works may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Home Composting Revolving Fund for the purchase, resale, and promotion of home composting bins and related outreach programs.
Fiscal Years The Home Composting Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.5 Youth Services Programs Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Youth Services Programs Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Health and Human Services Department.
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the Youth Services Programs Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the program receipts charged and received by the Health and Human Services Department in connection with the related fee-based programs.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the Health and Human Services Department may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Youth Services Programs Revolving Fund for costs related to youth service and community program activities.
Fiscal Years The Youth Services Programs Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.6 Traveling Meals Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Traveling Meals Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Health and Human Services Department.
15
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the Traveling Meals Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the program receipts charged and received by the Health and Human Services Department in connection with traveling meals program.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the Health and Human Services Department may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Traveling Meals Revolving Fund for the costs to provide traveling meals in connection with program.
Fiscal Years The Traveling Meals Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.7 Immunization Program Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Immunization Program Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Health and Human Services Department.
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the Immunization Program Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the program receipts charged and received by the Health and Human Services Department in connection with the immunization and vaccination programs.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the Health and Human Services Department may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Immunization Program Revolving Fund for costs associated with immunization, vaccination, and medical countermeasure distribution programs, as well as educational programs and public information efforts in support of those services.
Fiscal Years The Immunization Program Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.8 Public Facility Use Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Public Facility Use Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Department of Public Works.
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the Public Facility Use Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the facility use receipts charged and received by the Department of Public Works in connection with the use of Town facilities by community groups and organizations.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the Department of Public Works may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Public Facility Use Revolving Fund for costs to operate and maintain the facility for use for conferences, programs, functions or other events in connection with the use of the facilities.
Fiscal Years The Public Facility Use Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.9 Memorial Park Activities Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Memorial Park Activities Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Memorial Park Trustees.
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the Memorial Park Activities Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund receipts from food sales and voluntary program activities received by the Memorial Park Trustees.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the Memorial Park Trustees may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Memorial Park Activities Revolving Fund to provide a food concession and to maintain and improve Memorial Park.
Fiscal Years The Memorial Park Activities Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.10 Tree Replacement Revolving Fund
16
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Tree Replacement Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Department of Public Works.
Revenues The town accountant shall establish the Tree Replacement Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the receipts accepted by the Needham Select Board for the purpose of tree plantings charged and received by the Department of Public Works in connection with tree removal approvals.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the Department of Public Works may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Tree Replacement Revolving Fund for purchase, maintenance, distribution, and promotion of shade trees in the Town of Needham in connection with payments received by the Town and accepted by the Select Board for said purpose. Salary or wages of full-time staff shall be paid from the annual budget appropriation of the Department of Public Works and not from the Fund.
Fiscal Years The Tree Replacement Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2017.
2.2.7.5.11 Aging Services Programs Revolving Fund
Fund Name There shall be a separate fund called the Aging Services Programs Revolving Fund authorized for use by the Health and Human Services Department.
Revenues The Town Accountant shall establish the Aging Services Programs Revolving Fund as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the program receipts charged and received by the Health and Human Services Department in connection with the related fee based programs.
Purposes and Expenditures During each fiscal year, the Health and Human Services Department may incur liabilities against and spend monies from the Aging Services Programs Revolving Fund for costs related to educational, entertainment, and programmatic activities offered through the Department.
Fiscal Years The Aging Services Programs Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that begin on or after July 1, 2018.
[Note: Article 10 of STM 5.14.18 labeled section 2.2.5.11 in error. The section should be labeled 2.2.7.5.11]
2.2.8 Independent Audit
The Select Board shall annually employ a certified public accountant to make audits of the accounts of the Town.
SECTION 2.3 PLANNING BOARD
2.3.1 Installation of Water Mains. Every person making or opening subdivision of land in the Town shall, at his own expense, make such provisions for the development of streets therein, including the construction and drainage thereof, and the installation of water mains therein, as may be required by the Planning Board. Such street development and construction shall be in accordance with specifications therefor which the Director of Public Works shall from time to time adopt and water mains shall be installed only in a manner approved by the Director of Public Works. The Planning Board may require a proper bond with an adequate surety or sureties to secure performance of requirements of Sub-section 2.3.1.
2.3.2 Drainage. Every person constructing a street or way to public travel within the Town shall at his own expense make such provisions for the drainage of such street or way, and the territory contiguous thereto, as may be required by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may require a proper bond with an adequate surety or sureties to secure performance of its requirements of Sub-section 2.3.2.
SECTION 2.4 BOARD OF APPEALS
17
2.4.1 Appointment By Select Board. There shall be a Board of Appeals consisting of three regular members and two associate members appointed by the Select Board. The three regular members shall be appointed for three years and in such a manner that the term of one regular member shall expire each year.
2.4.2 Associate Members. The associate members shall be appointed by the Select Board for a term of one year. In case of a vacancy or the absence, inability to act, or interest on the part of a regular member of the Board of Appeals, that place may be taken by an associate member designated by the Chairman or acting Chairman.
2.4.3 Statutory Authority. Said Board of Appeals shall be the board of appeals, required under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 14, and Chapter 41, Section 81Z, and shall have all powers and duties and shall be governed by the procedure prescribed in all provisions of the general laws applicable to boards of appeals and to applications for special permits or for variances, arising under either the Building By-Laws or the Zoning By-Laws, and shall have jurisdiction of all appeals under the Subdivision Control Law.
2.4.4 Adoption of Rules. The Board of Appeals may adopt rules consistent with the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 14 and Chapter 41, Section 81Z, and provisions of the Building or Zoning By-Laws, for conducting its business and otherwise carrying out the purposes of said by-laws, the Subdivision Control Law and all applicable statutes.
SECTION 2.5 BOARD OF HEALTH
2.5.1 Transportation of Refuse and Garbage. No person shall carry in or through any of the streets, squares, courts, lanes, avenues, roads, places or alleys within the Town of Needham, any house dirt, ashes or garbage, or other refuse or garbage, or any grease or bones or any refuse substances from any dwelling houses or other buildings or places in the Town, except upon such terms and conditions as the Board of Health may deem in the health and interest of the Town.
2.5.2 Disposal of Refuse and Garbage. No person shall litter or, without a license from the Board of Health, dispose of any refuse on or in any public land, way, sidewalk, pond, stream, brook or watercourse or on any private land except at the Recycling Transfer Station with an appropriate permit for entry to that facility and in compliance with the rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
Any person who violates any provision of Sub-section 2.5.2 in the presence of a police officer may be arrested by such officer without a warrant, if such person refuses to give his true name and address or to remove any substance unlawfully discarded by such person after having been requested by such officer. Any person who violates any provision of Sub-section 2.5.2 shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense.
2.5.3 Sale of Cigarettes by Machine. All sale of cigarettes by machine is prohibited.
Any person who violates sub-section 2.5.3 Sale of Cigarettes by Machine shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred ($200.00) dollars for each offense. Each sale in violation of sub-section 2.5.3 shall be considered a separate offense.
SECTION 2.6 PUBLIC FACILITIES
2.6.1 Building Design and Construction Department There is hereby established a Building Design and Construction Department under the authority of the Town Manager. The Department shall be responsible for managing the design (including feasibility studies), construction, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of all buildings owned by the Town or constructed on land owned, leased, licensed or operated by the Town. These projects will be under the jurisdiction of the Permanent Public Building Committee as provided below, for which the Building Design and Construction Department will provide support.
2.6.2 Permanent Public Building Committee There shall be a Permanent Public Building Committee (hereinafter “Committee”) responsible for overseeing the design (including feasibility studies), construction, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of all buildings owned by the Town or constructed on land owned, leased, licensed or operated by the Town.
18
2.6.2.1 The Committee shall consist of the Town Manager or his or her designee and six additional members appointed by majority vote of an appointing authority. The appointing authority shall consist of the Moderator, the Chairman of the School Committee, the chairman of the Select Board, the Chairman of the Board of Library Trustees, and the Chairman of the Park and Recreation Commission.
2.6.2.2 Each of the members appointed by the Appointing Authority shall be a registered voter of the Town of Needham. No member appointed by the Appointing Authority shall be a paid employee of the Town, or serve as an elected official, or elected member of another standing Town board, committee or commission, except Town Meeting, or serve as an appointed member of another standing Town board, committee, or commission directly involved in the design, permitting, and/or financing of public buildings.
2.6.2.3 Among the members appointed by the Appointing Authority, there shall be a commercial general contractor, an architect, an engineer, and an attorney, if qualified individuals with the necessary expertise are available for appointment, and two other residents. If a commercial general contractor, architect, engineer, or attorney, as the case may be, is not available for appointment, the Appointing Authority shall have the discretion to appoint instead any individual meeting the qualifications set forth in 2.6.2.2 with construction, engineering, or accounting experience to fill that vacancy
2.6.2.4 The Town Manager, if a member, shall serve ex officio. A member serving as the designee of the Town Manager shall serve at the discretion of the Town Manager. Members appointed by the Appointing Authority shall serve for terms of three years.
2.6.2.5 The Appointing Authority shall, following the effective date of this section, appoint members of the Committee as follows: Two members for one year, two members for two years and two members for three years. Upon the expiration of a term, future appointments shall be for terms of three years, except that if a member vacates his or her seat before the expiration of his or her term, the Appointing Authority shall appoint a replacement to complete the unexpired portion of that term. Expiring terms shall end on December 31 of each year. A member may hold his or her seat after his or her term expires until a successor is qualified.
2.6.2.6 Definitions
For the purpose of this Section 2.6.2 the following words shall have the following meanings:
a. architect: a person with educational training and experience in the field of architecture, and a professional registration.
b. building: a structure in a portable or fixed location, with an area of at least one hundred square feet, having a roof or providing shelter, including swimming pools.
c. clerk-of-the-
works: an individual responsible for day-to-day inspection of a project. He or she shall prepare and maintain detailed daily records of a project’s progress and shall report to the project manager.
d. commercial
general
contractor: a person with the educational training and experience in general construction of a commercial nature, and a commercial general contractor’s license, or at least ten years of experience as a commercial general contractor.
e. designer: an individual, corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venturer, joint stock company, limited liability partnership or other entity engaged in the practice of architecture, landscape architecture, or engineering. If the designer is an individual, he or she shall be registered as an architect, landscape architect or engineer in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and if the designer is one of the other categories listed above, the majority of the partners or owners shall be registered as an architect, landscape architect or engineer in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
f. direct
construction
cost: the direct cost for material, labor and equipment to construct, reconstruct, enlarge or alter a building.
g. engineer: a person with educational training and experience in his or her engineering discipline, and a professional registration.
19
h. feasibility
study: prepared by a designer, and identifies the needs of a building user as well as alternatives for meeting the user’s functional requirements. It includes surveys and testing, including environmental impacts, access for the disabled and cost estimates.
i. final design: prepared by a designer, the final design includes a schematic design, design development, final drawings and specifications, bidding documents and contract documents.
j. indirect
construction
costs: architectural and engineering fees, furnishings and equipment, permit and license fees, project management costs, salaries for the project manager and clerk-of-the-works, financing costs, and project contingencies.
k. project: a project is a proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of any building owned by the Town or constructed on land owned, leased or operated by the Town.
l. Project
Committee: a committee consisting of the Permanent Public Building Committee members and the representatives designated by a User Agency for a specific building project. A member of the Permanent Public Building Committee shall serve as chairperson for all Project Committee activities.
m. project
manager: an individual who acts on behalf of the Committee, and who is responsible for the day-to-day supervision of a project. He or she shall maintain project records, issue emergency directives, and oversee the clerk-of-the-works and other project participants.
n. total project
cost: the combination of the direct and indirect construction costs.
o. User Agency: an elected or appointed board, committee or commission, including the Select Board, School Committee, Library Trustees, Park and Recreation Commission, Memorial Park Trustees, Conservation Commission, or other board, committee or commission having responsibility for a building.
2.6.2.7 The Committee is responsible for projects having a total project cost of $500,000 or more. The Committee may defer its jurisdiction in the instance where the project includes little or no actual building construction.
2.6.2.8 The Committee shall develop and publish procedures describing its activities. The Committee shall submit a report of all its activities for publication in the Town’s annual report.
2.6.2.9 The Committee shall invite to its meetings representatives from the Board of Health, the Commission on Disabilities, and any health and safety committee or other advisory committee for the project appointed by the relevant User Agency.
2.6.2.10 The Committee shall, subject to appropriation, conduct feasibility studies and final designs, oversee the construction of projects, procure designer and consultant services as it deems necessary or as required by law. The relevant User Agency shall determine the functional need and utility of a project.
2.6.2.11 Before the commencement of a feasibility study and before any hiring for a project, the relevant User Agency shall designate two people to serve on the Project Committee as its representatives. The User Agency may replace its representatives as it deems necessary. The User Agency representatives shall have full voting rights and shall have full participation in all the Project Committee’s deliberations and actions.
2.6.2.12 Any User Agency seeking to construct, reconstruct, alter or enlarge a building under its jurisdiction shall file a project application with the Committee. The Committee shall meet with the User Agency. At the request of the User Agency or at the discretion of the Committee, a feasibility study shall be conducted. Prior to the commencement of a feasibility study, the feasibility study funding shall be submitted as part of the capital improvement planning process in accordance with Section 2.2.2 of this by-law and funded by Town Meeting. The Project Committee and the User Agency shall review the completed feasibility study. Upon review, the Project Committee and the User Agency shall each indicate on a separate, signed copy whether they will accept, amend or reject the feasibility study. These provisions do not preclude the User Agency from conducting independent studies relating to its functions.
20
2.6.2.13 If a feasibility study approved by the Project Committee and the User Agency shows that a proposed construction project is necessary, the Project Committee shall conduct a final design. Prior to the commencement of the final design, the final design scope of work and its funding shall be submitted as part of the capital improvement planning process n accordance with Section 2.2.2 of this by-law and funded by Town Meeting. Prior to approval of a final design and contract documents by the Project Committee, a draft version shall be reviewed by the Project Committee and the User Agency. The final design and contract documents shall not be considered approved until the Project Committee and the User Agency acknowledge their approval in writing.
2.6.2.14 A description of the estimated total project cost shall be prepared for all feasibility studies and final designs.
2.6.2.15 Whenever project funding approval is sought from the town meeting, the Project Committee and the User Agency shall provide a detailed report to the town meeting that includes an explanation of the project need, scope of work, schedule and costs.
2.6.2.16 The Committee shall employ project managers and clerk-of-the-works for each project as it deems necessary.
2.6.2.17 The Town Clerk shall maintain a register of Committee members, and of architects, engineers, contractors, accountants, and attorneys that are willing to serve on the Committee. The Town Clerk shall maintain said register in such form as the Town Clerk, in consultation with the Select Board, may determine and such register may be purged from time to time of such information as the Town Clerk determines to be obsolete and of no further value.
2.6.2.18 Except as the laws of the Commonwealth may otherwise require, the Chairperson of the Committee, or his or her designated representative, shall, upon the termination of the Project Committee: (1) provide the User Agency and the Department of Public Works – Building Maintenance Division (hereinafter “BMD”) with a complete and final set of drawings and specifications of the finished structure, as-built drawings, Operations and Maintenance Manuals, all other contract documents, and attic stock materials used therein, and shall provide to the User Agency and BMD all papers guaranteeing the building or any feature thereof (“warrantees”) for work done thereon, and (2) post a digital copy of remaining records and reports on the town server for the purpose of maintaining detailed records, including any inventory indicating what papers, materials and records were deposited with the User Agency and BMD. Subject to the approval of the Town Clerk and the requirements of M.G.L. Chapter 66, the user Agency and BMD may destroy that portion of the material relinquished to the User Agency and BMD determined to have no substantial value, the balance of such materials being deposited in the Public Administration Collection.
SECTION 2.7 SPECIAL COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS
2.7.1 Transportation Committee
2.7.1.1 There is hereby established a Transportation Committee, which shall serve under the supervision of the Select Board as Town Agents. The said Committee shall consist of five members appointed as hereinafter provided, a simple majority of whom shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and of the members of the General Court, whose districts include all or part of Needham, serving ex officiis as non-voting members. Of the five appointed members aforesaid, two shall be appointed by the Select Board, two shall be appointed by the Planning Board and one shall be appointed by the Moderator, each such appointee to serve for a term of three years; provided, however, that of the members originally appointed, one shall serve for a term of one year, two for a term of two years and two for a term of three years, as the Select Board shall determine. If any appointed member shall resign or otherwise vacate his office, a successor shall be appointed by the appropriate authority to serve for the balance of the unexpired term.
The Committee shall, annually in April, elect from its membership a Chairman and such other officers it deems necessary and desirable.
2.7.1.2 Duties of the Committee. The Transportation Committee shall conduct continuing studies of the mass transportation needs of the Town, with particular emphasis upon commuter transportation. It shall make such special studies relative to transportation problems as the Select Board or Town Meeting may, from time to time, direct.
2.7.2 Future School Needs Committee
21
2.7.2.1 There shall be a Future School Needs Committee consisting of seven members: two members of the Finance Committee, two members of the School Committee, two members of the Select Board, and one member appointed by the Town Moderator. The chairman shall be designated from time to time by vote of the Committee. The Future School Needs Committee will assist in the identification of the criteria necessary to develop the estimates and projections. It shall be the responsibility of the School Committee to procure professionally-developed estimates of the Town's current and projected student population and to provide this information to the Future School Needs Committee for their review, guidance, and feedback.
SECTION 2.7.3 Community Preservation Committee
2.7.3.1 Establishment
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee, consisting of nine (9) voting members pursuant to MGL Chapter 44B. The composition of the committee, the appointment authority and the term of office for the committee members shall be as follows:
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by said Commission for a term of three years.
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by said Commission for a term of three years.
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by said Authority for a term of three years.
One member of the Park and Recreation Commission as designated by said Commission for an initial term of two years and thereafter for a term of three years.
One member of the Planning Board as designated by said Board for an initial term of one year and thereafter for a term of three years.
Two members to be appointed by the Select Board, one member to be appointed for a term of one year and thereafter for a term of three years and one member to be appointed for a term of two years and thereafter for a term of three years.
Two members to be appointed by the Moderator, one member to be appointed for a term of one year and thereafter for a term of three years and one member to be appointed for a term of two years and thereafter for a term of three years.
No person shall be appointed to the committee for more than two consecutive three year terms.
Should any of the Commissions, Boards, Committees, or individuals who have appointment authority under this by-law be no longer in existence for what ever reason, the appointing authority for that Commission, Board, Committee, or individual shall become the responsibility of the Select Board.
2.7.3.2 Duties
2.7.3.2.1 The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs, possibilities, and resources of the town regarding community preservation. The committee shall consult with the Finance Committee, the Select Board and other existing municipal boards, including the Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission, the Planning Board, the Park and Recreation Commission and the Housing Authority, or persons acting in those capacities or performing like duties, in conducting such studies. As part of its study, the committee shall hold one or more public informational hearings on the needs, possibilities and resources of the town regarding community preservation possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town.
2.7.3.2.2 The Community Preservation Committee, after consultation with the Finance Committee and the Select Board, shall make recommendations to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space; for the acquisition, preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of historic resources; for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use; for the creation, preservation and
22
support of community housing; and for the rehabilitation or restoration of open space, land for recreational use and community housing that is acquired or created as provided in this section. With respect to community housing, the community preservation committee shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
2.7.3.2.3 The Community Preservation Committee may include, in its proposal to the Town Meeting, a recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for purposes that are consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then available in the Community Preservation Fund. The Community Preservation Committee may recommend the issuance of general obligation bonds or notes in anticipation of revenues to be raised pursuant to Mass. Gen. Laws, Chapter 44B, Section 3, the proceeds of which shall be deposited in the Community Preservation Fund.
2.7.3.2.4 As provided in the Massachusetts Community Preservation Act, no expenditures shall be made from the Community Preservation Fund without the approval of Town Meeting.
2.7.3.2.5 The Community Preservation Committee will submit an annual administrative and operating budget for the Community Preservation Committee, which cannot exceed five percent (5%) of the annual revenues in the Community Preservation Fund, to Town Meeting for approval.
2.7.3.3 Requirement for a Quorum and Cost Estimates
The Community Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct business without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the Community Preservation Committee shall constitute a quorum. The Community Preservation Committee shall approve its actions by majority vote. Proposals to the Town Meeting shall include their anticipated costs.
2.7.3.4 Exemptions
Taxpayers qualifying for the low-income exemption or the low and moderate-income senior exemption as provided for in G.L. c. 44B shall submit an application for the exemption on a form provided by the Board of Assessors within three months after the tax bill or notice is sent.
2.7.3.5 Severability
In case any section, paragraph or part of this chapter be for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.
2.7.3.6 Effective Date
This by-law shall take effect upon approval by the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, and after all requirements of M.G.L. c.40, S. 32 have been met. Each appointing authority shall have thirty days after approval by the Attorney General to make their initial appointments.
The provisions of this Community Preservation by-law shall be of no force or effect until such time as the Town Meeting and the voters of the Town vote to accept the provisions of Section 3 to 7, inclusive, of Chapter 44B of the General Laws, otherwise known as the Community Preservation Act.
SECTION 2.8 PUBLIC LIBRARY
2.8.1 Public Administration Research Collection at the Public Library
There is hereby established, and there shall hereafter be maintained, a Public Administration Research Collection at the Town's Public Library, under the supervision of the Director of the Public Library, for the use of the town officers and committees, civil organizations and individual citizens of the Town engaged in research in matters pertaining to governmental and social problems, particularly relating to the Town of Needham. To the extent that the facilities permit, library employees shall assist the members of the Town Meeting and any committee thereof in all matters requiring statistical research or fact-finding, in connection with studies ordered by the Town Meeting.
23
2.8.2 The Town Clerk shall furnish the Director of the Public Library with at least two copies of every publication issued by the Town and distributed through the Town Clerk's office. Any town department, board, commission or committee publishing a report not so distributed shall file at least two copies of such report with the Director of the Public Library.
SECTION 2.9 COUNCIL ON AGING
2.9.1 There is hereby established a Council On Aging, consisting of a representative nominated by each of the following Town boards and committees: the Board of Health, the School Committee, the Trustees of the Needham Public Library, the Housing Authority, and the Park and Recreation Commission, and not fewer than seven additional members, all of whom shall be appointed by the Select Board and shall hold office for a term of three years.
2.9.2 It is the duty of the Council:
(a) To identify the needs and concerns and strengths of Needham's elderly and retired persons and those approaching retirement age.
(b) To design, promote, coordinate or implement services and programs to meet these needs and concerns.
(c) To inform the community and enlist the support and participation of all citizens in this effort.
(d) To work in coordination with programs of the Executive Office of Elder Affairs of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
2.9.3 A simple majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business of the council. The council shall elect from its membership such officers it deems necessary and desirable.
2.9.4 If any appointed member shall resign, or otherwise vacate his office, his successor shall be appointed in the same manner as described above to serve for the balance of the unexpired term.
SECTION 2.10 YOUTH COMMISSION
2.10.1 There is hereby established a Youth Commission consisting of eight members. A simple majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business of the Commission. The appointing authorities for said Commission shall be as follows: One by the Select Board, one by the Park and Recreation Commission, one by the Finance Committee, one by the Moderator, one by the Chief of Police, and one by the School Committee. Additionally, two student members to be appointed to the Commission by Superintendent of Schools as follows: In the first year a member of the Needham High School Junior Class shall be appointed for a two year term, and a member of the Senior Class for a one year term. Thereafter, one member of the Junior Class will be appointed for a two year term each year.
On or before the first day of June in each year, the appointing authorities shall appoint to the Commission sufficient members to fill expiring terms, each member so appointed to serve until the first day of June of the third year thereafter, with student members appointed to serve until the first day of June of the second year thereafter.
2.10.2 It shall be the duty of the Youth Commission to study, define, and ascertain the needs and problems of the Needham youth, and take such action necessary to promote the mental, physical and social growth of the youth of Needham through the implementation of appropriate procedures.
SECTION 2.11 HISTORICAL COMMISSION
2.11.1 Commission Members There shall be an Historical Commission of the Town of Needham, consisting of seven (7) members, each of whom shall be a resident of the Town of Needham, appointed by the Select Board. Initially, three (3) members shall be appointed for the term of three (3) years each, three (3) members shall be appointed for the term of two (2) years each, and one (1) member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, as the term for which the members were initially appointed expires, their successors shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years each. In the
24
event of a vacancy occurring in the membership other than by the expiration of the term of a member, a successor shall be appointed to serve for the balance of the unexpired term.
2.11.2 Quorum. At all meetings of the Historical Commission, four (4) members shall constitute a quorum.
2.11.3 Officers. The members of the Historical Commission shall annually, within thirty (30) days after the annual appointments are made by the Select Board, elect from its membership a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary who shall serve during the ensuing year and until the election of their successor. All other meetings of the members shall be held at such designated times and places as the members shall designate.
2.11.4 Powers and Authority of the Historical Commission. The Historical Commission may exercise all the powers, authority and functions authorized by M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 8D, and may make reasonable rules and regulations to aid in the orderly performance of its powers, authority and functions consistent with said Section 8D and Sub-section 2.11.4.
2.11.5 Demolition of Historical Buildings
2.11.5.1 Purpose. A demolition delay by-law provides a review procedure which results in a delay in the demolition of historically significant buildings. Such a by-law does not sanction or deny a proposed demolition but allows time for consideration of preservation alternatives to destruction. Property owners retain final decision-making authority.
2.11.5.2 Definitions.
Demolition - the act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing a building or portion of a building or commencing such work with the intent of completing the same.
Historically Significant - property that is listed in the Needham Historical Inventory and is listed or awaiting listing in the National and/or State Registers, this property having been associated with historic person(s) or event(s) or having been designated by the Needham Historical Commission as architecturally significant or unusual.
Preferably preserved - worthy of a delay period to allow consideration of alternatives to demolition.
2.11.5.3 Initial Determination
2.11.5.3.1 When an application for a building demolition permit is filed with the Building Department, the Building Department shall determine if the building is contained in the Needham Historical Commission Inventory.
2.11.5.3.2 If the building is not contained in the inventory, the demolition permit will not be reviewed by the Needham Historical Commission.
2.11.5.3.3 If the building is contained in the inventory, the demolition permit application, if properly completed, will be referred to the Needham Historical Commission for its review. The application need not be accompanied by evidence of workmen's compensation coverage or letters from utility providers that the utilities have been disconnected in order for the application to be referred to the Historical Commission.
2.11.5.4 Procedure For Review
2.11.5.4.1 The Building Department must submit the application within 5 business days to the Historical Commission, and shall not issue the demolition permit until the Needham Historical Commission has returned the application to the Building Department, or upon the failure of the Needham Historical Commission to act in accordance with the time limits set within this Demolition Delay By-Law.
2.11.5.4.2 The Historical Commission must meet to determine whether the building is historically significant. This must be done within 21 days of receipt of the application from the Building Department. The Commission will notify the applicant of the meeting at least seven days in advance of the meeting.
2.11.5.4.3 At this meeting, the owner of the property may make a presentation to the Commission if (s)he chooses.
25
2.11.5.4.4 If the Commission finds that the building is not historically significant, there will not be a Demolition Plan Review, and the application will be immediately returned to the Building Department.
2.11.5.4.5 If the building is found to be historically significant, there will be a Demolition Plan Review conducted by the Needham Historical Commission.
2.11.5.5 Demolition Plan Review Process
2.11.5.5.1 The applicant must submit 7 copies of a Demolition Plan to the Historical Commission. The Demolition Plan shall contain:
1) A map or plan showing the location of the building or structure to be demolished.
2) A photograph of the street facade elevation.
3) A narrative description of the building or structure, or part thereof, to be demolished.
4) The reason for the proposed demolition and data supporting said reason, including (where applicable) data sufficient to establish any economic justification for the demolition.
5) A certified list of abutters to said property and other neighbors within 300 feet, whose names are ascertained from the Board of Assessor’s most recent tax list.
2.11.5.5.2 Within forty-five days of the receipt of this demolition plan, the Commission shall review the application at a public hearing of the Commission to determine if the structure is preferably preserved. Public notice of such hearing shall be published by the Commission at the expense of the applicant in a local newspaper giving the time, place, and purpose of the hearing once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication not less than fourteen days before the day of said hearing. The Commission shall also mail a copy of said notice to the applicant, to abutters and to all owners of all property within 300 feet of the applicant’s property as appearing on the most recent tax list, to the Needham Planning Board and such other persons as the Commission shall deem established to be notified.
2.11.5.5.3 If the building is not determined to be preferably preserved, the application for a permit to demolish will be returned to the Building Department immediately.
2.11.5.5.4 If the building is determined to be preferably preserved, the application for a permit to demolish need not be returned to the Building Department for a period of 6 months from the date on which the Historical Commission files its report with the Town Clerk to prevent demolition.
2.11.5.5.5 If the Commission is satisfied that the applicant/owner has sincerely tried to find alternatives to demolition with no success, the application may be returned to the Building Department before the expiration of the 6-month period.
2.11.5.5.6 In any event, at the expiration of the 6-month period the application shall be returned to the Building Department.
2.11.5.6 Failure to Act
If the Historical Commission fails to act within the specified time limits, the Building Inspector may issue a demolition permit without return of the application from the Commission.
2.11.5.7 Building Permits
No permit for the alteration of an existing structure or the erection of a new structure that involves demolition on the site of an existing historically significant building may be issued prior to the issuance of a demolition permit from the Building Department for such an existing building or any portion thereof.
26
2.11.5.8 Emergency Demolitions
The Building Inspector may issue a demolition permit at any time in the event of imminent and substantial danger to the health or safety of the public due to deteriorating conditions in the historically significant building. The Building Inspector shall inspect the building and document, in writing, the findings and reasons requiring an emergency demolition, a copy of which shall be forwarded immediately to the Historical Commission.
2.11.5.9 Enforcement and Remedies
In the event of a demolition of an historically significant building in violation of this by-law, the person or persons responsible for the demolition including, but not limited to, the owners, tenants, developers, or contractors, shall each be subject to a fine of up to $300 per day for each violation. Each day that the building is not restored to its condition immediately prior to the said demolition, and the demolition permit is not issued, shall be a separate offense, up to a maximum of 183 days.
2.11.5.10 Severability
If any section, paragraph or part of this by-law is for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph and part shall continue in full force and effect.
2.11.5.11 Rules And Regulations
Pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 8D and Section 2.11.5.4 above, the Historical Commission shall make rules and regulations to implement this section.
2.11.5.12 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may appeal to Superior Court, per M.G.L. 249, Section 4.
ARTICLE 3
POLICE POWERS, AUTHORITY AND REGULATIONS
SECTION 3.1 GENERAL
3.1.1 Grazing of Animals. No owner or persons having the care of any horses, cows, or other grazing animals shall permit or allow them to roam at large or to graze on any street, lane, common square or other public place within this Town, nor permit any such animal to roam or stand upon any sidewalk within the Town.
3.1.2 Obstruction of Sidewalks. Except as permitted by the Select Board or the Director of Public Works, no person shall place, or cause to be placed, upon any public way or sidewalk, any lumber, wood, box, crate, barrel, can, package or other thing, or allow the same to remain for more than one hour, or more than ten minutes after being notified to remove the same by a constable or police officer.
3.1.3 Coasting in Streets. No person shall coast in any street or public way except those publicly designated for that purpose by the Select Board.
3.1.4 Use of Sidewalks. No person shall ride, drive, draw or push any motorcycle, automobile, car, wagon or sled, except invalid's or children's hand carriages, over or upon any public footpath or sidewalk.
3.1.5 Bicycles on Sidewalks. No person shall ride a bicycle on any sidewalk within certain marked areas of Needham Square and Needham Heights Square business districts. The pushing or walking of a bicycle is not prohibited in such areas. For this purpose, the Police Chief, with the approval of the Select Board, shall establish the boundary limits of the sidewalks subject to Sub-section 3.15 by appropriate markings on the sidewalks or other signs.
27
3.1.6 Discharge of Firearms. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm, or other explosive articles, within the limits of any park, playground, public way, public building or other property except with the consent of the Select Board, or hunt, or fire or discharge any firearm or other explosive articles, on any private property except with the written consent of the property's owner or legal occupant. This Sub-section shall not apply to the lawful defense of life and property, or to any lawful enforcement officer acting in the discharge of his duties.
3.1.7 Dealing in Second-Hand Merchandise. No person shall collect, deal in or keep a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or second hand articles, within the limits of the Town, unless licensed by the Select Board.
3.1.8 Snow and Ice on Sidewalks.
3.1.8.1 Commercial Property. Any owner, tenant, occupant or agent in charge of property used wholly or in part for stores, offices, or other public place who places any snow or ice on a sidewalk or a street on which such store, office or public place abuts, or allows snow and ice to remain on such sidewalk for more than five hours between sunrise and sunset, shall forfeit not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. If, through weather conditions the snow and ice is evenly spread over a sidewalk and frozen and therefore difficult to remove, it may remain until it can more easily be removed. While the snow and ice remain, however, the sidewalk must be kept in safe condition by sanding or otherwise.
3.1.8.2 All Other Property. Any person who places any snow or ice on a sidewalk or a street, shall forfeit not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
3.1.9 Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages. No person shall possess or consume an alcoholic beverage as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 138, Section 1, as amended, within the limits of any park, playground, public land or public building owned or under the control of the Town of Needham, except with written permission of the appropriate controlling Town tribunal, nor shall any person consume alcoholic beverage as defined in Section 1, on any public way or any way to which the public has a right of access as invitees or licenses, including any person in a motor vehicle in, on or upon any public way or any way to which the public has said right of access, within the limits of the Town of Needham; and no person shall consume an alcoholic beverage as previously defined, in, on or upon any private land or place without the consent of the owner or persons in control of such private land or place.
Any person who violates Sub-section 3.1.9 of the General By-Laws may be arrested by a police officer without a warrant.
All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of Sub-section 3.1.9 may be seized and held until final adjudication of the charge against any such person or persons has been made by the court.
3.1.10. Use of Marijuana. No person shall consume marijuana (or tetrahydrocannibinol, as defined in G.L. c. 94C, 1, as amended) within the limits of any park, playground, public land or public building owned or under the control of the Town of Needham, nor shall any person consume marijuana, as previously defined, on any public way or any way to which the public has a right of access as invitees or licenses, including any person in a motor vehicle in, on or upon any public way or any way to which the public has said right of access, within the limits of the Town of Needham; and no person shall consume marijuana, as previously defined, in, on or upon any private land or place without the consent of the owner or persons in control of such private land or place. Nothing in this bylaw shall authorize any possession, cultivation, transport, distribution, sale or use of marijuana otherwise prohibited by law.
3.1.11 Licensed Hawkers and Peddlers. Except as otherwise specified by regulations issued by the Select Board:
3.1.11.1 No person, under Massachusetts General Law Chapter 101, Section 22, shall sell or offer to sell items specified therein within 1,000 feet of any recreational area in organized use, or within 1,000 feet of any school (public or private) during the hours that school is in session, nor until one hour after the closing of said school or schools.
3.1.11.2 Such hawkers or peddlers shall not remain parked at any one location for a period of time exceeding ten (10) minutes, nor shall a bell, horn or other device to attract customers be used after the hour of 8:00 P.M. of any day.
28
3.1.12 Discharge of Water. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged ground or surface water collected by mechanical pump within a building or any surface water collected on private property in a manner that would create a hazardous condition or cause damage to a public way or sidewalk. No person shall allow a discharge to continue for more than ten minutes after being notified to cease by constable, police officer or Select Board.
3.1.13 Bow and Arrows. No person shall hunt with or discharge bow and arrow within the limits of any park, playground, public way, public building or other public property except with the consent of the Select Board, or hunt by bow and arrow on any private property except with the written consent of the property's owner or legal occupant.
3.1.14 Fines. Whoever violates the provisions of Sections 3.1 shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense, unless otherwise provided.
SECTION 3.2 SALE OF FOOD
3.2.1 Purpose. Section 3.2 is for the purpose of promoting public health, safety, convenience, welfare and peace, controlling noise and protecting nighttime tranquility.
3.2.2 Hours of Sale - Retail. No store, restaurant, or place of business engaged in the retail sale of food shall be open for the transaction of retail business between the hours of midnight and 6:00 A.M. except during other hours as the Select Board may fix by special permit.
3.2.3 Definition of Food. The term food as used in Section 3.2 shall include any article or commodity, however stored or packaged, intended for human consumption, and shall include alcoholic beverages to be consumed off the premises at which they are sold, unless any other law, permit or license granted to the seller of such beverages shall otherwise provide.
3.2.4 Fines. Violators of Section 3.2 shall be subject to a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each violation. For the purposes of Section 3.2, every calendar day on which Section 3.2, or the terms of any special permit, is violated shall be a separate offense; and each separate sale of food shall be deemed a separate offense. In the event of a sale of several items at one time to one customer, only one sale shall be deemed to have taken place. This section may be enforced by the procedures of M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21D.
3.2.5 Special Permit. In cases where the purposes of Section 3.2 permit it, the Select Board may issue a special permit allowing a store, restaurant or place of business to open or remain open for the transaction of business at specified hours other than those required by Section 3.2 or to remain open 24 hours a day. Such special permits shall remain in effect for a period of one year, unless revoked sooner after notice to the licensee and an opportunity for a hearing, upon a finding by the Select Board that the special permit no longer furthers the purposes of Section 3.2. Application for such a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the Select Board and shall be accompanied by a non-refundable, reasonable fee determined by the Select Board.
SECTION 3.3 PENALTIES FOR IMPROPER USE OF BURGLAR ALARMS
3.3.1 Preamble - It is determined that the number of false alarms being made to the Needham Police Department hinders efficiency and lowers department morale. This situation constitutes a danger to the general public, homeowners, businesses and Needham police officers. The adoption of Section 3.3 will reduce the number of false alarms and promote the responsible use of alarm devices in the Town of Needham.
3.3.2 Definitions
(a) The term Burglar Alarm System means any assembly of equipment and devices or a single device such as a solid-state unit connecting directly to a 110 volt alternating current line arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. The provisions of Sub-section 3.3.4 shall apply to all users.
(b) The term False Alarm means (i) the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or negligence on the part of the user of an alarm system, or his employees or agents; (ii) any
29
signal or automatic dialing device transmitted to the Police Department requesting, requiring or resulting in a response on the part of the Police Department when there has been no unauthorized intrusion, robbery, burglary or attempted threat. For the purposes of this definition, activation of alarm systems for the purpose of testing with prior approval by the Police Department, or by act of God, including but not limited to power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and similar weather or atmospheric disturbances shall not be deemed to be a false alarm.
(c) The term Automatic Dialing Device refers to an alarm system which automatically sends via regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of an emergency situation which the alarm system is designated to detect.
3.3.3 Control and Curtailment of Signals Emitted by Alarm Systems
(a) Every alarm user shall submit to the Police Chief his name, address and telephone number, and the names and telephone numbers of at least two other persons who are authorized to respond, after notification by the Police Department, to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system and who can open the premises in which the alarm system is installed. The owner of said premises shall immediately notify the Needham Police Department of any changes in the list of employees or other persons authorized to respond to alarms.
(b) All alarm systems, installed after the effective date of Section 3.3, which use an audible horn or bell, shall be equipped with a device that will shut off such bell or horn within (15) minutes after activation of the alarm system. All existing alarm systems in the Town of Needham must have such a shut-off device installed within six (6) months of passage of Section 3.3.
(c) Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted signal for more than fifteen (15) minutes between 7 P.M. and 6 A.M. which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed due to the absence or unavailability of the alarm user, or those persons designated by him under paragraph (a) of Sub-section 3.3.3, and which disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of the community, neighborhood or a considerable number of inhabitants of the area where the alarm system is located, shall constitute a public nuisance. Upon receiving complaints regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted signal, the Police Department shall endeavor to contact the alarm user, or members of the alarm user's family, or those persons designated by the alarm user under Sub-section 3.3.3, in an effort to abate the nuisance. The Police Chief shall cause to be recorded the names and addresses of all complaints and the time each complaint was made.
(d) No alarm system which is designated to transmit emergency messages or signals to the Police Department will be tested until the Police Dispatcher has been notified.
(e) The provisions of Section 3.3 shall not apply to alarm devices on premises owned or controlled by the Town, nor to alarm devices installed in a motor vehicle or trailer.
3.3.4 Penalties
(a) The user shall be assessed a false alarm service fine for each false alarm in excess of one (1) occurring within a calendar year according to the following schedule:
1) Second false alarm twenty-five dollars ($25)
2) Third false alarm fifty dollars ($50)
3) Fourth and subsequent false alarms, one-hundred dollars ($100)
The Police Chief shall notify the alarm user by mail or by service in hand by a police officer of such violation and said user shall submit payment to the Town Treasurer for deposit to the General Fund within fifteen (15) days of the notice.
(b) The owner of a system which causes six (6) or more false alarms within a calendar year, or who fails to pay the fee after said notice, may be ordered, by the Select Board, after a public hearing, to disconnect and otherwise discontinue the use of such system.
30
SECTION 3.4 HANDICAPPED PARKING
3.4.1 Requirements for Handicapped Parking Spaces
No person shall park a motor vehicle, motorcycle or any other means of transportation in a designated parking space reserved for vehicles owned and operated by disabled veterans or by other handicapped persons, unless said vehicle bears the distinctive number plates or a handicap placard furnished by the Registry of Motor Vehicles, authorized by M.G.L. Chapter 90, Section 2, or bears an official handicap plate or placard issued by any other state. Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or private way, or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking areas for businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities, cultural centers or residential dwellings, or for any other place where the public has right of access as invitees or licensees, shall reserve parking spaces in said off-street parking areas for vehicles owned and operated by disabled veterans or handicapped persons whose vehicles bear any of the aforementioned means of identification authorized by M.G.L. Chapter 90, Section 2, according the following formulas:
If the number of parking spaces in any such area is more than fifteen but not more than twenty-five, one parking space; more than twenty-five but not more than forty, five percent of such spaces, but not less than two; more than forty but not more than one hundred four percent of such spaces, but not less than three; more than one hundred but not more than two hundred, three percent of such spaces, but not less than four; more than two hundred but not more than five hundred, two percent of such spaces, but not less than six; more than five hundred but not more than one thousand, one and one-half percent of such spaces, but not less than ten; more than one thousand but not more than two thousand, one percent of such spaces, but not less than fifteen; more than two thousand but less than five thousand, three-fourths of one percent of such spaces, but not less than twenty; and more than five thousand, one-half of one percent of such spaces, but not less than thirty.
3.4.2 Sign Requirements for Handicapped Parking Spaces
Parking spaces designated as reserved under the provision of the sections of this article shall be identified by the use of above grade signs with white lettering against a blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking : Special Plate Required. Unauthorized Vehicles may be Removed at Owner's Expense". These spaces shall be as near as possible to a building entrance or walkway, shall be adjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed means permitting sidewalk access to a handicapped person and shall be twelve feet wide or two eight-foot wide areas with four feet of cross hatch between them.
3.4.3 Regulations of Unauthorized Vehicles in Handicapped Spaces
Unauthorized vehicles shall be prohibited within parking spaces designated for use by disabled veterans or handicapped persons as authorized by Section 3.4, or in such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designated for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way.
3.4.4 Penalty
The penalty for violation of Section 3.4 shall be as follows:
$100.00 each offense
SECTION 3.5 ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES
3.5.1 Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of Section 3.5.
(a) Person shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
(b) Vehicle shall mean a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and to transport persons or property or to pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and wagon.
31
(c) Street or highway shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained where any part is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
(d) Property shall mean any real property within the Town which is not a street or highway.
3.5.2 Abandonment of Vehicles
Except as to vehicles for which other provisions are made under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, no person shall abandon any vehicle within the Town, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the Town for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
3.5.3 Leaving of Wrecked, Non-operating Vehicle on Street
Except as to vehicles for which other provisions are made under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, no person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the Town.
3.5.4 Disposition of Wrecked, Unregistered or Discarded Vehicles
No person in charge or control of any property within the Town, whether as owner, tenant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled, non-operating, unregistered, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than ten (10) days. No person shall leave any such vehicle on any property within the Town for a longer time than ten (10) days, except any such vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the Town. This section shall not apply to Class III licenses under M.G.L. Chapter 140, Section 58.
3.5.5 Towing. Any vehicle left unattended, inoperative or in any way impeding the flow of traffic or creating a safety hazard may be ordered removed by a police official, with rank of not less than Sergeant, to some convenient location at the expense of the registered owner of said vehicle.
3.5.6 Impounded. The Fire Chief, Chief of Police, Director of Public Works or any member of their Department designated by such official, is hereby authorized to remove, or have removed, any vehicle left at any place within the Town which reasonably appears to be in violation of Section 3.5, lost, stolen or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 135 relative to unclaimed and abandoned property.
3.5.7 Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of Section 3.5 shall be deemed to have committed a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
SECTION 3.6 FIRE PREVENTION
3.6.1 Fire Lanes, and Vehicles Obstructing the Passage of Fire Apparatus
3.6.1.1 Fire Lanes: The Fire Chief shall require public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective use of fire apparatus. Such fire lanes shall have a minimum width of 18 feet and shall be designated by pavement markings and/or signs as determined necessary by the Fire Chief. The signs shall say "No Parking - Fire Lane" and the signs and pavement markings shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times by the owner of the property and replaced when necessary to insure adequate visibility. Any person who refuses to post such signs or mark the pavement as ordered by Fire Chief or violates any of the provisions of sub-section 3.6.1 shall be punishable by a fine of not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each and every noncompliance or violation.
32
3.6.1.2 It shall be unlawful to leave an unattended vehicle blocking a private way which furnishes access for fire apparatus to any building.
3.6.1.3 It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park a vehicle in any fire lane established by the Fire Chief under Sub-section 3.6.1. The Police Chief, Fire Chief or a member of their departments designated by them is hereby authorized to remove, or have removed, any vehicle within a fire lane established under this section which may block or obstruct the operations of fire apparatus by the Fire Department in the performance of its duties. Such vehicle may be towed and impounded until the costs of towing, impounding and other fines are paid.
3.6.2 Penalties for Improper Use of Fire Alarms
3.6.2.1 Preamble - It is determined that the number of false alarms being made to the Needham Fire Department hinders efficiency and lowers department morale. This situation constitutes a danger to the general public, homeowners, businesses and Needham firemen. The adoption of Sub-section 3.6.2 will reduce the number of false alarms and promote the responsible use of alarm devices in the Town of Needham.
3.6.2.2 Definitions
(a) The term Fire Alarm System means any assembly of equipment and devices or a single device such as a solid-state unit connected directly to a 110 volt alternating current line arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which the Fire Department is expected to respond. The provisions of Sub-section 3.6.2.4 shall apply to all users.
(b) The term False Alarm means (i) the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or negligence on the part of the user of an alarm system, or his employees or agents; (ii) any signal or automatic dialing device transmitted to the Fire Department requesting, requiring or resulting in a response on the part of the Fire Department when there is no fire. For the purposes of this definition, activation of alarm systems for purposes of testing with prior approval by the Fire Department, or by act of God, including but not limited to power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and similar weather or atmospheric disturbances shall not be deemed to be a false alarm.
(c) The term Automatic Dialing Device refers to an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or other otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designated to detect.
3.6.2.3 Control and Curtailment of Signals Emitted by Alarm Systems
(a) Every alarm user shall submit to the Fire Chief his name, address and telephone number, and the names and telephone numbers of at least two other persons who are authorized to respond, after notification by the Fire Department, to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system and who can open the premises in which the alarm system is installed. The owner of said premises shall immediately notify the Needham Fire Department of any changes in the list of employees or other persons authorized to respond to alarms.
(b) All alarm systems installed after the effective date of this by-law, which use an audible horn or bell, shall be equipped with a device that will shut off such bell or horn within (15) minutes after activation of the alarm system. All existing alarm systems in the Town of Needham must have a shut-off device installed within six (6) months of passage of Sub-section 3.6.2.
(c) Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted signal for more than fifteen (15) minutes between 7 P.M. and 6 A.M. which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed when the firemen arrive in response to the alarm, and which disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of the community, neighborhood or a considerable number of inhabitants of the area where the alarm system is located, shall constitute a public nuisance. Upon receiving complaints regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted signal, the Fire Department shall endeavor to contact the alarm user, or members of the alarm user's family, or those persons designated by the alarm user under paragraph (a) of Sub-section 3.6.2.3, in an effort to abate the nuisance. The Fire Chief shall record the names and addresses of all complainants and the time each complaint was made.
33
(d) No alarm system which is designated to transmit emergency messages or signals to the Fire Department will be tested until the Fire Dispatcher has been notified.
(e) The provisions of Sub-section 3.6.2 shall not apply to alarm devices on premises owned or controlled by the Town, nor to alarm devices installed in a motor vehicle or trailer.
3.6.2.4 Penalties
(a) The user shall be assessed one hundred dollars ($100.00) as a false alarm service fine for each false alarm in excess of three (3) occurring within a calendar year. The Fire Chief shall notify the alarm user by mail or by service in hand by a fire department official of such violation and said user shall submit payment to the Town Treasurer for deposit to the General Fund within fifteen (15) days of the notice.
(b) The owner of a system which causes six (6) or more false alarms within a calendar year, or who fails to pay the fee after said notice, may be ordered by the Select Board, after a public hearing, to disconnect and otherwise discontinue the use of the system.
SECTION 3.7 DOG REGULATIONS
3.7.1 Use of Leashes. No person shall allow a dog owned or kept by her/him to go beyond the confines of the property of the owner or keeper unless the dog is held firmly on a leash.
3.7.2 Disturbing the Peace. No person shall own or keep within the Town any dog which bites, excessively barks or howls or in any other manner disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, or endangers the safety of any person, domesticated animal or farm animal.
3.7.3 Complaints. The animal control officer is hereby authorized to seek a complaint against the owner or keeper of a dog who is found to have violated the provisions of sub-sections 3.7.1, 3.7.2, 3.7.4, 3.7.5, 3.7.6, 3.7.7, or 3.7.8 for which the following penalties shall be imposed:
1. First Offense – twenty-five dollars ($25.00)
2. Each Subsequent Offense – fifty dollars ($50.00)
3.7.4 Restraint of Dogs. In addition to the foregoing penalties, the animal control officer is also authorized and empowered to muzzle or restrain a dog, or to order the owner or keeper of a dog to muzzle or restrain a dog, pending a hearing before the Select Board as hereinafter provided, when the animal control officer finds that a dog has bitten or threatened any person or domesticated or farm animal, or has chased any vehicle upon any way open to public travel in the Town, or the owner had violated the provisions of section 3.7 more than three times in any calendar year. The owner or keeper of any dog that has been ordered to be restrained or muzzled under the provisions of section 3.7 may request in writing to the Select Board that the animal control officer vacate such order.
3.7.5 Uncontrollable Dogs. In addition to any other statutory authority contained in M.G.L. Chapter 140, the animal control officer may, with the approval of the Select Board, enter a complaint before the Select Board to obtain an order to control or dispose of a dog found to be uncontrollable, or whose owner or keeper is unresponsive to any other penalties contained in Section 3.7.
3.7.6 Restricted Areas. No person shall allow a dog, other than a service dog, owned or kept by him or her, whether leashed or unleashed, to trespass on Memorial Park or DeFazio Park.
3.7.7 Removal of Pet Waste. No person owning or keeping a dog shall suffer, permit, or allow such a dog to leave feces in any public or private property of someone other than that of the dog’s owner or keeper within the Town of Needham, without the approval of said property owner. Any person having custody and control of a dog in any such area shall carry with him or her proper equipment for the removal of feces. For purposes of this section, the means of removal shall be any tool, implement, or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces. No person shall leave or dispose of said feces in any catch basin, drainage structure, waterway or on any public property or street except in a trash receptacle.
34
3.7.8 Off-Leash Areas. The Town may authorize an area or areas to be used as off-leash areas for dogs licensed in the Town of Needham for which a separate fee will be assessed and for which the Select Board may, from time to time, establish regulations for use. No person owning or keeping a dog shall suffer, permit or allow such dog to use the off leash area without the proper license or in violation of such regulations.
3.7.9 Vaccination Requirement Whoever is the owner of a pet (dog or cat or ferret) six months of age or older shall cause such pet (dog or cat or ferret) to be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian using a vaccine approved by the Department of Public Health. Such owner shall produce a veterinarian’s certificate that such pet (dog or cat or ferret) has been so vaccinated setting forth the date of such vaccination and the duration of immunity, or a notarized letter from a veterinarian that a certification was issued. An exemption from such vaccine may be granted by the Board of Health only upon presentation of a licensed Massachusetts veterinarian’s certificate stating that because of an infirmity, other physical condition or regimen of therapy, such inoculation is considered inadvisable for a specified period of time for such reasons as provided in MGL Chapter 140 s.145B.
3.7.9.1 Unvaccinated pets (dogs or cats or ferrets) acquired or brought into the Town shall be vaccinated within thirty days after acquisition or entry into the Town or upon reaching the age of six months, whichever comes later.
3.7.9.2 Pets (dogs or cats or ferrets) shall be re-vaccinated in accordance with rules and regulations adopted and promulgated by the Department of Public Health.
3.7.9.3 Whoever violates this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars per offense.”
SECTION 3.8 NOISE REGULATION
3.8.1 General
Except in an emergency, construction activity conducted pursuant to a building permit, which causes noise that extends beyond the property line, shall be limited to the hours of 7AM to 8PM unless authorized by rules or regulations adopted by the Select Board. The penalty for violation of this regulation shall be a $50 fine.
SECTION 3.9 PUBLIC NUISANCE REGULATION
3.9.1 As defined below, no owner or tenant shall keep in the public view, on any lot, in any residential district, any substantial amount of junk or debris for more than a reasonable amount of time.
3.9.2 Definitions
3.9.2.1 Junk and Debris includes, but is not limited to, scrap metal, scrap construction materials, rags, plastics, batteries, paper trash, inoperable appliances, mattresses, tires, inoperable machinery, or other item not defined as a structure in accordance with the Massachusetts Building Code and the Town of Needham Zoning By-law, which is not in active use for any purpose authorized in a residential district.
3.9.2.2 A substantial Amount shall mean a quantity of material which occupies more than 375 cubic feet in the aggregate on any lot.
3.9.2.3 Reasonable Amount of Time shall mean thirty (30) days.
3.9.2.4 Public View shall refer to junk and debris viewed from either (i) any property line at six (6) feet or less above ground level, or (ii) by any immediately direct abutter from any place within that immediately direct abutter’s residence.
35
3.9.3 Conditions existing as of the date of the enactment of this section which meet the definition of substantial amounts of junk or debris must be brought into compliance within ninety (90) of the date of the approval of this By-law.
3.9.4 Action under this Section shall not bar any separate action initiated by any other Town Department under other provisions of this By-law or by regulation.
3.9.5 Any Town employee(s) so designated for this work (“enforcement officer”) by the Town Manager shall enforce this By-law. The first notice of violation issued by the enforcement officer shall be a written warning. The owner/occupant shall then have thirty (30) days within which to remedy and cure the violation. If within a reasonable period of time after this thirty (30) days have elapsed, the violation has yet to be remedied, the enforcement officer may issue a second written violation notice with a fine of fifty ($50.00) dollars. If within a reasonable period of time after sixty (60) days have elapsed since the issuance of the first notice of violation, the violation has still not been remedied, the enforcement officer may issue a third written violation with a fine of one hundred ($100.00) dollars, plus an additional ten ($10.00) dollars per day beginning on the 76th day following issuance of the first notice of violation and continuing thereafter until the violation is fully remedied/cured.
In the event that the owner/occupier of the involved property is subsequently cited with a second or third offense within that calendar year, the deadlines for remediation and related fines are as stated in the amended Section 8.2.2.4 of the General By-law.
3.9.6 Any citizen against whom a notice of violation is issued under this By-law shall have the right for a hearing before the Town Manager and/or his/her designee, and following said hearing, the Town Manager and/or his/her designee shall within a reasonable period of time thereafter, issue a decision. From the date that such a hearing request is received by the Town Manager until the date that a decision is issued, all of the deadlines stated in sections 3.9.6 and 3.9.7 shall be temporarily stayed.
SECTION 3.10 MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS All types of “marijuana establishments” as defined in G.L. c.94G, §1, including marijuana cultivators, independent testing laboratories, marijuana product manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed marijuana-related businesses, shall be prohibited within the Town of Needham. Exempt from the provisions of this prohibition are medical marijuana treatment centers operated under a medical use marijuana license in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 94I.
Section 3.11 STRETCH ENERGY CODE
3.11.1 Definitions
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) - The International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building energy code created by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted by many state and municipal governments in the United States for the establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for energy efficiency, and is updated on a three-year cycle. The baseline energy conservation requirements of the MA State Building Code are the IECC with Massachusetts amendments, as approved by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards.
Stretch Energy Code - Codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA of the Massachusetts building code, the Stretch Energy Code is an appendix to the Massachusetts building code, based on further amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) to improve the energy efficiency of buildings built to this code.
3.11.2 Purpose The purpose of 780 CMR 115.AA is to provide a more energy efficient alternative to the Base Energy Code applicable to the relevant sections of the building code for new buildings.
3.11.3 Applicability This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 115.AA, as indicated.
3.11.4 Stretch Energy Code The Stretch Energy Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions, amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into this section.
36
3.11.5 Enforcement The Stretch Energy Code is enforceable by the Building Commissioner effective January 1, 2020.
[Note. ATM Article 49 passed on May 13, 2019 added Section 3.10 entitled “Stretch Energy Code”. Because there was a previous section 3.10 entitled Marijuana Establishments, the town Clerk reniumbered the Stretchy Energy Code to Section 3.11.]
ARTICLE 4
LICENSES AND PERMITS
SECTION 4.1 DOG LICENSES
4.1.1 Licenses. Any owner or keeper of a dog which is six (6) months of age or older and is located in the Town of Needham shall obtain a license from the Town Clerk for that dog commencing on January 1st of each year, as required by M.G.L. Chapter 140.
4.1.2 Application. When applying for a license, the applicant must show proof that the dog has received a veterinarian certificate for rabies vaccination within the last three years, if the dog is six months of age or over, as required by M.G.L. Chapter 140, Section 145B. No fee shall be charged for a license for a dog specifically trained to lead or serve a blind person or a deaf person, provided that the Division of the Blind or Deaf certifies that such dog is so trained and actually in the service of a blind or deaf person.
4.1.3 Refund. No license fee or part thereof shall be refunded because of subsequent death, loss, spaying, neutering or removal from the Town of Needham or the Commonwealth or any other disposal of said dog.
4.1.4 Failure to License. In addition to the requirement that a dog shall be duly licensed as required by law, the owner of a dog not licensed on or before April 30th in any year shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), in addition to the license fee, upon the complaint of the dog officer. The owner of any unspayed and unleashed female dog found by the dog officer roaming in season (heat) off the premises of the owner or keeper shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). Each such occasion shall constitute separate violations.
4.1.5 Fees. The fees for registering and licensing dogs of all types in the Town shall be established from time to time by vote of the Select Board.
SECTION 4.2 PUBLIC CARRIAGES AND TAXIS
4.2.1 Licenses. The Select Board may license hackney carriages or motor vehicles for the conveyance of persons for hire from place to place within the Town and may revoke such licenses at their discretion. A record of all licenses so granted or revoked shall be kept by the Select Board.
4.2.2 Penalties. No person shall set up, use or drive in the Town any unlicensed hackney carriage or motor vehicle for the conveyance of passengers for hire from place to place within the Town. Any person violating Section 4.2 shall be subject to a penalty not exceeding twenty dollars ($20) for each offense.
4.2.3 Expiration and Fees. Licenses shall expire on the thirtieth day of April following the date of issuance, and shall not be transferred without the written consent of the Select Board. For each license the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the Town Treasurer for use by the Town. A license so granted shall become void if the applicant neglects or refuses to take out and pay for his license within ten days after notice that it has been granted.
4.2.4 Taxi Stands. The Select Board may grant to the holder of a license under Section 4.2 a license to use a certain portion of a public way as a taxi stand for the solicitation of passengers for hire and no person shall use any portion of any public way for such purpose without such license. Any person who violates any of the provisions of Sub-section 4.2.4 shall be punished by a fine of not more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense.
37
SECTION 4.3 FEES, REGISTRATION APPLICABLE TO FLAMMABLES
4.3.1 Statutory Authority. Pursuant to the authority of M.G.L. Chapter 148, Sections 10A, 13, 38A and 39A, and the Needham Fire Code, there is hereby established a fee schedule for licenses granted by the Select Board, Annual Certificate of Registration filed with the Town Clerk and Permits granted by the Chief of the Fire Department as follows:
4.3.2 Licenses for the Storage of Flammables issued by the Board of Selectmen
Class A: (all types)
166 - 40,000 gallons . . . $50.00
40,001 - 80,000 gallons . . . 200.00
80,001 - 100,000 gallons . . . 300.00
100,001 - 500,000 gallons . . . 400.00
500,001 - 1,000,000 gallons . . . 500.00
over 1,000,000 gallons . . . . . 800.00
Class B Fuel: (all types)
501 - 20,000 gallons . . . 50.00
20,001 - 40,000 gallons . . . 100.00
40,001 - 80,000 gallons . . . 200.00
80,001 - 100,000 gallons . . . 300.00
100,001 - 500,000 gallons . . . 400.00
500,001 - 1,000,000 gallons. . . 500.00
over 1,000,000 gallons . . . . . 800.00
Class C Fluids (all types)
1,001 - 20,000 gallons . . . 50.00
20,001 - 40,000 gallons . . . 100.00
40,001 - 80,000 gallons . . . 200.00
80,001 - 100,000 gallons . . . 300.00
100,001 - 500,000 gallons . . . 400.00
500,001 - 1,000,000 gallons . . . 500.00
over 1,000,000 gallons . . . . . 800.00
Flammable Solids 101 lbs and up . . . . . 50.00
Flammable Gases (within a building)
3,001 cubic ft, and up . . . . . 50.00
Flammable Gases (outside a building)
10,001 cubic ft. and up . . . . . 50.00
Liquid Petroleum Gases
500 - 1,000 gallons . . . 50.00
over - 1,001 gallons . . . 100.00
Automobiles
The parking of four or more vehicles in a structure - two dollars ($2.00) per vehicle, and not less than fifty dollars ($50.00).
Advertising costs for a hearing by the Select Board for the issuance of a license for the storage of flammables shall be paid by the applicant.
The annual fees shall include the cost of the initial registration with the Town Clerk. The fee for each annual renewal registration with the Town Clerk shall be the amount herein specified for the original license as set forth above.
4.3.3 Permit Fees
38
Underground Storage Tank Removal . . . . $100.00
Underground Storage Tank Installation . . . . 100.00
Underground Gasoline Tank Removal . . . . 100.00
Underground Gasoline Tank Installation . . . . 100.00
SECTION 4.4 GENERAL
4.4.1 Denial, Revocation or Suspension for Failure to Pay Municipal Taxes.
4.4.1.1 The tax collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the tax collector, shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve month period, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the appellate tax board.
4.4.1.2 The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the tax collector or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose owner has neglected or refused to pay local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the tax collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The tax collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the tax collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate.
4.4.1.3 Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
4.4.1.4 The Select Board may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officer, stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 268A, Section 1 in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.
This section 4.4.1 shall not apply to the following licenses and permits authorized by the following Massachusetts General Laws: open burning, section thirteen of chapter forty-eight; bicycle permits, section eleven A of chapter eighty-five; sales of articles for charitable purposes, section thirty-three of chapter one hundred and one; children work-permits, section sixty-nine of chapter one hundred and forty-nine; clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses, section twenty-one E of chapter one hundred and forty; dog licenses, section one hundred and thirty-seven of chapter one hundred and forty; fishing, hunting, trapping license, section twelve of chapter one hundred and thirty-one; marriage licenses, section twenty-eight of chapter two hundred and seven and theatrical events, public exhibition permits, section one hundred and eighty-one of chapter one hundred and forty.
39
ARTICLE 5
SIGN BY-LAW
SECTION 5.1 AUTHORITY AND OBJECTIVES
This article shall be known as the Sign By-Law, and is adopted under the authority of M.G.L. Chapters 93 and 43B. It is intended that this article will serve the following objectives:
Facilitate efficient communications to ensure that people receive the messages they need or want; promote good relationships between signs and the buildings and environment to which they relate; maintain visual diversity by avoiding a requirement of uniformity; and support business vitality within business and industrial zones by avoiding burdensome procedures and restrictions.
It is hereby determined that if the number of signs in the Town of Needham is excessive and unduly distracting to motorists and pedestrians, it can create a traffic hazard, reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public and mar the appearance of the Town of Needham.
The regulations contained in this article are the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve its purposes.
SECTION 5.2 DEFINITIONS
Sign: Any device designated to inform or attract the attention of persons who are not on the premises on which the device is located. Any exterior building surfaces which are internally illuminated or decorated with gaseous tube or other lights are considered signs. The following, however, shall not be considered signs within the context of this article:
a) flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion;
b) legal notices or informational devices erected or required by public agencies;
c) standard gasoline pumps bearing thereon in usual size and form the name, type, and price of gasoline;
d) integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except letter, trademarks, moving parts or parts internally illuminated or decorated with gaseous tube or other lights;
e) on-premises signs guiding and directing traffic and parking, not exceeding two square feet in area and bearing no advertising matter;
f) devices hand-carried or mounted on vehicles, unless regularly or recurrently located for fixed display;
g) signs on newspaper vending machines or newspaper racks, which are limited in context to the name and logo of the newspaper sold via such machine or rack and to the means of purchasing a newspaper from such machine or rack.
Sign Area: The area of the smallest horizontally or vertically oriented rectangle which could enclose all the display area of the sign, together with any backing different in color or material from the finish material of the building face, and together with any decorative framing or other element whose judged intent is to extend the effective sign area, exclusive of minimal supporting framework, but without deducting for open space or other irregularities. Only one side of flat, back-to-back signs need be included in calculating sign area. In the event of lettering on an awning, the sign area shall be the area of the smallest horizontally or vertically oriented rectangle which could enclose all the lettering and symbols thereon.
On-Premises Signs: Only signs pertaining exclusively to the premises on which they are located or to the products, accommodations, services or activities on the premises are on-premises signs.
40
Off-Premises Signs: Signs not pertaining exclusively to the premises on which they are located or to the products, accommodations, services or activities on the premises on which they are located.
Temporary Sign: Any sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, fabric, cardboard, wallboard, wood, metal, or plastic or other light material, with or without frames, intended to be displayed for a continuous period of not more than sixty days.
Permanent Attached Signs: Signs, other than temporary signs, which are attached to a building or visible through its window, whether wall or projecting, are permanent attached signs.
Permanent Freestanding Signs: Signs, other than temporary signs, which are not attached to a building, are permanent freestanding signs.
Compound Sign: One sign structure with two or more signs on it.
Street Banner: A sign in the form of a banner spanning a public street, placed within the Town right-of-way, and/or in locations designated pursuant to Section 5.3.1.5 below.
SECTION 5.3 ADMINISTRATION
5.3.1 Design Review Board. Except for street banners governed, reviewed and approved by the Select Board pursuant to Subsection 5.3.1.5, the review of all sign permit applications, and requests for special permits shall be performed by the Design Review Board (herein referred to as the "Board"), as further defined in Section 7.7 of the Needham Zoning By-Law. Three members shall constitute a quorum. All decisions shall require a positive vote of at least three members.
The Board shall meet at least monthly at such time and place to be determined by the members and at such additional times as it determines necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. In the event a member is unable or refuses to sit, the Chairman shall designate an alternate member to sit in the place of that absent member.
5.3.1.5 Select Board. Street Banners, which are placed within the Town right-of-way, spanning public streets and/or in locations authorized by the Select Board providing notice of a community-wide public event open to the general public and/or an activity of general community interest and which are hosted by the Town or its departments, boards, agencies, or commissions or by non-profit groups or organizations, may be specifically approved by the Select Board and displayed in locations authorized by the Select Board for a time period not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days before the announced event. Neither commercial advertising nor partisan political content shall be allowed to appear on the street banner. All street banners will be removed within two business days after the announced event or entertainment. Street Banners shall not be subject to the sign requirements of Subsections 5.3.2, 5.3.3, 5.3.4, 5.3.5, 5.3.6, and 5.3.7, and Sections 5.4 and 5.5. The Select Board may promulgate such regulations regarding street banners as it deems appropriate.
5.3.2 Issuance of Permits. No sign shall be erected, enlarged, redesigned, structurally altered, or used without the review of the Board, at which the applicant shall appear, and a sign permit issued by the Building Inspector, except for signs described in Sub-sections 5.5.1 (a), 5.5.1 (c), and 5.5.3.4. Permits shall be authorized only for signs in conformance with this article.
Applicants shall file a permit application accompanied by a photograph of the facade to which the sign is to be attached, or the area of intended location if unattached, and two prints of scale drawings of the sign and supporting structure showing placement thereon; the applicant shall also file five copies of the permit application, including five copies of all application materials, with the Design Review Board. (See Section 7.7 Design Review, of the Zoning By-Law.) If an applicant requires guidance as to whether any special permits are required or knows that such permit or permits are required, the applicant may file his application with the Building Inspector. If the Building Inspector finds that the proposed sign is in all respects in conformance with this article, he shall within 35 days of filing instruct the applicant to file the application directly to the Design Review Board.
41
The Design Review Board shall review requests for sign permits submitted and shall, within thirty-five (35) days of the receipt of the application materials, transmit its advisory recommendations regarding the design of the sign to the Building Inspector and the applicant. No sign permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector within this thirty-five (35) day period unless said recommendations are sooner received. If approved by the Design Review Board, the Building Inspector shall issue a sign permit within 45 days of the filing of the application.
If the Building Inspector, upon requested review, finds that the proposed sign is not in conformance with this Article as aforesaid, he shall, within 35 days of the filing of the application notify the applicant in writing of the reasons why a sign permit cannot be granted as of right and give the applicant the option of revising the signage or applying for a special permit. The Building Inspector shall forward a copy of such notice to the Board.
5.3.3 Appeal from Building Inspector's Action or Failure to Act
Any person aggrieved by the Building Inspector's action or failure to act may appeal by filing an appeal with the Board and the Town Clerk within 30 days of the Building Inspector's action or failure to act. The Board shall rule on the appeal within 75 days of the filing of the appeal with the Town Clerk. If the Board denies relief to the applicant, it shall notify him in writing of the reasons for such denial. Failure of the Board to act within said 75 days shall be deemed to be a grant of the relief sought, subject to applicable judicial appeal under state law. If, on appeal, the permit is approved, the Board shall direct the Building Inspector to issue the permit.
5.3.4 Special Permits. If an applicant wishes to obtain a permit for a sign that does not comply with this article, he shall apply to the Board for a Special Permit from the requirements of this article in accordance with the procedure established under Sub-section 5.3.3 of this article. The Board shall set a date for and hold a public hearing. It will be the responsibility of the applicant, at his own expense, to give notice of the public hearing at least seven days in advance by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in Needham and by posting such notice in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less than 7 days before the day of the hearing. The applicant for a Special Permit is further required to give notice of the public hearing, sent 10 days before the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid to all parties in interest.
Parties in Interest as used in Sub-section 5.3.4 shall mean the abutters, owners of land directly opposite the proposed site of the sign on any public or private street or way and abutters to the abutter within three hundred feet of the property line of the applicant as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list.
Publications and notices of the public hearing required by Sub-section 5.3.4 shall contain the name of the area or premises; street address, if any, or other adequate identification of the location, of the area or premises which is the subject of the petition; the date, time and place of the public hearing; the subject matter of the hearing; and the nature of action or relief requested if any. No such hearing shall be held on any day on which a state or municipal election, caucus or primary is held in Needham.
The Board may in its discretion grant a Special Permit, but only if the proposed sign meets all of the Design Guidelines set forth in Sub-section 5.3.5 of this article and if the Board finds that, owing to physical peculiarities of the specific location, literal enforcement of the terms of this article would result in substantial hardship to the applicant or substantial detriment to the vicinity, and that such a Special Permit will be consistent with the stated objectives of this Article. If the Board denies the Special Permit sought, it shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for such denial. Failure of the Board to act within 75 days shall be deemed to be a grant of the permit sought by such applicant. If the permit is approved, the Board shall direct the Building Inspector to issue permit with such terms and conditions it deems appropriate.
Special Permits are not transferable.
5.3.5 Design Guidelines. The following guidelines shall be used by the Board in its review of all sign applications. A Special Permit may be permitted under Sub-section 5.3.4 above only if the Board finds that the proposed sign meets all of the following guidelines:
a) Sign scale is appropriate in relation to development scale, viewer distance and travel speed and sign sizes on nearby structures.
42
b) Sign size, shape and placement serves to define or enhance such architectural elements of the buildings as columns, sill lines, cornices and roof edges, and not to interrupt, obscure or hide them.
c) Sign design is not wholly discontinuous with other signage on the same or adjacent structures, providing continuity in mounting location and height, proportions, materials or other important qualities.
d) Sign materials, colors, lettering style and form are compatible with building design and use.
e) Sign content does not overcrowd background.
f) Sign legibility is not impaired by excessive complexity, multiple lettering styles or colors or other distracting elements.
5.3.6 Fees - General. Application and hearing fees shall be established and revised from time to time by the Board at a level not exceeding that sufficient to defray the estimated cost of administering this article, and shall be based upon the number, area and illumination of the signs applied for.
5.3.7 Temporary Real Estate Signs. Temporary real estate signs require payment of a uniform fee to be determined by the Board whenever a sign is to be displayed on the premises of property being offered. Real estate brokers or agents shall obtain a one-year permit for displaying such signs and shall be subject to a uniform fee to be assessed annually in an amount to be determined by the Board.
SECTION 5.4 GENERAL REGULATIONS
5.4.1 Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a safe and neat condition to the satisfaction of the Building Inspector and in accordance with requirements of the State Building Code. Structural damage, missing letters or other deterioration obscuring content shall be remedied within sixty days or the sign shall be removed. Signs pertaining to a business that has closed, discontinued, or changed its name shall be removed within sixty days.
5.4.2 Prohibitions
5.4.2.1 Illumination
a) Illuminated signs shall be lighted by a steady stationary light, shielded and directed solely at or internal to the sign.
b) No illumination shall be permitted which casts glare onto any residentially used premises or onto any portion of a way so as to create a traffic hazard, or which results in average face brightness exceeding 60-foot lamberts elsewhere.
c) No sign shall be illuminated after 11 P.M. and before 7 A.M., unless related to a retail establishment during hours it is open to the public. In an emergency declared by the Selectmen, however, hours of permissible illumination may be expanded or curtailed to the extent and for such period as the Select Board may require.
d) Flashing signs, strobe lights, and series or chasing lights, are prohibited from being visible outside a business.
5.4.2.2 Location
a) No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets or of a street and driveway in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of its position, shape or color, it may interfere with, or obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
b) No signs shall be attached to motor vehicles, trailers or other movable objects regularly or recurrently located for fixed display.
c) No sign shall be attached to a radio, television, or water tower, or microwave or satellite dish, or any other type of tower or smoke stack.
43
d) No sign shall extend above or beyond the end of the wall to which it is attached, nor overhang a street or sidewalk by more than the thickness (up to 12") of a flat wall sign: except one perpendicular, blade, or projecting sign (hereinafter “projecting sign”) is allowed by right, even if it is a second sign, provided it does not, in the opinion of the Board, materially obstruct neighboring signs or businesses. Projecting signs may not be internally illuminated. If the projecting sign is the only sign requested by an applicant seven (7) square feet are allowed by right. If the projecting sign is in addition to a sign on the façade, three (3) square feet is allowed by right. Projecting signs may have a maximum projection of four (4) feet from the wall and a minimum of eight (8) feet above the sidewalk.
e) No portion of any sign shall be located above the roof line of a building. Roof line means the intersection of the exterior wall and the roof.
f) No freestanding sign shall be located within a required side or rear yard or within fifteen feet of a streetline or extend more than twenty feet above adjoining ground level.
5.4.2.3 Type
a) A V-shaped sign consisting of two single-faced signs shall not be permitted.
b) Pennants, streamers, advertising flags, banners, spinners or similar devices shall not be permitted.
c) No animated or revolving sign shall be permitted and only time and temperature indicators shall be allowed to flash.
d) Sandwich boards are also permitted provided they meet the following requirements: one sign per business; 2 feet by 3 feet maximum sign panel in a black or white colored frame; they are comprised of permanent printed sign panels or handwritten sign panels; they are located on the site of the advertised business’ street front on private property, or if on public property, do not block or interfere with the 48” width of the pubic sidewalk; they are on display during the business’ operating hours only; they may advertise short term sales, daily menus, sign-up periods up to three weeks ahead of end date, and similar special events; they are not internally illuminated; and they do not contain any alcohol or cigarette advertisements.
SECTION 5.5 PERMITTED SIGNS
5.5.1 All Zoning Districts. The following signs are allowed in all zoning districts:
a) One on-premise sign, either attached or free-standing, indicating only the name and/or profession of the owner or occupant, the street and/or number, not to exceed two square feet in area. No permit is required.
b) One off-premise directional sign may be erected and maintained within the public right-of-way at any intersection if authorized by the Select Board, or on private property if authorized following an application and hearing by the Board in accordance with Sub-sections 5.3.2 and 5.3.3 of this article. Such signs shall be permitted only upon the Board's determination that the sign will promote the public interest, will not endanger the public safety and will be of such size, location and design as will not be detrimental to the neighborhood. At locations where directions to more than one establishment are to be provided, all such directional information shall be incorporated into a single structure. All such directional signs shall be unlighted and each shall be not over four square feet in area.
c) Signs of not more than a total of twelve square feet in area, erected for charitable, educational, political or religious purposes. No permit is required.
d) (i) A temporary unlighted real estate sign not larger than twelve square feet in area, advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or subdivision on which it is erected.
(ii) A temporary unlighted sign not larger than twelve square feet indicating the name, address and telephone number of the parties involved in construction on the premises.
44
(iii) For a development of six or more lots or dwelling units, one sign not larger than twelve square feet at each visible street entrance to the development from a prior existing way indicating the name, address and telephone number of the parties involved in construction on the premises.
e) One bulletin board not exceeding twelve square feet for and on the premises of a public, charitable, educational, political or religious institution. No permit is required to change the lettering on such a bulletin board.
f) One memorial sign or tablet indicating the name of the building and/or date of erection, if not exceeding 2% of the area of the wall to which it is attached and if carved into or attached in such a way as to be an integral part of the building, and without separate illumination.
5.5.2 Single Residence, General Residence, Apartment and Institutional Zoning Districts
(a) One on-premises sign, either attached or freestanding, oriented to each street on which the premises abut, each such sign not to exceed twelve square feet in area, indicating the nonresidential principal use or uses of the premises.
(b) One on-premises sign, either attached or freestanding, stating the name of the apartment complex if it contains more than six units, such sign not to exceed twelve square feet.
5.5.3 Business, Industrial, and Industrial Park Zoning Districts
5.5.3.1 Number: In addition to signs allowed under Sub-section 5.5.1 and 5.4.2.2 d) the following are permitted:
a) One permanent sign whether permanently attached or freestanding, as further described in Sub-sections 5.5.3.2 and 5.5.3.3 of this article, for each occupant of separate space per street that the premises abut. However, no permit may be granted for more than one freestanding sign per parcel;
b) One additional sign for each business which has an entrance facing a side or rear parking lot available for use by the public; said sign to be located so as to designate the entrance and to be smaller than the primary sign.
5.5.3.2 Permanent Attached Signs. The total area of all permanent attached signs shall be not more than fifteen percent of the projected area of the elevation to which they are attached. Each sign shall not exceed 2 square feet for every linear foot of the projected area of the elevation to which it is attached, up to a maximum of 32 square feet. If a sign is oriented for visibility from Route 128 (I-95), and is to exceed 32 square feet, then the Board may approve it only after a finding that the sign complies with the Design Guidelines, and no such sign shall exceed one hundred square feet.
5.5.3.3 Permanent Freestanding Signs
a) Area: If a single sign, the area shall not be more than 32 square feet, and not more than 60 square feet if oriented for visibility from Route 128 (I-95). If a compound sign, the total area of a freestanding sign structure shall not exceed 60 square feet
b) Visibility: Every freestanding sign placed within thirty feet of the curb line of intersecting streets and driveways shall have an open space of at least seven feet from the ground to the base of the sign, except that monument signs may be no more than 3 feet above street grade.
c) All freestanding signs on the same parcel of land shall be attached to the same support.
5.5.3.4 Temporary. Except as provided in Section 5.4.2.3 d), temporary signs, in addition to signs allowed under Sub-section 5.5.3.1, are permitted only if unlighted, inside of windows, occupying not more than 25% of the area of each window, and advertising sales, special events or changes in the nature of an operation, but shall not otherwise be used to advertise a continuing or regularly recurring business operation and shall be removed promptly when the information they display is out of date or no longer relevant. No permit is required.
45
5.5.4 Table of Sign Areas. The following table of maximum sign sizes is presented for ease of use. For clarification, refer to the appropriate section(s) of the By-law. In some instances the actual size may be less than the maximum area. Signs of less than 2 square feet require no permit.
Type Maximum Area
(square feet)
Sale, lease, rental subdivision [5.5.1.d (i)] . . . . . 12
Construction [5.5.1.d.(ii)] . . . . . . . 12
Development of 6 or more units or lots [5.5.1.d.(iii)] . . . 12
Real estate signs [5.5.1.d.(i)] . . . . . . 12
Religious, educational, charitable or political
institutions [5.5.1.c] . . . . . . 12
On premise signs, all zoning districts [5.5.1.a] . . . . 2
Nonresidential principal uses in residential
districts [5.5.2.a] . . . . . . . 12
Apartment complexes [5.5.2.b] . . . . . . 12
Business, Industrial, or Industrial Park
Districts Attached [5.5.3.2] 2 sq. ft. for each
linear ft. of building . . . . . . 32
Attached if visible from Rt. 128 [5.5.3.2] . . . . 100
Freestanding [5.5.3.2] . . . . . . 32
Freestanding if visible from Rt. 128 [5.5.3.3]. . . . 60
Off-premises directional signs [5.5.1.b] . . . . . 4
Bulletin boards for institutions [5.5.1.e] . . . . . 12
SECTION 5.6 VIOLATIONS
5.6.1 Fines. Any person violating any provisions of this Article shall be subject to a penalty up to the maximum amount allowed for each offense under the noncriminal processes authorized by M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21D. Each day on which the violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
5.6.2 Notice and Removal. Existing signs which violate this article shall be removed or brought into conformity with this article within thirty days of notification of violation by the Building Inspector, unless he authorizes a longer period necessitated by unavailability of parts.
5.6.3 Pre-existing, Non-Conforming Signs. Signs erected prior to February 24, 1986, and not enlarged, redesigned, or structurally altered after that date other than pursuant to a permit issued by the Building Inspector shall not have to be removed or brought into conformity with this article until February 24, 1996.
ARTICLE 6
46
GENERAL WETLANDS PROTECTION
SECTION 6.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this article is to protect the wetlands, related water resources and adjoining land areas in the Town of Needham by prior review and control of activities deemed by the Conservation Commission likely to have a significant effect upon wetland values, including but not limited to the following: pubic or private water supply, groundwater, flood control, erosion and sedimentation control, storm damage prevention, water pollution prevention, fisheries, wildlife habitat, recreation, agriculture and aquaculture values (collectively, the "wetlands values protected by this article").
SECTION 6.2 JURISDICTION
Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission (hereinafter referred to as "the Commission") or as provided in this article, no person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon or alter the following resource areas: (1) within 100 feet of any freshwater wetland, marsh, wet meadow, bog or swamp; (2) within 100 feet of any bank, beach, dune or flat; (3) any lake, river, pond or stream, whether or not intermittent; (4) within 100 feet of any lake, river, pond, stream or estuary; (5) any land under said waters; or (6) any land subject to flooding (collectively, the "resource areas").
SECTION 6.3 EXCEPTIONS
The permit and application required by this article shall not be required for maintaining or repairing, but not changing or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water, sewer, telephone, telegraph or other telecommunications services, provided that written notice has been given to the Commission at least 14 days prior to commencement of work, and provided that the work conforms to performance standards and design specifications in regulations adopted by the Commission.
The permit and application required by this article shall not be required for work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in agricultural use or in aquacultural use, provided that written notice has been given to the Commission at least 14 days prior to the commencement of work.
The permit and application required by this article shall not apply to emergency projects necessary for the protection of the health or safety of the public, as determined by the Commission, in such circumstances and upon such conditions as it deems appropriate, after advance written notice has been received by the Commission prior to commencement of any work, except for emergency response to safeguard life, health and property damage.
Other than stated in this section, the exceptions provided in the Wetlands Protection Act shall not apply under this article.
SECTION 6.4 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS AND REQUESTS FOR DETERMINATION
Written application to perform activities regulated by this article, affecting resource areas protected by this article, shall be filed with the Commission. The application shall include such information and plans as are deemed necessary by the Commission to describe proposed activities and their effects on the environment. No activities shall commence without receiving and complying with a permit issued pursuant to this article.
The Commission shall accept as the application and plans under this article the Notice of Intent and plans filed under the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40, together with such other information as is required by this article and regulations issued hereunder.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an area is subject to this article may in writing request determination from the Commission. Such a request for determination shall contain data and plans specified by the regulations of the Commission.
47
At the time of an application or request, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified in regulations of the Commission. This fee is in addition to that required by the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40. The Commission may waive or reduce the filing fee and costs and expenses for an application or request filed by a government agency or otherwise as the Commission may determine by its regulations.
SECTION 6.5 NOTICE OF HEARINGS
The Commission in an appropriate case may combine its hearing under this article with the hearing conducted under the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40.
Any person filing an application or a request for determination with the Commission shall give written notice thereof, at the same time, to all abutters at their mailing addresses, shown on the most recent applicable tax list of the
assessors, including owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, and abutters to the abutters within 300 feet of the property line of the applicant, including any in another municipality. The applicant shall notify abutters in writing by hand delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, or by certificates of mailing. If written notification is made by hand-delivery, the applicant shall obtain signatures at the time of delivery acknowledging receipt of said notification. The notice to abutters shall enclose a copy of the application or request, with plans, or shall state where copies may be examined and obtained by abutters free of charge. An affidavit of the person providing such notice, with a copy of the notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the Commission. When a person requesting a determination is other than the owner, the request, the notice of the hearing and the determination itself shall be sent by the Commission to the owner as well as to the person making the request.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any application or request for determination, with written notice given at the expense of the applicant at least five working days prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days from receipt of a completed application or request for determination unless an extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.
The Commission shall issue its permit or determination in writing within 21 days of the close of the public hearing thereon unless an extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.
The Commission shall have the authority to continue the hearing to a date certain announced at the hearing, for reason stated at the hearing, which may include receipt of additional information offered by the applicant or others, information and plans required of the applicant deemed necessary by the Commission in its discretion, or comments and recommendations of boards and officials listed in Section 6.6. In the event the applicant objects to a continuance or postponement, the hearing shall be closed; and the Commission shall take action on such information as is available.
SECTION 6.6 COORDINATION WITH OTHER BOARDS
Any person filing a permit application or a request for determination with the Commission shall provide a copy thereof at the same time, by certified mail (return receipt requested) or hand delivery, to the Select Board, Planning Board, Board of Health and Building Inspector. An affidavit of the person providing such notice, with a copy of the notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the Commission. The Commission shall not take final action until such boards and officials have had 21 days from receipt of notice to file written comments and recommendations with the Commission. The applicant shall have the right to receive any such comments and recommendations and to respond to them at a hearing of the Commission, prior to final action.
SECTION 6.7 PERMITS, DETERMINATION AND CONDITIONS
If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the activities which are the subject of the application are likely to have a significant or cumulative effect upon the wetland values protected by this article, the Commission, within 21 days of the close of the hearing, shall issue or deny a permit for the activities requested. If it issues a permit, the Commission shall impose conditions which the Commission deems necessary or desirable to protect those values and all activities shall be done in accordance with those conditions.
48
The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the requirements of this article; for failure to submit necessary information and plans requested by the Commission; for failure to meet the design specifications, performance standards and other requirements in regulations of the Commission; for failure to avoid or prevent unacceptable significant or cumulative effects upon the wetland values protected by this article; and where conditions are inadequate to protect those values. The Commission may require applicants to retain an independent consultant, acceptable in advance by the Commission, in order to provide the Commission with sufficient information on which to base a decision.
A permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance. Notwithstanding the above, the Commission, in its discretion, may issue a permit expiring five years from the date of issuance for recurring or continuous maintenance work, provided that annual notification of time and location of work is given to the Commission. The Commission may renew any permit for one period of up to three years, provided that such request is received in writing by the Commission at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit.
The Commission may revoke or modify a permit issued under this article for good cause after notice to the holder of the permit, to the public, to abutters and to town boards pursuant to Section 6.5 and a public hearing.
The Commission, in an appropriate case, may combine the permit or other action on an application issued under this article with the Order of Conditions issued under the Wetlands Protection Act.
No work proposed in any application shall be undertaken until the permit issued by the Commission with respect to such work has been recorded in the Norfolk Registry of Deeds or, if the land affected thereby is registered land, in the registry section of the land court for the Norfolk district, and until the holder of the permit certifies in writing to the Commission that the permit has been so recorded.
SECTION 6.8 REGULATIONS
After public notice and public hearing, the Commission shall promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this article. Failure by the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations, or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law, shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this article.
SECTION 6.9 DEFINITIONS
Except as otherwise provided in regulations of the Commission, the definitions of terms in this article are those set forth in the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40 or regulations promulgated thereunder.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this article:
The term person shall include any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to town by-laws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or body, this municipality and any other legal entity, its legal representatives, agents or assigns.
The term alter shall include, without limitation, the following activities when undertaken to, upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by this article:
(a) Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate materials of any kind;
(b) Changing of pre-existing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns or flood retention characteristics;
(c) Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
(d) Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may degrade water quality;
(e) Placing of fill, or removal of material, which would alter elevation;
49
(f) Driving of piles, erection or expansion of buildings or structures of any kind;
(g) Placing of obstructions or objects in water;
(h) Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees;
(i) Changing water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other physical or chemical characteristics of water;
(j) Any activities, changes or work which may cause, or tend to contribute to, pollution of any body of water or groundwater, including but not limited to, application of pesticides or herbicides.
SECTION 6.10 SECURITY
As part of any permit issued under this article and in addition to any security required by any other municipal or state board, agency or official, the Commission may require that the performance and observance of any conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in part by one or more of the methods described below:
(a) By a proper bond, deposit of money, negotiable securities or other undertaking of financial responsibility sufficient, in the opinion of the Commission, to be released in whole or in part upon issuance of a Certificate of Compliance for work performed pursuant to the permit;
(b) By a covenant enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of this municipality, whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and observed before any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed.
Upon written request of the applicant, the Commission shall release the covenant described in (b) above, or partially release said covenant with respect to particular lots, provided that:
1. No violation notice under this Article or enforcement order under M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40 has been recorded at the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds as of the date of the applicant's request; and
2. A proper bond or other undertaking of financial responsibility, as provided in (a) above, and sufficient in the opinion of the Commission, has been given to the Commission.
In the event that a bond or other undertaking has already been given, the Commission reserves the right to increase the amount of the bond or other undertaking of financial responsibility sufficient, in the opinion of the Commission, to secure completion of the work to be performed pursuant to the permit.
SECTION 6.11 ENFORCEMENT
The Commission, its agents, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may make, or cause to be made, such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Commission deems necessary.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce this article, its regulations and permits issued thereunder by violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal court actions.
Upon request of the Commission, Town Counsel shall take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon request of the Commission, the Chief of Police or Town Counsel shall take legal action for enforcement under criminal law.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer having police powers, shall have authority to assist the Commission in enforcement.
Any person who violates any provision of this article, regulations thereunder or permits issued thereunder may be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum amount allowed under Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws. Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; and each provision of the article, regulations or permit violated shall constitute a separate offense.
50
SECTION 6.12 BURDEN OF PROOF
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the application will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative effect upon the wetland values protected by this article. Failure to provide adequate evidence to the Commission supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions.
SECTION 6.13 APPEALS
A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in an action filed within 60 days of the date of the decision in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 249, Section 4.
SECTION 6.14 RELATION TO THE WETLANDS PROTECTION ACT
This article is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rules statutes, independent of the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40, and regulations thereunder.
SECTION 6.15 EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this article shall be September 1, 1988, and shall not be applicable to (a) work presently regulated by Orders of Condition issued by the Commission pursuant to the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40, and regulations thereunder, and (b) work that is the subject of Notices of Intent filed with the Commission prior to September 1, 1988, pursuant to the provisions of said Wetlands Protection Act.
ARTICLE 7
STORMWATER
SECTION 7.1 PURPOSE
The purpose of this By-Law is:
(a) To prevent pollution of Needham’s wetlands and surface waters from uncontrolled stormwater runoff and illicit discharges.
(b) To prevent pollutants from entering the Town of Needham’s Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4).
(c) To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the MS4 and to require the removal of all such illicit connections.
(d) To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater discharges, including the NPDES MS4 Permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the Massachusetts Stormwater Standards, regardless of the location of the subject property relative to wetlands or other resource areas, and the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) issued to the Town of Needham by the EPA in 1996.
(e) To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this By-Law through permitting, inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
(f) To control runoff and prevent soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from construction site stormwater runoff.
(g) To promote infiltration and the recharge of groundwater.
(h) To protect, maintain and enhance the public safety, environment, health, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to manage stormwater runoff.
(i) To ensure that soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and stormwater runoff control practices are incorporated into the site planning and design process and are implemented and maintained.
SECTION 7.2 DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this By-Law, the following definitions shall apply:
51
Alteration Any activity that will change the ability of a ground surface area to absorb water or will change existing surface drainage patterns. Examples include, but are not limited to, construction of new structures, excavation, earthmoving, or paving.
Best Management Practices (BMPs) Structural, non-structural, and managerial techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and practical means to prevent or minimize increases in stormwater volumes and flows, reduce point source and non-point source pollution, and promote stormwater quality and protection of the environment.
Clean Water Act The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) as it may hereafter be amended, and the Massachusetts Clean Water Act and Regulations.
Commercial The term commercial shall include municipal, industrial, and multi-family projects.
Construction Site Any site where activity is proposed or occurs that involves the alteration of land and involves a permit required by the Town.
Development The alteration of land requiring an application for a building permit; or for a permit from the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA), or Conservation Commission.
Erosion Control The prevention or reduction of the movement of soil particles or rock fragments due to stormwater runoff. Erosion control is typically achieved through the installation of straw bales, silt fence, silt socks, or by surface coverings such as jute mesh, erosion control blankets, or by the establishment of surface vegetation.
Dry Well A subsurface structure that infiltrates stormwater runoff.
Green Citizen Certificate A certificate issued by the Select Board conferring recognition to environmentally conscious citizens who install infiltration/recharge systems, rain gardens, or similar stormwater quality improvements that are not required by the Stormwater By-Law or these promulgated regulations.
Illicit Connection A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance that allows a discharge into the MS4 that is not entirely composed of stormwater or clean groundwater, including any connection from an indoor drain, sink, toilet, or laundry facility.
Illicit Discharge Any direct or indirect discharge to the MS4 or the Waters of the Commonwealth that is not composed entirely of stormwater or clean groundwater, including, without limitation, any discharge of a pollutant, sewage, process wastewater, or wash water, except as exempted. The term does not include a discharge in compliance with a NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit or a Surface Water Discharge Permit.
Impervious Surface Any material or structure on, above or below the ground that prevents water from infiltrating through to the underlying soil. Impervious surfaces may include, without limitation: paved surfaces, parking lots, sidewalks, driveways, rooftops and swimming pools.
Large Residential Project A residential project (new construction or reconstruction) of a residential building with larger than 4,000 square feet (s.f.) of ground coverage.
Low Impact Development (LID) Stormwater management systems and practices that mimic natural hydrologic processes resulting in infiltration, evapotranspiration or use of stormwater. LID techniques manage stormwater as close to the source as possible. LID practices frequently use cost-effective landscape features located at the lot level.
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook (MSH) A document published in 1997 and revised and updated in 2008 by MassDEP as guidance on the 1996 Stormwater Policy.
MS4 (Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System) The system of conveyances, owned or operated by the Town of Needham, that is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, swale, culvert, channel, catch basin, outfall, outlet, reservoir, or other drainage structure.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge Permit
52
A permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the state that authorizes the discharge of stormwater containing pollutants into waters of the United States.
New Construction Construction or replacement of a structure, house or building which requires a Building Permit or construction/reconstruction of a parking lot, or construction of a subdivision roadway requiring Planning Board or Board of Appeals approval.
Non-point Source Pollution Rainfall or snowmelt that picks up pollutants as it moves across the ground.
Non-stormwater Discharge A discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater, such as sanitary waste or process water.
Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan A plan setting the functional, financial and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance of a stormwater management system to ensure that it continues to function as designed.
Person An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
Plot Plan The plan that accompanies an application for a Building Permit.
Point Source Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including, without limitation, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. The term does not include agricultural stormwater discharges and return flows from irrigated agriculture.
Pollutant Any element or characteristic of sewage, agricultural, industrial or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be introduced into Needham's MS4 or waters of the Commonwealth. Pollutants shall include, but are not limited to:
(a) Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
(b) Oil and other automotive fluids;
(c) Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
(d) Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, accumulations and floatables;
(e) Excess pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
(f) Hazardous materials and wastes;
(g) Sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
(h) Dissolved and particulate metals or nonmetals, including phosphorus;
(i) Animal wastes;
(j) Rock, sand, salt, silt, soils;
(k) Construction wastes and residues; and
(l) Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Permitting Authority The municipal board, committee or department with authority for issuing permits for construction. These include the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Department of Public Works, Building Department, and Zoning Board of Appeals.
Recharge The process by which groundwater and the underlying aquifer is replenished by the absorption of water.
Redevelopment Replacement, rehabilitation, or expansion of existing structures, improvement of existing roads or reuse of degraded or previously developed areas. Redevelopment is defined to include the following projects:
(a) Maintenance and improvement of existing roadways including widening less than a single lane, adding shoulders, correcting substandard intersections, improving existing drainage systems and repaving; and
(b) Development, rehabilitation, expansion and phased projects on previously developed sites provided the redevelopment results in no net increase in impervious area.
Runoff The water from rain, snowmelt or irrigation that flows over the land surface and is not absorbed into the ground, instead flowing into the MS4 or streams or other surface waters or land depressions.
53
Sanitary Sewer System A separate underground conveyance system specifically for transporting sanitary waste operated separately and independently from the MS4, to which storm, surface, and ground waters are not lawfully admitted.
Small Diameter Drain Program A Town of Needham Program allowing the extension of the Town’s drainage system (MS4) by a series of 6-inch, 8-inch and 10-inch drain pipes used to collect roof drains and clean sump pump discharges.
Stormwater Water originating from rainfall and snow/ice melt.
Stormwater Management The use of structural or non-structural practices that are designed to reduce and control stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes or peak flow discharge rates. Stormwater Management includes the use of Low-Impact Development (LID) management practices.
Vegetation Trees, shrubs, bushes and ground cover, including grass.
Watershed Management Plan The plan developed for the Town of Needham subdividing watershed areas within the Town and depicting drainable soil areas appropriate for infiltration/recharge.
Waters of the Commonwealth All waters within the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts under the Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L ch. 131 section 40 and regulations at 310 CMR 10.00) and regulations at 314 CMR 9.00, Water Quality Certification, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, wetlands, and vernal pools.
Waters of Needham All waters within the jurisdiction of the Town of Needham under the Wetlands Protection Bylaw (Article 6) and implementing regulations, including rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, wetlands and vernal pools.
SECTION 7.3 ADMINISTRATION
7.3.1 The Select Board shall adopt, and may periodically amend, Stormwater Regulations to effectuate the purposes of this By-law, after conducting a public hearing to receive Public comment.
7.3.2 The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the day-to-day administration of this By-Law and its Regulations except as provided in Section 7.3.3 below. The Director may designate a person or persons to carry out any of his/her duties under this Stormwater By-Law.
7.3.3 The issuing authorities for permits (Building Department, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, and Conservation Commission) are responsible for determining compliance with this By-law for any application to these authorities. The Director of Public Works/designee shall review permit applications and provide an advisory opinion to the issuing authorities.
7.3.4 The Director of Public Works/designee shall have the authority to investigate suspected illicit discharges and to require the elimination of illicit discharges.
SECTION 7.4 APPLICABILITY
7.4.1 Permits and Approvals
All persons required to obtain a Building Permit for new construction and/or additions greater than 25% of the existing building footprint shall be subject to the requirements of this By-Law.
All persons also required to obtain Planning Board Site Plan approval pursuant to the Zoning By-Law, Planning Board approval for a Subdivision, and/or a Board of Appeals Decision (for new construction and/or additions greater than 25% of the existing building footprint) are subject to the requirements of this By-Law.
7.4.2 Stormwater Management and Erosion Control
54
Except as listed below, all applications for new construction or redevelopment subject to the provisions of this By-law, whether or not the issuance of a Building Permit is required, shall include Stormwater Management and Erosion Control provisions.
The relevant permitting authority (Building Department, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, or Conservation Commission) shall review and approve the Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan prior to the issuance of a permit.
The Director of Public Works/designee shall participate in the review process and make recommendations to the permitting authority as needed. Applications involving facade treatments, interior renovations, and/or changes in use are exempt from the requirement for a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan.
The following applications do not require a Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan when proposed in an area not subject to jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission:
• Applications for addition to a commercial structure, parking lot, or roadway that is less than 1,500 square feet.
7.4.3 Modification of Building Permits
The applicant, or an agent thereof, shall obtain the approval of the Director of Public Works prior to any change or modification of an activity associated with the Stormwater Management and Erosion Control provisions of the Building Permit. The Director of Public Works shall approve or reject the change or modification in writing on the plot plan submitted within two (2) weeks of the receipt of such change or modification. If no action is taken within the said two-week period, the change or modification shall be deemed to have been approved.
7.4.4 Modification Requiring Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, and/or Conservation Commission Approval
In circumstances where Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, and/or Conservation Commission approval is required prior to the issuance of a Building Permit, approval by the respective board or commission is required prior to any significant change or modification of an activity associated with an approved Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan. Additional stormwater runoff and erosion control measures may be required prior to approval of the change or modification.
SECTION 7.5 ILLICIT DISCHARGE, DETECTION & ELIMINATION (IDDE)
7.5.1 Prohibited Activities
7.5.1.1 Illicit Discharges No person shall cause or allow an illicit discharge into the MS4 or into the Waters of the Commonwealth. This By-Law shall not exempt stormwater discharges from regulations under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater program where applicable.
7.5.1.2 Illicit Connections No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any Illicit Connection, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
7.5.1.3 Obstruction of Municipal Storm Drain System No person shall obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the MS4 without prior written approval from the Director of Public Works.
7.5.2 Regulated Activities
7.5.2.1 No person shall connect a pipe or other appurtenance to the Town of Needham Sanitary Sewer System or the MS4, or otherwise perform any modification, repair, rehabilitation, or replacement work on either system, without receiving an approved Sewer Connection Permit or Drainage Connection Permit from the Department of Public Works.
7.5.2.2 No person shall allow a pipe, swale or other point source to discharge onto a Public Way.
55
7.5.3 Exemptions
The following are exempt from the requirements of this By-Law:
(a) Water line flushing;
(b) Landscape irrigation;
(c) Diverted stream flows;
(d) Rising ground waters,
(e) Uncontaminated ground water (groundwater that is free of pollutants);
(f) Discharges from potable water sources;
(g) Air conditioning condensation;
(h) Lawn watering;
(i) Flows from wetland resource areas;
(j) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities; and
(k) Discharges necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
SECTION 7.6 EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF STORM DRAIN SYSTEM ACCESS
The Director of Public Works/designee may suspend MS4 access to any person or property without prior written notice when such suspension is determined to be necessary to prevent or terminate a threatened or actual discharge of pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment. In the event that any person fails to comply with an emergency suspension order issued pursuant to this section, the Director of Public Works/designee may take all reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
SECTION 7.7 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
7.7.1 Regulated Activities
A Stormwater Management and Erosion Control plan shall be required for any construction activity as set forth under Section 7.4 of this By-Law.
7.7.2 Exempt Activities
The following activities shall be exempt from this By-Law:
(a) Any work or projects for which all necessary approvals and permits have been issued before the effective date of this By-Law;
(b) Use of land for the primary purpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture, or the use, expansion, or reconstruction of existing structures for the primary purpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture, to the extent protected under the Zoning Act, M.G.L. c. 40A, § 3;
(c) Customary cemetery management;
(d) Normal maintenance of Town-owned public land, ways, public utilities and appurtenances; and
(e) Emergency activities necessary to protect public health or safety.
7.7.3 General Requirements
7.7.3.1 Pre-Construction
A Stormwater Management and Erosion Control plan shall be submitted as part of a Building Plot Plan or independently with an application for a Building Permit, Planning Board application, Zoning Board of Appeals application, Conservation Commission application, and/or prior to any development activity.
7.7.3.2 Construction
The Stormwater Management and Erosion Control plan shall include construction period measures to prevent the discharge of silt or sediment to the MS4 and/or abutting properties.
7.7.3.3 Post-Construction
56
For both commercial and residential projects, the Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan shall include provisions for post-construction measures to provide a minimum combined volumetric capacity to recharge a minimum of one (1) inch of rainfall depth over the total impervious area of the property (buildings and impervious surfaces). For commercial projects, the Stormwater Management and Erosion Control Plan shall include stormwater runoff quality controls and other structural and non-structural Best Management Practices (BMPs) to remove pollutants from stormwater prior to recharge to the groundwater in accordance with the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook. The purpose of this plan is to prevent or minimize increases in stormwater volumes and flows to the MS4 and to reduce pollutant loading to the MS4 and receiving waters.
7.7.3.4 Standard Infiltration Method
As one option to satisfy Sections 7.7.3.1 and 7.7.3.2 and 7.7.3.3, for residential and commercial development subject to this By-Law with 4,000 square feet of impervious surface or less on the property, a Standard Infiltration Method (SIM) may be utilized consisting of the installation of drywells at one or more corners of the main dwelling/building to collect the roof runoff from the structure. Building projects involving additions greater than 25% of the existing building footprint but less than 50% of the existing building footprint shall collect the entire runoff from the roof of the addition plus runoff from the roof on the side of the existing structure that contains the addition. Building projects involving additions that are 50% or greater than the existing building footprint shall capture the stormwater runoff from the entire roof. The as-built (certified) Plot Plan showing the improvements to the property shall be stamped by a Massachusetts Registered Land Surveyor.
7.7.3.5 Poor Soils
Properties located within an area of poor soils as identified on the Town’s Watershed Management Plan or due to shallow depth to groundwater or other reason as determined by the Director of Public Works/designee, a small diameter drain shall be extended from the Town’s stormwater drainage system (MS4) down gradient of the property to the property to collect the roof runoff from the main dwelling. If there is no portion of a drainage system within 100 feet of the property, the property owner shall contribute to a fund for the Town to construct a communal infiltration system on Town property. The contribution shall be an amount as determined by the Board of Selectmen per cubic foot of stormwater required to be recharged as described above.
7.7.3.6 Operation and Maintenance Plan
An Operation and Maintenance Plan (O&M Plan) shall be submitted with the application for a Building Permit, Planning Board application, Board of Appeals application, or Conservation Commission application pursuant to this By-Law. The Operation and Maintenance Plan shall be designed to ensure compliance with this By-Law in all seasons and throughout the life of the system. The O&M Plan shall be signed by the property owner. For residential and commercial development with 4,000 square feet of impervious surface or less, the O&M Plan shall consist of an annual inspection of the drywells, and removal of sediment, leaves or debris as needed.
7.7.3.7 As-Built Drawing
Except as provided for in Section 7.7.3.4, as-built drawings stamped by a Massachusetts Registered Professional Engineer showing all stormwater management systems shall accompany the as-built Plot Plan at the completion of a project.
7.7.4 Design Criteria
7.7.4.1 Residential development and commercial development with 4,000 square feet or less of impervious surface constructed using the Standard Infiltration Method (SIM) will be deemed compliant with the design criteria of this By-law.
57
7.7.4.2 All developments subject to this By-Law shall satisfy the following design criteria:
(a) Stormwater Management and Erosion Control measures must, in the opinion of the Building Department, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, or Conservation Commission, as the case may be, be in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Massachusetts Stormwater Standards issued in 1996 as amended, regardless of the proximity of the development to resource areas or their buffer zones, as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. c. 131, § 40 and its implementing regulations.
(b) Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to prevent adverse impacts caused by the discharge of silt or sediment to municipal and/or abutting properties during and after land disturbance and construction activities.
(c) There shall be no change to the existing conditions of abutting properties from any increase in volume or peak rate of stormwater runoff or from erosion, silting, flooding, sedimentation or impacts to wetlands and other resource areas as defined in the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and/or Needham Wetlands Protection Bylaw.
(d) When any proposed discharge may have an impact upon streams, wetlands and/or the MS4 or its conveyance system (storm sewers), the Director of Public Works/designee may require minimization or elimination of this impact based on site conditions and existing stormwater system capacity.
SECTION 7.8 MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES
[Reserved]
SECTION 7.9 SEVERABILITY
If any provision of this Article shall be found invalid for any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall be construed as narrowly as possible, and the balance of the Article shall be deemed to be amended to the minimum extent necessary, so as to secure the purposes thereof.
SECTION 7.10 ENFORCEMENT
The Director of Public Works/designee shall enforce this By-Law, and any regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders made pursuant to this By-Law as follows:
7.10.1 The Director of Public Works may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this By-Law or the regulations thereunder, which may include (but are not limited to) an order to:
(a) eliminate illicit connections or discharges to the MS4;
(b) perform monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(c) cease and desist unlawful discharges, practices, or operations; and
(d) remediate contamination in connection therewith.
7.10.2 If the Director of Public Works/designee determines that abatement or remediation of contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, it shall be a violation of this By-Law and the Director of Public Works/designee may, at his or her option, authorize such work.
7.10.3 Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Public Works/designee under this provision of this Stormwater By-Law may submit a letter of appeal to the Board of Selectmen who may affirm, amend, or overrule that decision after a public meeting held not more than 45 days after the submission of a letter of appeal.
7.10.4 If a person violates the provisions of this By-Law, or any regulation, permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the Director of Public Works/designee, with the approval of the Select Board, may seek injunctive relief in a court of
58
competent jurisdiction to restrain such person from activities that would create further violations or to compel the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
7.10.5 The remedies set forth in this Section are not intended to be exclusive of any other remedies available under applicable federal, state, or local law.
SECTION 7.11 WAIVER
The permit granting authority may waive strict compliance with any requirement of this By-Law when (a) such action would serve a substantial public interest, (b) such action is required for compliance with the Massachusetts Contingency Plan (MCP), or (c) strict compliance would result in severe economic hardship greater in magnitude than the public interest to be served.
ARTICLE 8
PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT OF TOWN BY-LAWS,
RULES AND REGULATIONS
SECTION 8.1 PENALTIES
8.1.1 Whoever performs an act, or carries on a business or an activity within the Town for which a license or permit is required by the provisions of these General By-Laws, the Building, Plumbing and Electrical Wiring Codes and the Zoning By-Laws, without having a valid outstanding license or permit to perform such an act, or to carry on such business or activity, shall, unless a specific penalty is provided elsewhere in said by-laws or codes, be punished by a fine of not exceeding twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense.
8.1.2 Except as may be otherwise provided by law, and as the district court may see fit to impose, for any violation of these General By-laws the minimum penalty for each violation shall be fifty dollars ($50). The maximum penalty for each violation or offense brought in such manner shall be three hundred dollars ($300).
SECTION 8.2 ENFORCEMENT
8.2.1 Criminal Complaint. Any person violating any provision of these General By-Laws may be penalized by indictment or on complaint brought in the district court.
8.2.2 Non-criminal Disposition. Any person violating any provision of these General By-Laws, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition as provided in M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21D. The non-criminal method of disposition may also be used for violations of any rule or regulation of any municipal officer, board or department which is subject to a specific penalty.
Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the intention of this provision that the following sub-sections are to be included within the scope of this sub-section, that the specific penalties as listed here shall apply in such cases and that in addition to the municipal personnel listed for each section, if any, police officers shall in all cases be considered enforcing persons for the purpose of this provision; and each day on which any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
8.2.2.1 Zoning By-Law
Enforcement Agent: Building Inspector, Assistant Building Inspector
Fine Schedule:
Warning - First Offense;
$50. - subsequent offenses
59
8.2.2.2 Sign By-Law (Section 5)
Enforcement Agent: Building Inspector, Assistant Building Inspector
Fine Schedule:
Warning - First offense;
$50. - subsequent offenses
8.2.2.3 Demolition of Historical Buildings (2.11.5.9)
Enforcement Agent: Building Inspector
Fine Schedule: Up to $300 per offense.
8.2.2.4 Police Regulations
A. Grazing Of Animals (Sub-section 3.1.1)
Fine Schedule:
$20. per offense
B. Obstructing Public Ways Or Sidewalks (Sub-section 3.1.2)
Fine Schedule:
$50. per offense
C. Carrying Refuse Substances Without Board Of Health Approval (Sub-section 2.5.1)
Enforcement Agent: Health Director and Sanitarian
Fine Schedule:
First Offense - $50.
Second Offense - $100.
Third Offense - $200
Fourth and Subsequent Offenses - $300
D. Coasting On A Public Way (Sub-section 3.1.3)
Fine Schedule:
$20. per offense
E. Driving On A Public Sidewalk or Footpath (Sub-section 3.1.4)
Fine Schedule:
$50. per offense
F. Riding Bicycles On Sidewalks In Needham Square and The Heights Square Business
Districts (Sub-section 3.1.5)
Fine Schedule:
$20. per offense
G. Discharging A Firearm (Sub-section 3.1.6)
Fine Schedule:
First Offense - $50.
Second Offense - $100.
Third Offense - $200
Fourth and Subsequent Offenses - $300
60
H. Corner Clearance (Sub-section 2.2.5.1.6)
Enforcement Agent: Town Engineer/Building Inspector
Fine Schedule:
$50. per offense
I. Alcoholic Beverages On Public Property (Sub-sections 3.1.9)
Fine Schedule:
$50. per offense
J. Public Consumption of Marijuana (Sub-section 3.1.10)
Fine Schedule: $50 per offense
K. Licensed Hawkers And Peddlers (Sub-section 3.1.11)
Fine Schedule:
$50. per offense
L. Nighttime Closing Hours (Sub-sections 3.2.1 through 3.2.5)
Fine Schedule:
$200. per offense
M. Obstructing Fire Lanes (Sub-sections 3.6.1.1 through 3.6.1.3)
Enforcement Agent: Fire Chief/Fire Inspectors
Fine Schedule:
$50. per offense
N. Public Carriages (Taxis) (Sub-sections 4.2.1 through 4.2.4)
Fine Schedule:
$50. per offense
O. Abandoned Cars (Sub-section 3.5.4 – 3.5.7)
Fine Schedule:
$50.00
P. Discharge of Water (Sub-section 3.1.12)
Fine Schedule:
$50.00 per offense
Q. Snow and Ice on Sidewalks (Sub-Section 3.1.8)
Enforcement Agent: Any DPW Supervisor
Fine Schedule: $50.00 per offense
R. Discharge of Bow and Arrow (Section 3.1.13)
Fine Schedule:
First Offense - $50.
Second Offense - $100.
Third Offense - $200
Fourth and Subsequent Offenses - $300
61
S. Noise Regulation (Section 3.8.1)
Fine Schedule:
$0 First offense
$25. Second offense
$50. For each additional offense
T. Public Nuisance Regulation (Section 3.9)
Fine Schedule:
$0 First offense – written warning
$50. Failure to remedy/cure first offense within thirty (30) days following issuance of the first notice of violation
$100. Failure to remedy/cure first offense within sixty (60) days following issuance of the first notice of violation
$10 Additional per diem fine for failure to remedy/cure first offense within seventy-five (75) days following issuance of the first notice of violation, which additional daily fine shall continue until the first offense is fully remedied/cured
$50. Second offense within the calendar year
$100. Failure to remedy/cure second offense within thirty (30) days following issuance of the first notice of violation
$10. Additional per diem fine for failure to remedy/cure second offense within forty-five (45) days following issuance of the first notice of violation, which additional fine shall continue until the second offense is fully remedied/cured
$100. Third offense within the calendar year
$200. Failure to remedy/cure third offense within thirty (30) days following issuance of the first notice of violation
$10. Additional per diem fine for failure to remedy/cure third offense within forty-five (45) days following issuance of the first notice of violation, which additional fine shall continue until the third offense is fully remedied/cured.
U. Vaccination Requirements (Section 3.7.9)
Enforcement Agent: Animal Control Officer
Fine Schedule: $50 per offense
V. Street Occupancy Permit/Excavation in a Public Way (Sub-section 2.2.5.1.4)
Enforcement Agent: Director of Public Works or his or her designee
Fine Schedule:
$300 per offense
8.2.2.5 Conservation Commission Regulations
A. Wetlands Protection By-Law (Sub-sections 6.1 through 6.15)
Enforcement Agent: Conservation Commission Chairman/Conservation Agent
Fine Schedule:
$100. first offense
$200. subsequent offenses
62
8.2.2.6 Fire Department Licenses And Permits (Sub-sections 4.3.1 through 4.3.3)
A. Removing Underground Tank Without A Permit
Enforcement Agent: Fire Chief/Fire Inspector
Fine Schedule:
$200. per offense
B. Failure To Obtain Required Fire Department License Or Permit
Enforcement Agent: Fire Chief/ Deputy Chiefs/Fire Inspectors
Fine Schedule:
$200. per offense
8.2.2.7 Board Of Health Regulations
Enforcement Agent: Health Director, Environmental Health Agent,
or Public Health Nurse
Fine Schedule:
First Offense - $50
Second Offense - $100
Third Offense - $200
Fourth and Subsequent Offenses - $300
8.2.2.8 Select Board Regulations
A. Regulations Regarding For-Profit Transient Vendors/Businesses; Hawkers and Peddlers;
Door to Door Solicitations
$25.00 First offense
$50.00 Each subsequent offense within any twelve month period, each subsequent
offense constituting a separate offense. (Revised Article 70, 2001 A.T.M.)
B. Regulations Regarding Trench Safety Authorized by Section 2.2.5.4.4
Enforcement Agent: Director of Public Works
Fine Schedule: $100 per offense.
C. Water Emergencies; Violations (Sub-Section 2.2.5.5)
Enforcement Agent: Any DPW Supervisor
First violation: Written Warning
Second violation (issued within the same calendar year): $50
Third violation (issued within the same calendar year): $200
Fourth and subsequent violations (issued within the same calendar year): $300
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Private Ways (Sub-Section 2.2.5.6)
Enforcement Agent: Fire Chief
$50 per offense.
63
8.2.2.9 Stormwater Regulation (Article 7)
Enforcement Agent: Director of Public Works, Town Engineer
Fine Schedule
First Offense – Written Warning
Second Offense – failure to cure offense within 15 days’ of notice of first offense - $50 - each day being a separate offense.
Subsequent Offenses – failure to cure offense within 15 days’ notice of second offense - $100 - each day being a separate offense.
ARTICLE 9
LEGAL CONSTRUCTION OF GENERAL
BY-LAW PROVISIONS
SECTION 9.1 DEFINITIONS
As used in these General By-Laws, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly requires a different construction:
Home Rule Amendment - Amendment Article II of the Constitution of the Commonwealth, as revised by Amendment Article LXXXIX of said Constitution, all as the same from time to time be amended hereafter.
M.G.L. - the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as most recently amended.
Town - the Town of Needham.
Town Charter - Acts of 1971, Chapter 403 (the Needham Special Home Rule Charter Act), as from time to time amended.
SECTION 9.2 EFFECT OF GENERAL LAW AMENDMENTS
If a provision of the General Laws, cited in a Town by-law, shall be renumbered and located elsewhere in the General Laws by the General Court or by an initiative law, the old citation appearing in by-law shall be construed as meaning the new provision, until such by-law is amended to correct the reference. The Town Counsel shall, as necessary, submit to the Town Meeting as soon as may be, proposals to correct any statutory references in the Town by-laws.
SECTION 9.3 CONSTRUCTION OF OTHER WORDS AND PHRASES
Words and phrases used in General By-Law provisions enacted under authority of, or in implementation of, general or special laws of the Commonwealth shall have the meaning such words and phrases have in said laws, unless the by-law context clearly requires a different construction.
SECTION 9.4 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE
These Articles, and their various parts, sections and clauses thereof, are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section or clause is adjudged invalid by the Attorney General or by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall remain in full force and effect.
Town of Needham
Massachusetts
Charter
(Acts of 1971, C. 403 as amended by the
Act of the General Court.)
July 2019 Compilation
TOWN OF NEEDHAM
CHARTER
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Charter Page
Part 1 Incorporation, Short Title, Definitions . . . . . 1
Part 2 Representative Town Meeting . . . . . . 1
Part 3 Town Officers . . . . . . . . 6
Part 4 Public Works . . . . . . . . 10
Part 5 Park, Recreation and Conservation . . . . . 12
Part 6 Municipal Planning . . . . . . . 13
Part 7 General Provisions . . . . . . . 13
1
PART 1.
INCORPORATION, SHORT TITLE, DEFINITIONS
Section 1. Incorporation Continued. All the inhabitants dwelling within the territorial limits of the town of Needham, as presently and hereafter constituted, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate known as the town of Needham which shall be a political subdivision of the commonwealth and, as such, shall have perpetual succession and shall hold and exercise all powers and privileges heretofore exercised by the town and any additional powers and privileges herein conferred and all powers and privileges conferred upon towns under the constitution and laws of the commonwealth.
Section 2. Short Title. This act shall be known and may be cited as the Needham special home rule charter.
Section 3. Definitions. As used in this act, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context or the constitution of the commonwealth clearly requires otherwise.
"Charter", this act and any amendments to this act adopted pursuant to chapter 43B of the General Laws.
Civil defense laws", all General Laws, temporary laws and the provisions of this charter relative to: (i) the defense of the commonwealth in anticipation of, during and following enemy attack; (ii) the suppression of domestic disorders; (iii) the protection of order, life and property during and immediately following natural or man made disasters of great magnitude; and (iv) the continuity of government in the commonwealth and in the town during and immediately following any such attack, disorder or disaster.
"Town meeting", a regular or special meeting of the elected representative town meeting members; provided., however, that “town meeting” shall not include a meeting of the registered voters of the town unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
"Vote of the town", a town by law or a vote adopted by the town meeting including, where appropriate to the context, the results of a referendum.
PART 2.
REPRESENTATIVE TOWN MEETING
Section 4. Representative Town Meeting Continued. There shall continue to be in the town the form of representative town government by limited town meetings as set forth herein.
Section 5. Establishment of Town Meeting Precincts. The division of the town into 10 voting precincts shall continue until re-divided pursuant to this section. The select board, in exercising its authority to divide the territory of the town into voting precincts, shall make such division as will provide not more than 10 precincts, each of which shall contain approximately the same number of inhabitants.
The precincts shall be established so as to consist of compact and contiguous territory and bounded, so far as possible, by the center line of known streets and ways or by other well defined limits. Their boundaries shall be reviewed and, if need be, revised by the select board based on the most recent federal census in the second January following the taking of the census, conformable to the requirements of sections 1 to 10, inclusive, of chapter 54 of the General Laws. In any year when so directed by a vote of a town meeting, the boundaries shall be reviewed and, if necessary, revised by the select board in conformity to said sections 1 to 10, inclusive, of said chapter 54.
Not later than 20 days after the establishment or revision of the precincts, but not later than January 31 of that year, the select board shall file a report of their doings with the town clerk, the registrars of voters and the assessors with maps or descriptions of the precincts and the names and residences of the registered voters therein. The select board shall also cause to be posted at the town hall such maps or descriptions of the precincts as established or revised from time to time, with the names and residences of the registered voters therein. They shall also cause to be posted in at least 1 public place in each precinct a map or description of that precinct, with the names and residences of the registered voters therein
2
The division of the town into precincts and any revision of such precincts shall take effect on the date that the select board files the report thereof with the town clerk. Whenever the precincts are established or revised, the town clerk shall forthwith give written notice thereof to the state secretary, stating the number and designation of the precincts.
Meetings of the registered voters of the several precincts for elections, for primaries and for voting upon any question to be submitted to all of the registered voters of the town shall be held on the same day and at the same hour and at such places within the town as the select board shall direct in the warrant for such meeting.
Section 6. Representative Town Meeting Membership. Other than the officers designated in section 7 as town meeting members at large, the representative town meeting membership in each precinct shall consist of the largest number divisible by 3 which will admit of a representation thereof in the approximate proportion which the number of inhabitants therein bears to the total number of inhabitants in the town and which will cause the total elected membership to be as nearly but not more than 240 as may be.
In any year in which a revision of the precincts in the town may not be done because of the restrictions imposed by chapter 54 of the General Laws, the select board may reapportion the seats of the town meeting members elected from precincts in proportion to the number of inhabitants residing therein in order to reflect significant population changes as estimated by the town clerk using the annual street listings and the annual school census.
The registered voters in each precinct shall elect by ballot the number of registered voters in the precinct, other than the officers designated in section 7 as town meeting members at large, as provided for in the first paragraph to be town meeting members.
The incumbent town meeting members serving at the time this charter takes effect shall continue to serve the balance of the terms for which they were elected. Their successors shall be elected in the same manner for 3-year terms as may be necessary to provide for each precinct the total number to which it is then entitled. Upon the redivision of the town into a greater or lesser number of precincts in accordance with the procedures set forth in this charter and in the General Laws, the terms of all incumbent town meeting members shall terminate upon the election and qualification of their successors as provided in the following paragraph.
After any redivision of the town into precincts as provided in this charter, the registered voters in each precinct shall elect by ballot the number of registered voters in the precinct, other than the officers designated in section 7 as town meeting members at large, as provided for in the first paragraph to be town meeting members pursuant to the following paragraph.
The first third in order of votes received of members so elected shall serve 3 years, the second third in such order shall serve 2 years and the remaining third in such order shall serve 1 year, beginning on the day of such election. In case of a tie vote affecting the division into thirds, the members elected from the precinct shall determine the same by ballot. Thereafter, except as otherwise provided herein, at each annual town election, the registered voters of each precinct shall, in like manner, elect as town meeting members for terms of 3 years such number of elected town meeting members as are necessary to provide for such precinct the total number of elected town meeting members to which it is then entitled and the registered voters shall at such election fill any vacancies then existing in the number of town meeting members in such precinct and such persons elected shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired terms for which they were elected. The terms of office of all elected town meeting members from each precinct shall cease upon the election of their successors as herein provided. Town meeting members as such shall receive no compensation. After each election of town meeting members, the town clerk shall forthwith notify each member by mail of their election.
Section 7. Town Meeting Members at Large. Any representative town meeting held under this charter, except as otherwise provided herein, shall be limited to the voters elected pursuant to section 6, together with the following elected officers designated as town meeting members at large, each of whom shall have the right to vote in the town meeting: (a) any resident member of the general court from the town whose state legislative district is wholly within the town; (b) the moderator; (c) the town clerk; (d) the members of the select board; (e) the chairperson of each other elected board of the town, except the housing authority and the commissioners of trust funds.
If a voter elected to be a town meeting member under section 6 shall be elected to become 1 of the officers designated as a town meeting member at large in clauses (a) to (d), inclusive, of the first paragraph, such person shall, upon such election, cease to be a town meeting member elected under said section 6 and the resulting vacancy in the representation of that member’s precinct shall be filled as provided in section 9. A voter may serve at the same time as a town meeting member upon election as such under said section 6 and as an officer designated as a town meeting member at large under clause (e)
3
of said first paragraph and such voter may vote in proceedings of the town meeting as a single member and shall not vote a second time by reason of such dual tenure of offices. The designation as a town meeting member at large under said clause (e) of said first paragraph shall apply to the chair of the elected board as of the tenth day following the annual town election.
Section 8. Nomination of Candidates for Town Meeting Members. Nomination of candidates for town meeting members to be elected under this charter shall be made by nomination papers, which shall bear no political designation, but to the name of an incumbent candidate elected by the people, the words "Candidate for Re-election" may be added. Nomination papers shall be signed by not less than 10 voters of the precinct in which the candidate resides and shall be filed with the town clerk not later than the date fixed by law as the last day for filing nomination papers by candidates for town office; provided, however, that any town meeting member may become a candidate for reelection by giving written notice thereof to the town clerk not later than the last date fixed by law for the giving of such notice. No nomination papers shall be valid in respect to any candidate whose written acceptance is not thereon or attached thereto when filed.
Section 9. Resignations and Vacancies in Elected Town Meeting Membership. A town meeting member may resign by filing a written resignation with the town clerk and such resignation shall take effect on the date of such filing. A town meeting member who removes from the town shall cease to be a town meeting member and an elected town meeting member who removes from 1 precinct to another or becomes removed due to a revision of precincts shall not retain membership after the next annual election as an elected member from the precinct from which he is removed.
If a vacancy occurs in the full number of town meeting members from any precinct, whether arising from a failure of the registered voters thereof to elect or from any other cause, the town clerk shall immediately select the person who received the next highest number of votes for the office of town meeting member in the preceding election in that precinct and shall notify such person of such person’s appointment as a town meeting member. If that candidate does not accept such appointment, the town clerk shall select the person who received the next highest number of votes for the office of town meeting member in the preceding election in that precinct. If that candidate does not accept such appointment, the town clerk shall call together the town meeting members of the precinct wherein the vacancy occurred and they shall by majority vote of those present, elect any registered voter of that precinct to fill the vacancy. The town clerk shall count the ballots, make a certificate of the election and notify the person so chosen and, upon receipt by the town clerk of a written acceptance by the person so elected, the person shall be deemed elected and qualified as a town meeting member, subject to the right of all town meeting members to judge the election and qualification of its members, as provided in section 10.
A town meeting member appointed or elected to fill a vacancy pursuant to this section shall serve only until the next annual town election.
A tie vote between 2 or more persons for the last place to be filled by elected candidates or between 2 or more persons with the highest number of votes as defeated candidates or between 2 or more persons with the second highest number of votes as defeated candidates shall be resolved by a majority vote of the town meeting members from that precinct attending a meeting called by the town clerk for that purpose. Upon resolution of a tie vote by the town meeting members, any person not so chosen for the last place to be filled by elected candidates shall be deemed to be the person or receiving the highest number of votes as defeated candidates and any person so tied at the election with the highest number of votes as defeated candidates who are not so chosen by the town meeting members of the precinct shall be deemed to be the person or person receiving the second highest vote as defeated candidates.
Section 10. Town Meeting to be Judge of Own Members. The representative town meeting shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its elected members.
Section 11. Time, Notice, Conduct and Adjournment of Town Meeting. The annual town meeting for the election of town officers and such other matters as may be voted on the official ballot and the annual town meeting for the transaction of business by the representative town meeting shall be held in February, March, April or May of each year as shall be determined by vote of the town.
The town clerk shall notify town meeting members of the time and place at which representative town meetings shall be held and such notices shall be sent by mail at least 7 days before the meeting.
A majority of the town meeting members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business but a lesser number may organize temporarily and may adjourn from time to time. Notice of each adjourned representative town meeting shall be posted by the town clerk in at least 5 public places in the town and the town clerk shall also notify the members by mail of
4
the adjournment at least 24 hours, if the period of adjournment shall permit, before the time of the adjourned representative town meeting. A notice shall state briefly the business to be acted upon at the town meeting and shall include notice of any proposed reconsideration. All town meetings shall be open to the public and the press and, subject to such conditions as may be determined from time to time by the representative town meeting, a voter of the town who is not a town meeting member may speak at any representative town meeting but shall not vote.
Section 12. Warrant Articles and Voting Thereon by Town Meeting. The articles in the warrant for every town meeting that relate to the election of the moderator, town offices, town meeting members, to referenda and to all other matters to be acted upon and determined by ballot shall be acted upon and determined by the registered voters of the town in their respective precincts.
All other articles in the warrant for a town meeting shall be acted upon and determined exclusively by town meeting members at a meeting to be held at such time and place as shall be set forth by the select board in the warrant for the meeting, subject to the referendum procedure provided for in section 13.
Section 12A. Right of Initiative; Initiative Procedures. Registered voters of the town may, by initiative petition prepared and filed in accordance with this section, propose to an annual town meeting the passage of a measure. If the measure fails to pass at the annual town meeting, the registered voters may cause the measure to be submitted to the voters of the town for their approval or disapproval as hereinafter provided; provided, however, that no measure shall be proposed by initiative petition which: (i) makes a specific appropriation of money from the treasury of the town other than an appropriation to pay for the costs of a study or to pay for a capital acquisition or improvement; (ii) amends the zoning map or zoning by laws of the town; or (iii) proposes the submission to the voters of the town of an amendment to the charter.
An initiative petition shall set forth the full text of the measure proposed by the petitioners and shall first be signed by not less than 100 and not more than 250 registered voters of the town, each of whom shall sign their name and record their address on the petition as such person’s name and address appear on the list of registered voters. The initiative petition shall be submitted to the town counsel not later than the fifteenth day of January prior to the annual town meeting into which that petition is to be introduced. If the town counsel shall certify that the measure proposed by the initiative petition does not conflict with the constitution or the laws of the commonwealth and that it includes only subjects not excluded from the initiative by this section, the initiative petition shall then be filed by the town counsel with the select board and the select board shall cause the proposed measure to be included in the warrant for the annual town meeting as an initiative article and shall be so designated; provided, however, that if the town counsel fails within 10 days following receipt of an initiative petition, to notify the select board in writing of the counsel’s reasons for not certifying the petition, the petition shall be deemed to have been certified by the town counsel and, upon the request of any registered voter who had previously signed that petition, the select board shall cause the proposed measure to be included in the warrant as an initiative article and shall be so designated.
If an initiative article is included in the warrant for an annual town meeting, the moderator shall give to any registered voter of the town who signed the initiative petition the privilege of making the first substantive motion under the initiative article, which shall be in the words of the proposal in the article. The moderator shall allow opportunity for debate on the initiative article and on motions thereunder and shall not accept a motion to put the previous questions as to the first substantive motion or as to any motion in substitution therefor until the petitioners and their opponents have been afforded a reasonable time within which to present their arguments without repetition. The town meeting shall act on the first substantive motion in the form in which it was presented and, if such motion is not passed, the town meeting may take such other action under the initiative article which is within the scope thereof, including the adoption of any alternative measure. Action under an initiative article shall be taken by a majority vote, by a 2/3 vote or by such other vote as may be required by the nature of the action under any applicable state law.
If the annual town meeting shall dissolve without having adopted, enacted or voted on passage of the first substantive motion presented as aforesaid under an initiative article but at least 1/4 of the total number of town meeting members voting upon the first substantive motion have voted in the affirmative, the original petitioners of the initiative article may complete their petition by filing with the select board an additional number of signatures of registered voters of the town which, when combined with the signatures of the original petitioners, shall equal in number not less than 15 per cent of the total number of persons registered to vote in the town. Each additional signatory voter shall sign the voter’s name, and set forth the voter’s address on the petition as it appears on the list of registered voters and all additional signatures shall be gathered not earlier than the day following the day on which the aforesaid town meeting dissolved and shall be filed with the select board as set forth above not later than 20 days, not including Sundays and legal holidays, following the dissolution.
5
If the annual town meeting has adopted, enacted or voted passage of any motion as an alternative to or a substitute for the first substantive motion, the original petitioners of the initiative article may in like manner complete their initiative petition by filing with the select board an additional number of signatures as provided in the preceding paragraph.
Within 10 days after the filing of the completed initiative petition, the select board shall issue a call for a special meeting of the voters. The meeting shall be held within 14 days after the call was issued to present to the voters at large the measure proposed in the petition that was acted upon unfavorably by the town meeting and any alternative measures that may have been adopted by the town meeting; provided, however, that the 14-day period shall not include Sundays or legal holidays or any day between the first Wednesday in July and the first Wednesday in September immediately following as no such special meeting shall be held between the first Wednesday in July and the first Wednesday in September. Both of the measures shall appear on the ballot to be voted upon by the voters at large and shall be stated in the same language and form used in the motions acted upon by the town meeting as appearing in the records of the town meeting. The checklist shall be used in the same manner as it is used in the election of town officers.
If a majority of the registered voters of the town voting thereon and at least 20 per cent of all the registered voters, shall vote in the affirmative on either the first substantive motion or upon the alternative motion, the measure voted upon in the affirmative by the number of voters thus required and the measure receiving the largest number of votes if conflicting measures are approved shall take effect immediately or at such later time as may be specified in the measure or, if it be a by law subject to the approval of the attorney general, it shall take effect subject to section 32 of chapter 40 of the General Laws; provided, however, that any measure which, for passage, requires a 2/3 affirmative vote of the town meeting members voting thereon in a town meeting shall, if proposed by an initiative petition or if it is an alternate measure adopted by the town meeting, shall require the affirmative vote of 2/3 of the registered voters voting thereon at a special meeting called by the select board under this section. Any measure proposed by initiative petition or adopted by the town meeting, and approved by the registered voters of the town under this section shall thereafter be subject to amendment, revision or repeal by the town meeting, subject to the right of referendum by petition as provided in section 13.
Nothing in this section shall invalidate or limit the right of 10 or more registered voters to have an article inserted in the annual town meeting warrant at their written request or the right of 100 registered voters or 10 per cent of the total number of registered voters of the town, whichever is lesser, to have an article inserted in a special town meeting warrant at their written request or the right of 200 registered voters or 20 per cent of the total number of registered voters of the town, whichever is lesser, to request in writing the calling of a special town meeting as provided for in section 10 of chapter 39 of the General Laws.
Section 13. Referenda on Representative Town Meeting Action. No final vote of a town meeting passing a measure under any article in the warrant, except a vote to adjourn or dissolve or a vote appropriating money for the payment of notes or bonds of the town and interest thereon becoming due within the current fiscal year or a vote for the temporary borrowing of money in anticipation of revenue or a vote declared by preamble by a 2/3 vote of the town meeting members present and voting thereon to be an emergency measure necessary for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety, or convenience of the town shall be operative until after the expiration of 20 days, not including Sundays and legal holidays, from the dissolution of the town meeting.
If within that 20-day period a referendum petition, signed by not less than 15 per cent of the registered voters of the town and containing their names and addresses as the same appear on the list of registered voters, is filed with the select board requesting that the measure passed by any such vote which has not become operative as aforesaid be submitted to the voters of the town at large, then the operation of such vote shall be further suspended pending its determination as hereinafter provided and the select board, within 10 days after the filing of the referendum petition, shall call a special meeting which shall be held within 14 days after issuing the call to present to the voters at large the measure so involved; provided, however, that the 14-day period shall not include Sundays and legal holidays or any day between the first Wednesday in July and the first Wednesday in September immediately following as no such special meetings shall be held between the first Wednesday in July and the first Wednesday in September.
All votes on any measure so submitted shall be taken by ballot and the measure so submitted shall be stated upon the ballot in the same language and form as the motion was adopted by the town meeting, as appearing in the records of the town meeting. The checklist shall be used in the same manner as in the election of town officers. If a majority of the registered voters of the town voting thereon and at least 20 per cent of all the registered voters shall vote in the negative, the action of the town meeting in passing the measure that was the subject of the referendum petition shall be null and void, otherwise it shall take effect immediately upon the declaration by the select board of the vote upon the referendum or at such later date as may be specified by the vote of the town meeting.
6
If a referendum petition is not filed within the 20-day period, the vote of the town meeting passing the measure shall become effective on the expiration of that period or at such later date as may be specified in the vote passing the measure.
Section 14. Powers of Town and Town Meeting. The town shall continue to have the capacity to act through and be bound by its town meeting members who shall, when convened from time to time as provided by law, constitute a representative town meeting and the representative town meeting shall exercise exclusively, in conformance with this charter, all powers vested in the municipal corporation. Actions in conformance with laws that are now or hereafter applicable to the transaction of town affairs in town meetings shall, when taken by a town meeting in accordance with this charter, have the same force and effect as if such action had been taken in a town meeting open to all the voters of the town as heretofore organized and conducted.
Section 15. Certain Rights of the People not Abridged. Nothing in this charter shall abridge the right of the inhabitants of the town to hold general meetings as that right is secured to them by the constitution of the commonwealth and nothing in this charter shall confer upon any representative town meeting of the town the power finally to commit the town to any measure affecting its municipal existence or changing its government without action taken thereon by the voters of the town at large, using the official ballot and check list therefor.
PART 3.
TOWN OFFICERS
Section 16. Select Board. There shall be a select board for the town which shall consist of 5 members elected at each annual town election for 3-year terms. The select board shall continue to have and exercise all the powers and duties vested in select boards or boards of selectmen by the General Laws or by vote of the town, except as otherwise provided herein. For the purposes of this charter and the by-laws of the town, “selectmen” or “board of selectmen” shall mean select board. Members of the select board may be addressed as select board member, board member, selectwoman or selectman.
The select board shall have general authority to execute the civil defense laws within the town and to make any declaration of emergency as required by law.
Section 17. School Committee. There shall continue to be a school committee for the town which shall consist of 3, 5, 6, 7 or 9 members elected at each annual town election for terms of 3 years as the town may vote. The school committee shall have the powers, duties, responsibilities and functions vested in school committees by the General Laws and as delegated to it by the town which are not inconsistent with the General Laws. The school committee shall execute all laws pertaining to educational responsibilities assigned to the town and such further responsibilities as may be delegated to them by vote of the town.
Section 18. Moderator. A moderator shall be elected by ballot at the annual town election for a term of 3 years and shall serve as moderator of all town meetings, except as otherwise provided by law, and shall serve until a successor is elected and qualified. Nominations for and election of a moderator shall be as in the case of other elective town officers and any vacancy in the office may be filled by the town meeting members at a meeting held for that purpose. If a moderator is absent, a moderator pro tempore may be elected by the town meeting members.
Section 19. Other Elected Officers. The town, at its annual town meeting, shall in each year when the term of office of an incumbent expires and except when other provision is made by law, choose by ballot from its registered voters the following town officers for the following terms of office:
(i) a town clerk for a term of at least 1 year;
(ii) 3 or 5 park and recreation commissioners for 3-year terms as may be established by vote of the town;
(iii) at least 1 constable for a 3-year term unless the town, by vote, provides that constables shall be appointed;
(iv) 1, 3 or 5 assessors, but as nearly 1/3 of their number shall be elected or appointed annually, each to hold office for 3-years terms as provided by vote of the town;
(v) 5 members of the board of health for 3-year terms;
7
(vi) 5 to 9 planning board members elected pursuant to section 81A of chapter 41 of the General Laws as established by vote of the town;
(vii) 7 trustees of the Needham Public Library, but as nearly one1/3 of their number shall be elected annually, each to hold office for 3-year terms as provided by vote of the town;
(viii) 4 members of the Needham Housing Authority for 5year terms;
(ix) 3 or 5 trustees of Memorial Park for 3-year terms as provided by vote of the town; and
(x) any other officers as may be provided for by the General Laws or by vote of the town.
Section 20. Appointed Officials.
(a) The select board shall appoint and may remove a town manager or an acting town manager in accordance with section 20A.
(b) The select board shall appoint a town counsel, members of the board of appeals, election officers, registrars of voters, except the town clerk, members of the historic commission, conservation commission, commission on disabilities and, except as provided in section 19, all other boards, committees and commissions for whom no other method of selection is provided in this charter or by-law.
(c) The town manager shall appoint, subject to the approval of the select board, a chief of the police department, a chief of the fire department, a director of public works, an assistant town manager/director of finance or a person performing such functions regardless of title and an assistant town manager/personnel director or a person performing such functions regardless of title. Appointments made by the town manager shall become effective upon the approval of the select board. If the select board shall fail to act, appointments made by the town manager shall become effective on the fifteenth day following the day on which notice of the proposed appointment was filed with the select board; provided, however, that notice of appointment shall be considered filed with the select board when the notice is filed at an open meeting of the select board.
(d) The town manager shall be the appointing authority for the following officials and employees of the town:
(i) the town accountant, a town treasurer/tax collector, a planning director, an administrative assessor, an inspector of buildings, a director of public health, a director of veterans’ services, a director of park and recreation, a director of youth services, a director of management information systems, an executive director of the council on aging, a library director, a town engineer, a director of municipal building maintenance and a building construction and renovation manager or any persons performing such functions regardless of title; and
(ii) all other employees and officials of the town for whom no other method of selection is provided in this charter, except for employees of the school department and the executive secretary of the finance committee; provided, however, that the executive secretary of the finance committee shall be appointed by the finance committee.
(e) Any appointment by the town manager in accordance with clause (i) of subsection (d) shall be subject to the approval of the elected or appointed board or committee having jurisdiction over a department, if any. Appointments made by the town manager shall become effective upon the approval of the board or committee. If a board or committee fails to act, appointments made by the town manager shall become effective on the fifteenth day following the day on which notice of the proposed appointment was filed with the board or committee; provided, however, that notice of appointment shall be considered filed with the board or committee when the notice is filed at an open meeting of the board or committee.
(f) A person appointed by the town manager under subsections (c) and (d) who is not subject to chapter 31 of the General Laws may be removed by the town manager; provided, however, that no removal shall be made of any officer in said subsection (c) without the approval of the select board; and provided further, that no removal shall be made of other employees or officers until the town manager consults with the elected or appointed boards or committees having jurisdiction over that employee’s department, if any. Removal of officers pursuant to said subsection (c) shall become effective upon the approval of the select board. If the select board fails to act, removals made by the town manager shall become effective on the fifteenth day following the day on which notice of the proposed removal was filed with the select
8
board; provided, however, that notice of removal shall be considered filed with the select board when the notice is filed at an open meeting of the select board.
Section 20A. Appointment and Removal of Town Manager.
(a) Appointment of Town Manager.
(1) The select board shall appoint a town manager for a term of not more than 3 years. The town manager shall be a professionally qualified person of proven ability who has had substantial involvement with municipal government. The town manager shall be appropriately fitted by education, training and experience to perform the duties of the office; provided, however, that such experience shall have been full-time, paid experience in a responsible administrative position.
(2) Upon the expiration of the term of the town manager or upon the resignation or removal of the town manager or if a vacancy occurs in the office of town manager, the select board shall appoint an acting manager within 7 days after such expiration, resignation, removal or vacancy to perform the duties of the office and the acting manager shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified in accordance with paragraph (1).
(3) The town manager shall be appointed without regard to party or political designation. The town manager shall be a citizen of the United States of America. No person holding elective public office in the town, except for town meeting member, shall, within 3 years of holding such elective public office, be eligible for appointment as town manager.
(4) The town manager shall not hold an elective public office during the town manager’s tenure and shall not engage in any other business or occupation during such tenure, except for part-time consultative or teaching duties, directly related to the profession of municipal management and with the expressed consent of the select board. The town manager may be appointed for successive terms of office.
(5) Before entering upon the duties of the town manager’s office, the town manager shall be sworn, in the presence of a majority of the select board, to the faithful and impartial performance of the town manager’s duties by the town clerk or a justice of the peace.
(b) Acting Town Manager. The town manager may designate, subject to the approval of the select board, by means of a letter filed with the town clerk, a suitable person to perform the duties of the office during the town manager’s temporary absence or disability. If the town manager fails to make the appointment or if the person so appointed fails to serve, the select board may appoint a suitable person to perform such duties. Upon a vacancy in the office of town manager or upon a suspension of the town manager, the select board shall, within 7 days after such vacancy or suspension, appoint an acting town manager to perform the duties of the office.
(c) Removal of the Town Manager. The select board may suspend or remove the town manager by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the select board.
Section 20B. Powers and Duties of the Town Manager. The town manager shall be the chief executive officer of the town. In addition to other powers and duties provided for in this charter, the town manager:
(i) shall supervise, either directly or through persons appointed by the town manager in accordance with this charter, all department managers, except the school department managers, and shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments, except the school department; provided, however, that the town manager shall not exercise any control over the discretionary power vested by law in any board, committee, commission or officer;
(ii) may, consistent with this charter, the General Laws and the town by-laws and with the approval of elected boards having jurisdiction over affected departments, where applicable, and with the approval of the select board after a public hearing held by the select board for such purpose, reorganize, consolidate or abolish departments under the town manager’s supervision and establish such new departments as the town manager considers necessary and transfer the duties and powers and, so far as is consistent with the use for which the funds were voted by the town, transfer the appropriation of 1 department to another;
(iii) shall have jurisdiction over the rental and use of all town property, except school property, and shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all town buildings, including school buildings and grounds; provided, however, that the town manager shall be responsible for the preparation of plans and the supervision of all work on existing and new buildings,
9
including the planning and work on school buildings, unless otherwise assigned by the town meeting to a permanent building committee; and provided further that any plans for the construction or improvement of school buildings or property shall be subject to the approval of the school committee;
(iv) shall be the purchasing agent for the town and shall award all contracts for all departments and activities of the town, except for the school department;
(v) shall adopt rules and regulations establishing a personnel system, subject to the approval of the select board and with the oversight of the personnel board as provided herein; provided, however, that such personnel system shall make use of modern concepts of personnel management and shall include, but not be limited to: (a) a method of administration; (b) personnel policies indicating the rights, obligations and benefits of employees; (c) a classification plan; (d) a compensation plan; (e) a method of recruiting and selecting employees based on merit principles; (f) a centralized record keeping system; (g) disciplinary and grievance procedures; (h) a professional development and training program; and (i) such other elements as deemed necessary; provided further, that all town agencies and positions shall be subject to the rules and regulations adopted under this clause, excluding employees of the school department and as otherwise provided in chapter 150E of the General Laws; provided further, that personnel policies referenced in clause (b) or changes to such policies shall not be submitted to the select board without the prior review and approval of the personnel board; provided further, that classification or compensation plans referenced in clauses (c) and (d), or changes to such plans, shall not be submitted to the select board for approval until the town manager has submitted the plan or plan revision to the personnel board for review and comment and, if comments were made within 15 days after submission, the town manager has provided written response to any comments made by the personnel board; and provided further, that in all other aspects of the personnel system, the town manager shall confer with the personnel board.
(vi) shall fix the compensation of all town employees except, those under the jurisdiction of the school committee, within the limits established by appropriation and subject to chapter 150E of the General Laws.
(vii) shall negotiate and administer all collective bargaining agreements with employee organizations representing town employees, other than employees of the school department, pertaining to wages and other terms and conditions of employment in accordance with chapter 150E of the General Laws; provided, however, that such agreements, other than agreements with employee organizations representing school department employees, shall be subject to the approval of the select board; provided further, that subject to the approval of the select board, the town manager may employ special counsel to assist in the performance of the duties under this clause; and provided further, that the town manager or a designee shall participate in the deliberations of the school committee in collective bargaining with employee organizations representing school department employees as provided in said chapter 150E;
(viii) shall keep the records of the office of town manager and shall render, as often as may be required by the select board, a report of all operations during the period reported on;
(ix) shall keep the select board advised as to the needs of the town and shall recommend to the select board for adoption measures requiring action by the select board or by the town as considered necessary or expedient by the town manager;
(x) shall implement town meeting votes and shall report in writing annually to the town meeting on the status of prior town meeting votes on which implementation has not been completed, except matters related to the schools;
(xi) shall administer, either directly or through a person appointed by the town manager in accordance with this charter, all general and special laws applicable to the town, all by-laws and votes of the town and all rules and regulations made by the select board, except matters related to the schools;
(xii) shall report to the select board and the finance committee on the financial condition of the town;
(xiii) shall have access to all town books and papers for information necessary for the proper performance of the town manager’s duties and may, without notice, cause the affairs of any department or activity under the town manager’s control, or the conduct of any officer or employee thereof, to be examined;
(xiv) shall be accessible and available for consultation to the chairs of town boards, committees and commissions, whether appointed or elected, and shall make accessible and available to them such data and records of the town manager’s office as may be requested in connection with their official duties; and
1 0
(xv) shall perform such other duties consistent with the town manager’s office as may be required by the by-laws, by vote of the town or by vote of the select board.
The town manager shall be the chief fiscal officer of the town. Warrants for the payment of town funds prepared by the town accountant in accordance with section 56 of chapter 41 of the General Laws shall be submitted to the town manager. The approval of the warrant by the town manager or, in the town manager’s absence, by the acting town manager shall be sufficient authority to authorize payment by the town treasurer but the select board shall approve all warrants in the event of the absence of the town manager or acting town manager or during a vacancy in the office of town manager.
When a payroll, bill or other claim against the town has been presented to the town manager, the town manager shall, if the matter appears to the town manager to be invalid, excessive in amount or otherwise contrary to the interests of the town, immediately investigate the facts and determine what, if any, payments shall be made. Pending the investigation and determination by the town manager, payment shall be withheld.
Section 20C. Estimate of Capital Expenditures. All boards, departments, committees, commissions and officers of the town shall annually, at the request of the town manager, submit to the town manager in writing a detailed estimate of the capital expenditures, as defined by by-law, required for the efficient and proper conduct of their respective departments and offices for the ensuing fiscal year and the ensuing 4-year period. The town manager, after consultation with the select board, shall submit to the select board in writing a careful, detailed estimate of the recommended capital expenditures for the aforesaid periods, showing specifically the amount necessary to be provided for each office, department and activity and a statement of the amounts required to meet the debt service requirements or other indebtedness of the town. The select board shall transmit a copy of the capital budget to the finance committee along with the select board’s recommendations relative thereto. The calendar dates on or before which the capital budget is to be submitted and transmitted shall be specified by by-law.
Section 21. Other Boards, Committees and Commissions. The following boards and committee shall continue to perform the duties and responsibilities assigned to them by the General Laws or by vote of the town:
(i) a finance committee which shall consist of such number as shall be established by vote of the town;
(ii) a personnel board;
(iii) commissioners of trust funds; and
(iv) such other boards, committees and commissions as provided for by the General Laws or by vote of the town.
PART 4.
PUBLIC WORKS
Section 22. Select Board to be Board of Public Works. The select board shall continue to be and shall exercise the functions of a board of public works and, in that capacity, shall exercise under the designation of select board all of the powers and duties vested by law in the following boards and offices: (i) highway surveyors; (ii) water commissioners; (iii) sewer commissioners; and (iv) tree wardens; provided, however, that such boards and commission shall be abolished on the effective date of this act. The select board, acting as the board of public works, shall be the lawful successor of the boards and offices abolished by this section.
Section 23. Director of Public Works. The town manager shall appoint a director of public works who shall administer, under the supervision of the town manager, the departments of the town under the control of the select board as they may designate. The director shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments within the scope of the director’s duties and shall hold office subject to the will of the town manager, consistent with subsection (c) of section 20. The director shall be especially fitted by education, training and experience to perform the duties of the office and shall not be required to be a resident of the town. During the director’s tenure, the director shall not hold elective public office or another appointive public office and the director shall not be engaged in any other business or occupation. The director shall, subject to the approval of the town manager, appoint such assistants, agents and employees as the performance of the duties of the departments under the director’s supervision may require and may, with like approval, remove any such
1 1
assistant, agent or employee. The director shall keep records of the doings of the office and shall have charge of and shall preserve, arrange and index so as to be readily accessible to the public all plans, surveys, field notes, records, documents and inventories connected with the engineering operations of the town. The director shall deliver to the town manager, as often as the town manager may require, a report of all operations under the director’s control during the period reported upon and shall, annually and at such other times as the town manager may request, make a synopsis of all the reports for publication. The director shall keep the town manager fully advised of the needs of the town within the scope of the director’s duties and shall furnish to the town manager a carefully prepared and detailed written estimate of the appropriations required during the ensuing fiscal year for the proper conduct of all departments of the town under the director’s supervision.
Section 24. Laying Out, and Maintenance of Drains, etc. The town may lay out, construct, maintain and operate a system of main drains and common sewers for all or part of its territory, with such connections and other works as may be required for a system of sewage disposal. For such purpose, the town may construct such sewers or drains over and under land in the town as may be necessary to conduct the sewage to the south metropolitan sewerage system and, for the purpose of providing better surface or other drainage, may make, lay and maintain such drains as it seems best. The town may, within its limits, make and maintain subdrains and, with the approval of the commonwealth’s department of public health, discharge the water into any brook, stream or watercourse within the town. The town may make and maintain within its limits in any way where main drains or common sewers are constructed such connecting drains, underdrains and sewers within the limits of such way as may be necessary to connect any estate which abuts upon such way.
Section 25. Particular Sewers. The town, through its select board acting as the board of public works, may upon the application of the owner of any estate abutting on any way where a main drain or common sewer is constructed, lay in such sewered way and in the private land of such owner such particular sewer or connecting drain as may be necessary to connect any building on such estate with that main drain or sewer and the town manager may make all necessary contracts in the name and behalf of the town for such purpose. The expenses thereof shall be paid out of any appropriation that may be made by the town therefor.
Section 26. Exercise of Eminent Domain, etc., for Sewer and Drain Purposes. The select board, as the board of public works acting for and on behalf of the town, may take by eminent domain under chapter 79 of the General Laws or acquire by purchase or otherwise any lands, water rights, rights of way or easements, public or private, in the town, necessary for accomplishing any purposes referenced in sections 24 to 31, inclusive, and may construct such main drains and sewers under or over any bridge, railroad, railway, boulevard or other public way or within the location of any railroad and may enter upon and dig up any private land or public way for the purpose of laying such drains and sewers and for maintaining and repairing the same and may do any other thing proper or necessary for the purposes of said sections 24 to 31, inclusive; provided, however, that the select board shall not take in fee any land of a railroad corporation and shall not enter upon or construct any drain or sewer within the location of any railroad corporation except at such time and in such manner as the select board and the corporation may agree or, in case of a failure to agree, as may be approved by the department of public utilities. Any person injured in their property by an action of the select board under this section may recover damages from the town under said chapter 79.
Section 27. Apportionment of Costs of Sewage Disposal. The town shall, by vote of its town meeting, determine what proportion of the cost of any system of sewerage and sewage disposal the town shall pay; provided, however, that it shall pay not less than ¼ and not more than 2/3 of the whole cost. In providing for the payment of the remaining portion of the cost of a system or for the use of a system, the town may avail itself of any of the methods authorized by the General Laws and any General Laws relative to the assessment, apportionment, division, reassessment, abatement and collection of sewer assessments, to liens therefor and to interest thereon shall apply to assessments made hereunder. At the same meeting at which it determines the proportion of the cost to be borne by the town, the town meeting may by vote determine which methods the remaining portion of the cost shall be provided for. The collector of taxes of the town shall certify the payments of such assessments or apportionments thereof to the select board and the select board shall preserve a record thereof.
Section 28. Assessment of Sewer Betterment. The cost of constructing each particular sewer or connecting drain described in section 25 shall be assessed by the select board upon the estate benefited thereby. Such assessments shall be made by filing with the collector of taxes of the town a certificate, designating the way and the private land on which the particular sewer or connecting drain has been constructed and by giving the names of any owners of the estate for which such connection has been made and the amount of the assessment to be paid by each such owner. A copy or duplicate of the certificate shall, within 10 days after the filing of the same with the collector of taxes, be recorded in the Norfolk county registry of deeds or, in the case of registered land, in the office of the assistant recorder for the Norfolk county registry of
1 2
deeds. The collector of taxes shall, upon receipt of such certificate, make a written demand for the payment of such assessment or charge and each owner shall, within 3 months after such demand was served upon the owner or occupant of the estate or sent by mail to the last address of the owner known to the collector of taxes, pay to the collector of taxes the sum so assessed or charged. Except as provided in this paragraph, the provisions of the General Laws relative to the assessment, apportionment, division, reassessment, abatement and collection of sewer assessments, to liens therefor and to interest thereon shall apply to assessments made under this section. In applying such provisions to assessments, the notice referred to in this section shall be deemed to be the demand of the tax collector required thereunder. The lien for any assessment made under this section shall attach upon the recording or filing for registration of the copy of duplicate of the certificate of assessment. In the apportionment of such assessments thereunder, no installment shall be less than $10.
Section 29. Application of Sewer Receipts. The receipts from sewer assessments and from payments made in lieu thereof shall be applied to the payment of charges and expenses incident to the maintenance and operation of the system of sewerage, or to the extension thereof, to the payment of interest upon bonds and notes issued for sewer purposes or to the payment or redemption of such bonds or notes.
Section 30. Sewer Contracts. All contracts made for the purposes of sections 24 to 31, inclusive, shall be made in the name of the town and shall be signed by the town manager. No contract shall be made and no obligation shall be incurred hereunder for the purposes of said sections 24 to 31, inclusive, in excess of the amount appropriated by the town therefor.
Section 31. Sewer Regulations. The select board, as the board of public works, may prescribe rules and regulations for the connection of estates and building with main drains and sewers and for the inspection of materials, construction, alteration and use of all connections and drains entering into any such main drains and sewers. The select board may prescribe penalties, which shall not exceed $50, for each violation of any such rule or regulation. The rules and regulations shall be published at least once a week for 3 consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the town; provided, however, that if there is no such publication, then the rules and regulations shall be published at least once a week for 3 consecutive weeks in a newspaper published in the county of Norfolk. No rules and regulations shall take effect until such publication has been made.
PART 5.
PARK, RECREATION AND CONSERVATION
Section 32. Park and Recreation Commission. There shall continue to be a park and recreation commission in the town which shall consist of such number of commissioners, who shall be elected for such terms as authorized by vote of the town pursuant to section 19. The park and recreation commission shall have the powers, duties and functions vested: (i) by the General Laws in boards of park commissioners, playground or recreation commissions and town forest committees; and (ii) in the commission by this charter or by vote of the town. The commission shall continue to have the management and care of the town forest, formerly managed by the special town forest committee.
Section 33. Memorial Park. The land known as the Memorial Park in the town of Needham shall continue to be under the jurisdiction of the Trustees of Memorial Park. The trustees shall continue to: (i) receive, hold and manage, with the approval of the town meeting, any devise, bequest or gift for the establishment or equipment of memorials for properly commemorating the service of members of the armed forces of the commonwealth and the armed forces of the United States; and (ii) maintain and operate, upon such portion of Memorial Park as they determine, an athletic field with suitable equipment and, in their discretion, to regulate its use for athletic games and other entertainment of a public nature, to which an admission fee may be charged upon such terms and conditions as the trustees may impose.
Section 34. Conservation Commission. There shall continue to be in the town a conservation commission of not less than 3 and not more than 7 members as determined by vote of the town. The conservation commission members shall be appointed by the select board for 3-year terms and the terms of office of approximately 1/3 of the members shall expire each year. The commission shall have the powers, duties and functions specified by section 8C of chapter 40 of the General Laws and such additional duties as may be assigned to it by vote of the town.
The conservation commission may receive gifts of both real and personal property in the name of the town, subject to the approval of the select board. The conservation commission may acquire by gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise, lease or otherwise the fee in such land or water rights or any lesser interest, development right, easement, covenant or other
1 3
contractual right, including conveyances on conditions or with limitations or reversions, as may be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use of or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open space and other land and water areas within the town and shall manage and control the same. The conservation commission may adopt rules and regulations governing the use of land and waters under its control and may prescribe fines of not more than $100 for any violation thereof.
PART 6.
MUNICIPAL PLANNING
Section 35. Planning Board. There shall continue to be in the town a planning board which shall consist of not less than 5 and not more than 9 members who shall be elected or appointed as may be determined by vote of the town. The planning board members shall be elected or appointed for 5-year terms, so arranged such that the term of at least 1 member shall expire each year and their successors shall be elected or appointed in like manner.
Section 36. Board of Appeals. There shall continue to be a board of appeals established under section 14 of chapter 40A of the General Laws, which shall be the existing board of appeals under the town building by law and shall perform the duties of the board of appeals under section 81AA of chapter 41 of the General Laws. The board of appeals shall consist of 3 members who shall be appointed by the select board for 3 year terms so arranged that the term of 1 appointee shall expire each year. The select board shall, in a like manner, appoint 2 associate members.
The board of appeals shall have and shall exercise all of the powers and duties of boards of appeal under the zoning enabling act, the subdivision control law and the building by laws and such further powers and duties as may be granted to the board by vote of the town.
PART 7.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 37. Construction. The provisions of this charter act shall be construed as if said act had been adopted by the procedure set forth in sections three and four of Article LXXXIX of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth. The powers granted to the town of this charter act shall be liberally construed in order to give full effect to the powers specifically granted herein. The provisions of this charter act as originally adopted shall be construed as a continuation of the provisions of the existing law in effect at the time of its adoption unless the contrary is clearly required by the context thereof.
Section 38. Severability. The provisions of this charter act are severable. If any of the provisions of this charter act are held to be unconstitutional, or invalid, the remaining provisions of said act shall not be affected thereby. If the application of this charter act or any of its provisions to any person or circumstances is held to be invalid, the application of said act and its provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
Section 39. Repeal of Certain Acts. Chapter seventy-three of the acts of nineteen hundred and twenty-three, chapter four hundred and fifty-four of the acts of nineteen hundred and twenty-four, chapter one hundred and eighty-nine of the acts of nineteen hundred and thirty-two, chapter twenty-nine of the acts of nineteen hundred and thirty-four, chapter sixty-eight of the acts of nineteen hundred and thirty-seven, chapter thirty of the acts of nineteen hundred and fifty, chapter twenty-one of the acts of nineteen hundred and fifty-five, chapter seventy-four of the acts of nineteen hundred and fifty-five, chapter three hundred and fifty-nine of the acts of nineteen hundred and fifty-six, chapter three hundred and sixty-eight of the acts of nineteen hundred and fifty-six, chapter eighty-four of the acts of nineteen hundred and fifty-nine and chapter one hundred and forty of the acts of nineteen hundred and sixty-five are hereby repealed.
Section 40. Existing Law. All general laws, and all special laws, town by-laws, rules and regulations of or pertaining to the town which are in force when this charter act takes full effect, and which are not specifically repealed hereby, shall continue in full force and effect until amended or rescinded by due course of law or expire by their own limitation. Nothing in this charter act shall affect or impair the rights or privileges of persons who are town officials or employees at the time it takes effect or derogate from the protection afforded to them by the civil service law, laws relating
1 4
to veterans' tenure, or chapter thirty-two of the General Laws. Nothing contained herein shall impair any existing contractual rights established prior to the adoption of this charter act or any amendment thereto.
Section 41. Effective Date. Sections forty-one and forty-two of this act shall take effect upon the passage of this act. Section one to forty, inclusive, of this act shall become effective on the first day of April immediately following the next town election specified in section forty-two if a majority of the voters of the town voting thereon at such election have voted in favor of its adoption. Any amendment or revision adopted subsequent to said date shall become effective upon the date specified in such amendment or revision.
Section 42. Submission of Act to Voters. This charter act shall be submitted for acceptance to the registered voters of the town of Needham at the town election next held following the passage of this charter act. The vote shall be taken by ballot in accordance with the provisions of the General Laws, so far as the same shall be applicable, in answer to the following question which shall be placed upon the official ballot to be used in said town at said election: -- "Shall an act passed by the General Court in the year nineteen hundred and seventy-one, entitled `An Act recodifying the existing laws establishing the frame of government of the town of Needham into a special home rule charter act', be accepted?".
Upon its acceptance by a majority of the registered voters of said town voting thereon at said town election, as aforesaid, this charter act shall take effect in the town of Needham on the first day of April immediately following said election, as herein provided, but not otherwise.
Approved June 14, 1971.
Amended 1973, 1974, 1975, 1976, 2000.
And further amended by Chapter 176 of the Acts of 2004
(Section 6 and 7 of Chapter 176 of the Acts of 2004 shall take effect upon its passage.
Section 1 to 5, inclusive, shall take effect 185 days following acceptance by a majority
of the registered voters of the town which was so passed on November 2, 2004)
And further amended by Chapter 341 of the Acts of 2018 (signed by the Governor on 1/1/2019).

ZONING BY-LAW
OF THE
TOWN OF NEEDHAM
As amended under Article 48 - March 26, 1925 Adjourned Annual
Town Meeting, as recodified to February 27, 1984 and as further
amended to October, 2017.
NEEDHAM PLANNING BOARD
Ted Owens, Chairman
Paul S. Alpert, Vice-Chairman
Martin Jacobs
Jeanne S. McKnight
Elizabeth J. Grimes
Lee Newman
Director of Planning and Community Development

The edition published May 2018 includes
all amendments adopted by the October 2017
SPECIAL TOWN MEETING
ZONING BY- LAW
OF THE
TOWN OF NEEDHAM, MASSACHUSETTS

Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. GENERAL …………….. ….. 1
1.1 Purpose …………………….. 1
1.2 Basic Requirements…………... 1
1.3 Definitions ………………….. 1
1.4 Non-Conformance……............. 10
1.4.1 Intent ………………... 10
1.4.2 Continuation …………. 10
1.4.3 Change………………... 10
1.4.4 Restoration…………… 10
1.4.5 Abandonment ………… 11
1.4.6 Alteration……………... 11
1.4.7 Single-Family and Two
Family Dwellings…….. 11
1.4.8 Non-Conforming Lots… 14
1.4.9 Conformance with
Subsequent Amendments. 14
1.4.10 Substitution……………. 14
1.5 Variation ...................... 14
2. USE DISTRICTS ………… 16
2.1 Classes of Districts……………. 16
2.2 Location of Districts………….. 17
2.3 Description of Flood Plain Districts……………………….. 18
3. USE REGULATIONS……… 19
3.1 Basic Requirements……........... 19
3.1.2 Prohibited Uses………… 19
3.2 Schedule of Use Regulations… 20
3.2.1 Uses in the RRC, SRA,
SRB, GR, A-1, A-2, A-3,
I, IND & IND-1 Districts.. 20
3.2.2 Uses in the B, CSB, CB, ASB
& HAB Districts ……….... 34
3.2.3 Uses in the Neighborhood
Business District ……………. 45
3.2.4 Uses in the New England
Business Center District …….. 48
3.2.5 Uses in the Highland
Commercial-128 District…….. 51
3.2.6 Uses in the Mixed Use-128
District……………………….. 53
3.3 Uses in Flood Plain Districts…….… 56
3.3.1 Prohibited Uses ……………… 56
3.3.2 Permitted Uses ……………….. 56
3.3.3 Uses Requiring a Special Permit. 57
3.3.4 Special Permit Criteria ………. 58
3.3.5 General Provisions Relating to
Flood Plain District………….. 58
3.3.6 National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Requirements…………. 59
3.4 Aquifer Protection District………. 60
3.4.1 Purpose of District …………… 60
3.4.2 Scope of Authority …………... 60
3.4.3 Definitions …………………... 60
3.4.4 Establishment and Delineation of
Aquifer Protection District….. 61
3.4.5 District Boundary Disputes …. 61
3.4.6 Use Regulation ……………… 61
3.4.7 Procedures for Issuance of
Special Permit……………….. 65
3.4.8 Severability …………………. 67
3.5 Adult Uses Overlay District……… 68
3.5.1 Purpose and Intent ……………. 68
3.5.2 Establishment of Districts and
Relationship to Underlying
Districts ……………………… 68
3.5.3 Definitions ………………… 68
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
3.5.4 Permitted Uses …………….. 69
3.5.5 Special Permit Uses ………. 69
3.5.6 Special Permit Standards
For Adult Uses …………… 69
3.5.7 Lapse of Special Permit …… 71
3.5.8 Severability ……………....... 71
3.6 Medical Overlay District……...... 72
3.6.1 Purpose of District ……… 72
3.6.2 Scope of Authority ……… 72
3.6.3 Allowed Uses …………… 72
3.6.4 Special Permit Uses……… 72
3.6.5 Multiple Buildings and Uses. 73
3.6.6 Dimensional Regulations for
the Medical Overlay District .73
3.6.7 Required Number of Parking
Spaces ………………… 74
3.6.8 Site Plan Review
Requirements………….. 75
3.7 Wireless Communications Facilities Towers Overlay District……….... 76
3.7.1 Purpose of District ……….. 76
3.7.2 Scope of Authority ………. 76
3.7.3 Uses in the Wireless
Communications Facilities
Towers Overlay District …. 76
3.7.4 Establishment and Delineation of
Wireless Communications Facilities
Towers Overlay District …. 78
3.7.5 Severability ……………… 78
3.8 Needham Center Overlay District 79
3.8.1 Purpose of District ……… 79
3.8.2 Scope of Authority …….. 79
3.8.3 Use Regulations ………… 79
3.8.4 Dimensional Regulations … 80
3.8.5 Off-Street Parking ……….. 82
3.8.6 Affordable Housing ……… 83
3.8.7 Site Plan Review ………... 84
3.8.8 Design Guidelines ……….. 85
3.9 Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District…………………………… 86
3.9.1 Purpose of District …………. 86
3.9.2 Scope of Authority ………… 86
3.9.3 Use Regulations ……………. 86
3.9.4 Dimensional Regulations …… 88
3.9.5 Off-Street Parking …………… 89
3.9.6 Affordable Housing …………. 90
3.9.7 Site Plan Review …………….. 91
3.9.8 Design Guidelines …………… 91
3.10 Garden Street Overlay District….. 92
3.10.1 Purpose of District ……… 92
3.10.2 Scope of Authority ……… 92
3.10.3 Use Regulations …………… 92
3.10.4 Dimensional Regulations … 93
3.10.5 Off-Street Parking ………… 94
3.10.6 Affordable Housing ……….. 94
3.10.7 Site Plan Review …………. 94
3.10.8 Design Guidelines ………… 95
3.11 Temporary Meteorological Towers
Overlay District……………………... 96
3.11.1 Purpose of District ……… 96
3.11.2 Scope of Authority ……… 96
3.11.3 Definitions ……………….. 96
3.11.4 Uses in Temporary Meteorological Towers Overlay District … 96
3.11.5 Submission Requirements … 98
3.11.6 Severability ……………….. 99
3.12 Elder Services Zoning District…… 100 3.12.1 Purpose of District………. 100
3.12.2 Scope of Authority………. 100
3.12.3 Allowed Uses…………….. 100
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
3.12.4 Special Permit Uses……… 100
3.12.5 Multiple Buildings and Uses
in the Elder Services Zoning
District…………………… 100
3.12.6 Dimensional Regulations For
the Elder Services Zoning
District………………… 101
3.12.7 Building Height
Requirements………….. 101
3.12.8 Building Bulk, Lot Coverage
and Other Dimensional Requirements………… 101
3.12.9 Off-Street Parking…….. 102
3.12.10 Affordable Housing….. 102
3.13 Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation Overlay
District …………………………. 104
3.13.1 Purpose of District ……… 104
3.13.2 Scope of Authority …… 104
3.13.3 Definitions …………… 104
3.13.4 Allowed Uses.. ………. 104
3.13.5 Special Permit Uses……. 105
3.13.6 General Requirements…. 105
3.14 Mixed-Use Overlay
District …………………………. 110
3.14.1 Purpose of District ……… 110
3.14.2 Scope of Authority …… 110
3.14.3 Definitions …………… 111
3.14.4 Approval Process………. 111
3.14.5 Special Permit Decision
Criteria………………… 113
3.14.6 Special Permit Conditions. 114
3.14.7 Time Limit…….. ………. 114
3.14.8 Dimensional Requirements 115
3.14.9 Performance Standards…. 115
3.14.10 Peer Review……………. 117
3.14.11 Special Permit Uses……. 117
4. DIMENSIONAL
REGULATIONS……………… 118
4.1 Basic Requirements…………… 118
4.1.1 Applicability …………… 118
4.1.2 Exemption for Recorded Lots. 118
4.1.3 Reduction of Area, Frontage,
and Setback requirements … 118
4.1.4 Change of Subdivision Plans.. 118
4.1.5 Minimum Required Lot Width. 119
4.1.6 Height and Setback Limitation
Exception………………… 119
4.2 Dimensional Regulations for Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B, General Residence and Institutional Districts…………………..…… 124
4.2.1 Table of Regulations for Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B
and General Residence Districts,
for Buildings and Structures on
Lots Created by Deed or Plan Endorsed or Recorded Prior to
January 9, 1986 and Not
Including New Construction … 126
4.2.2 Table of Regulations for Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B
and General Residence Districts,
for Buildings and Structures on
Lots Created by Deed or Plan Endorsed or Recorded on or after
January 9, 1986 and Not
Including New Construction … 128
4.2.3 Table of Regulations for Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B
and General Residence Districts,
for Buildings and Structures
Created Through New Construction
On Any Lot ………………. 130
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
4.2.4 Table of Regulations for Public, Semi-Public and Institutional Uses in the Rural Residence Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B and General Residence Districts, and for the Institutional District … ……... 132
4.2.5 Build Factor Formula………… 134
4.2.6 Lot Area Calculation…………. 134
4.2.7 Special Regulations for Rural Residence – Conservation District………………………... 135
4.2.8 Height Limitation Exceptions… 135
4.2.9 Minimum Side & Rear Line
Setbacks: Accessory Structures. 136
4.2.10 Flexible Development Consistent with Subdivision Control Law.. 137
4.2.11 Planned Residential Development (PRD) ……….. 139
4.2.12 Residential Compound……….. 142
4.2.13 Reductions in Dimensional
Regulations by Special Permit.. 145
4.2.14 Screening for Public, Semi-Public
& Institutional Uses………… 145
4.3 Dimensional Regulations for
Apartment Districts………….. 148
4.3.1 Table of Regulations……….. 148
4.3.2 Driveway Openings…………. 148
4.3.3 Open Space…………………. 149
4.3.4 Building Location…………… 149
4.3.5 Setbacks for Other Uses……… 149
4.4 Dimensional Requirements for Commercial Districts…………. 150
4.4.1 Minimum Lot Area & Frontage. 150
4.4.2 Maximum Building Bulk ……. 150
4.4.3 Height Limitation…………….. 152
4.4.4 Front Setback…………………. 152
4.4.5 Driveway Openings………….. 153
4.4.6 Enclosed Parking………… 154
4.4.7 Business Use in Other
Districts…………………... 154
4.4.8 Side & Rear Setbacks Adjoining
Residential Districts……… 155
4.4.9 Building Entrances in the CSB,
ASB, HAB, and NB……….. 156
4.4.10 Building Entrances in Center Business District………… 156
4.5 Dimensional Regulations for
Highland Commercial 128……. 157
4.5.1 Supplemental Dimensional Regulations……………… 158
4.5.2 Floor Area Ratio, Incentives. 158
4.6 Dimensional Regulations for
Industrial Districts ..................... 159
4.6.1 Basic Requirements……… 159
4.6.2 Front and Side Setbacks…. 159
4.6.3 Maximum Lot Coverage….. 159
4.6.4 Height Limitation………….. 159
4.6.5 Side & Rear Setbacks Adjoining
Residential Districts……… 159
4.6.6 Driveway Openings……… 160
4.7 Special Conditions………….. 161
4.7.1 Specific Front Setbacks…. 161
4.7.2 Height Limitation Exceptions in Business, Apartment, Industrial
& Industrial-1 Districts……. 161
4.7.3 Minimum Side Line Setbacks
for a Dwelling or Institutional Building in Certain Districts. 161
4.7.4 Change in Dimensional Regulations by Special Permit……….. 162
4.7.5 Historical Preservation
Dimensional Special Permit.. 162
4.8 Dimensional Regulations - NEBC 164
4.8.1 Supplemental Dimensional Regulations for NEBC…….. 165
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
4.8.2 Floor Area Ratio, Incentives. 165
4.9 Dimensional Regulations for Mixed -
Use 128….................................. 166
4.9.1 Supplemental Dimensional Regulations……………… 167
4.9.2 Floor Area Ratio, Incentives.. 167
4.10 Dimensional Regulations for
Industrial-1 Districts…………… 168
4.10.1 Basic Requirements……….. 168
4.10.2 Floor Area Ratio ………….. 168
4.10.3 Driveway Openings………… 169
4.10.4 Gould Street – Highland
Avenue Buffer…………….. 169
5. GENERAL REGULATIONS…… 170
5.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements 170
5.1.1 Applicability ……………….. 170
5.1.2 Required Parking …………… 174
5.1.3 Parking Plan and Design Requirements……………… 176
5.1.4 Off-Street Parking Requirements
for Multi-Family Structures…. 179
5.1.5 Applicability for Parking Structures…………………… 179
5.1.6 Maintenance…………………. 179
5.2 Earth Removal…………………… 179
5.3 General Design Requirements.… 180
5.3.1 Access……………………….. 180
5.3.2 Drainage…………………….. 180
5.3.3 Water quality and erosion…… 180
5.3.4 Light………………………… 181
5.3.5 Safety……………………….. 181
5.3.6 Environment………………… 181
5.4 Disposal of Low Level Radioactive Waste…………………………….. 181
5.5 Signs …………………………... 181
6. SPECIAL REGULATIONS… 182
6.1 Accessory Uses………………. 182
6.2 Boats, Motor Homes & Trailers.. 183
6.2.1 Occupancy…………… 183
6.2.2 Storage………………… 183
6.3 Filling Stations and Commercial Garages………………………. 183
6.4 Outdoor Parking of Vehicles…. 184
6.4.1 Basic Requirements………. 184
6.4.2 Review Criteria…………… 185
6.5 Limited Heliports…………….. 185
6.5.2 Basic Requirements……… 185
6.6 Complex Developments……….. 187
6.6.1 Intent…………………… 187
6.6.2 Applicability……………. 187
6.6.3 Submittal Requirements… 187
6.6.4 Decision Criteria………… 188
6.6.5 Conditions……………. 189
6.7 Wireless Communications
Facilities……………………….. 190
6.7.1 Intent…………………… 190
6.7.2 Definitions……………… 190
6.7.3 Use Regulations………… 192
6.7.4 Submittal Requirements… 194
6.7.5 Decision Criteria………… 196
6.7.6 Design Review for Wireless Communication Equipment.. 197
6.7.7 Modifications……………… 198
6.7.8 Monitoring & Maintenance.. 198
6.7.9 Abandonment or
Discontinuation of Use…… 199
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
6.7.10 Reconstruction or Replacement
of Existing Towers and Monopoles………………… 199
6.7.11 Severability………………. 199
6.8 Intensity of Use Special Permit Criteria for the NEBC, HC-128 &
MU-128 Districts……………… 200
6.8.1 Applicability……………… 200
6.9 Outdoor Seating……………….. 202
6.9.1 Applicability…………….. 202
6.9.2 Basic Requirements Seasonal
Outdoor Seating………… 202
6.10 Special Permit Criteria for a
Medical Marijuana Treatment
Center or Off-Site Medical
Marijuana Dispensary………… 204
6.11 Retaining Walls………………… 205
6.11.1 Purpose and Intent………. 205
6.11.2 Applicability……………. 205
6.11.3 General Provisions………. 205
6.11.4 Design Review & Permitting. 206
6.11.5 Special Permit Provisions…. 206
7. ADMINISTRATION…….… 207
7.1 Enforcement………………… 207
7.2 Building or Use Permit………. 207
7.3 Occupancy Permit……………. 208
7.4 Site Plan Review……............... 209
7.4.1 Purpose………………… 209
7.4.2 Definitions………………. 209
7.4.3 Requirements……………… 211
7.4.4 Procedure………………….. 212
7.4.6 Review Criteria……………. 214
7.5 Board of Appeals………………. 215
7.5.1 Appeals…………………….. 215
7.5.2 Special Permits…………….. 215
7.5.3 Variances…………………… 219
7.6 Planning Board………………… 220
7.6.1 Special Permit Granting Authority………………….. 220
7.6.2 Recommendations to the
Board of Appeals…………… 220
7.7 Design Review…………………. 220
7.7.1 Purpose……………………. 220
7.7.2 Design Review Board…….. 221
7.7.3 Procedure…………………... 222
7.7.4 Design Criteria……………... 223
7.8 Repetitive Petitions……............ 224
7.9 Penalties………………………. 224
7.10 Amendment…........................... 225
7.11 Severability……....................... 225
7.12 Effective Date…….................... 225
8. TEMPORARY MORATORIUM ON THE SALE AND DISTRIBUTION OF RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA……………….. 225
8.1 Purpose…................................. 225
8.2 Definitions ……....................... 226
8.3 Temporary Moratorium........... 227
8.4 Severability…………………… 227
Amendments – 1925 to 2017 (on file in Planning Board Office)
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 1
ZONING BY-LAW
NEEDHAM, MASSACHUSETTS
1. GENERAL
1.1 Purpose
The purpose of this By-Law is to promote the health, safety, convenience, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of Needham; to lessen congestion in the streets; to conserve health; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; to conserve the value of land and buildings; to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town and to preserve and increase amenities under the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 40A. The use, construction, alteration, height, area and location of buildings and structures and the use of premises in the Town of Needham are regulated as hereinafter provided.
1.2 Basic Requirements
Any building or structure hereinafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or moved or any use of premises hereinafter established, altered or expanded in the Town of Needham shall be in conformity with the provision of this By-Law. Any use not specifically or generically enumerated in a district herein shall be deemed prohibited. In accordance with General Laws, Chapter 40A, and notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, this By-Law shall not prohibit, regulate or restrict the use of land or structures for religious purposes or for educational purposes on land owned or leased by the Commonwealth, or any of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious sect or denomination or by a non-profit educational corporation, provided, however, that such land or structures may be subject to reasonable regulations concerning the bulk and height of structures and determining yard sizes, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements.
1.3 Definitions
In this By-Law the following terms shall have the following meanings unless a contrary meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed. Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 2
Accessory Building – a building devoted exclusively to a use subordinate to and customarily incidental to the principal use.
Accessory Use – a use subordinate to and customarily incidental to the principal use.
Adult Day Care – a facility offering daytime programs for older adults providing health care and assessment, personal care, social programs, recreational activities, meals and transportation, but not providing overnight or residential accommodations.
Affordable Housing Unit - A dwelling unit that is affordable to and occupied by a household with income at or below eighty (80) percent of the area median income that applies to subsidized housing in the Town of Needham, adjusted for household size, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and meets all applicable requirements for inclusion on the Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing Inventory. Except as may be provided elsewhere in this bylaw, each affordable housing unit shall be eligible for inclusion in the Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing Inventory, in accordance with regulations or policies of the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). As used in this bylaw, “affordable housing unit” and “affordable unit” shall have the same meaning.
Affordable Housing Restriction - A contract, mortgage agreement, deed restriction, or other legal instrument, acceptable in form and substance to the Town of Needham, that effectively restricts occupancy of an affordable housing unit to qualified purchaser or qualified renter, and which provides for administration, monitoring and enforcement of the restriction during the term of affordability. An affordable housing restriction shall run with the land in perpetuity or for the maximum period of time allowed by law, and be enforceable under the provisions of M.G.L. c.184, ss. 31-33 or other applicable state law. The Board of Selectmen of the Town of Needham may accept, hold, and enforce affordable housing restrictions.
Antenna – a device used for transmitting or receiving radio, television or other type of electronic waves.
Assisted Living and Alzheimer's/Memory Loss Facilities – Convalescent or nursing homes that may not be licensed as skilled nursing facilities by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, but cater to individuals who need some degree of assistance in caring for themselves and are certified, licensed, or otherwise approved by the Executive Office of Elder Affairs or other Commonwealth of Massachusetts governmental entity.
Basement – That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade. A minimum of 50% of the area of the basement walls must be below grade to be considered a basement. Only one basement level may be partly below grade; additional basement levels must be completely below grade. Notwithstanding the above, a walkout basement shall be limited to a maximum height of 10 feet with said height measured from the plane of the finished basement floor to the plane of the underside of the first floor joists directly above. For purposes of this definition, area shall be computed by taking the exterior perimeter of basement walls, whether or not exposed, multiplied by the height of all walls, whether or not exposed.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 3
Building (or part or parts thereof) – a combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or property. Roof shall include an awning or any similar covering whether or not permanent in nature.
Christmas Season – a period of time from the Saturday before Thanksgiving Day until January 4 of the following year.
Complex Development – any development made subject to the provisions of Section 6.6 Complex Development by designation (“SPC”) in Section 3.2 Use Regulation Schedule, based on size and general category of use.
Conforming Use – use of buildings, structures or land which complies with all the use and dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the use is located.
Continuing Care Retirement Community – A Continuing Care Retirement Community, whether or not governed by M.G.L. Chapter 93, Section 76, is also sometimes called a life care community, allowing residents to “age in place”. Facilities are on a campus of one or more contiguous parcels that includes separate housing for those who live independently, which may include communal dining for one or more meals, assisted living facilities that offer more support, and nursing homes for those needing skilled nursing care.
Coverage – that portion of a lot that is covered or occupied by any building or structure; underground buildings or structures devoted solely to parking are exempt from the definition of coverage, if the ground area immediately above said underground building or structure is equal to or no higher than 3 feet above the lowest elevation, as determined by the existing street grade measured at its centerline in front of the underground building or structure, and is devoted to surface parking, landscaping or other elements of off-street parking areas as provided for in Section 5.1 of the Zoning By-Law.
Dormer – A projection built out from a sloping roof, usually containing a window or vent.
Dwelling – any fixed structure containing one or more dwelling units, but not including hotels, motels, boarding houses, or structures solely for transient or overnight occupancy.
Dwelling Unit – a room or group of rooms designed and equipped exclusively for use as living quarters for only one family including provisions for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
Dwelling, Multi-Family - A building in the Needham Center, Chestnut Street or Garden Street Overlay District containing three or more dwelling units, which building houses only residential uses.
Family – (1) one or more persons related by blood or marriage and including not more than eight additional persons of which not more than six may be foster children and not more than four may be persons other than foster children, or (2) not more than five unrelated individuals per dwelling unit where one individual is the resident owner of the property, all living as a single
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 4
housekeeping unit. The Board of Appeals may issue a special permit for up to two additional individuals per dwelling unit.
Farmers Market – A Farmers Market is activity which is comprised predominantly of activity whereby a) farmers display and sell (i) items that have been produced on farms they operate or (ii) items that have been produced on other farms through a farmer-agent relationship (such items to include food, flowers, plants, firewood, preserves, baked goods, soaps, wool products and similar items), such sales to be directly to the public and not through wholesale vendors, by the farmer, the farmer’s employees, or farmer-agents, and b) bakery establishments display and sell their baked goods, such sales to be directly to the public and not through wholesale vendors, by the bakery establishment, its employees, or farmer-agents. A farmer-agent is defined as a farmer who is acting on behalf of another farmer (or bakery) on the basis of a direct contractual relationship with such farmer (or bakery) and there is no intermediary.
Floor Area, Gross – the sum of the areas of the several floors of each building on a lot including areas used for human occupancy in basements, attics, and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls, but excluding cellars, unenclosed porches, balconies, attics, or any floor space in accessory buildings or in main buildings intended and designed for the parking of automobiles or for accessory heating and ventilating equipment, laundry, or accessory storage.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) – the floor area divided by the lot area. Floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of a building as measured from the exterior surface of the exterior walls. Parking garages, interior portions of building devoted to off-street parking, and deck or rooftop parking shall be considered floor area.
Frontage – a continuous portion of a sideline of a way, public or private, between the sidelines of a lot in common ownership and in the case of a corner lot, between a sideline of such lot and the intersection of sidelines of ways or the midpoint of the curve connecting such sidelines. No lot shall be required to have frontage on more than one way. No lot shall be deemed to have frontage unless there exists safe and convenient vehicular access from said lot to a street or way.
Green Building - A building designed, constructed, and operated and maintained throughout its life cycle to conserve energy and water, reduce environmental impacts, and protect the health of the general public and occupants of the building.
Health-Care Facility – Premises licensed to provide care on a relatively long-term basis to persons admitted thereto, comprising nursing homes, rest homes, sanitariums, convalescent homes, hospices, long-term pediatric or geriatric care facilities, extended care or rehabilitation facilities, and physical, psychiatric, psychological, cognitive, or behavioral therapy facilities, whether or not owned by or affiliated with a hospital.
Height – the vertical distance of the highest point of a structure or the roof of a building above the average grade of the ground adjoining the building or surrounding the structure.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 5
Heliport, general – an area used by helicopters which includes passenger and cargo facilities and regularly scheduled passenger and cargo service, aircraft maintenance and repair, fueling service, storage space, hangars and accessory buildings, and/or overnight storage.
Heliport, limited – an area on a roof or on the ground used by helicopters for the purpose of picking up or discharging passengers or cargo, but not including fuel service, maintenance or overhaul, hangars or other accessory buildings, or overnight storage (except when removal is prohibited due to atmospheric conditions or mechanical difficulties).
Hospital – A facility licensed as a hospital under Section 51 of Chapter 11, M.G.L., and maintained for the purposes of caring for persons admitted thereto for diagnosis or medical, surgical, restorative or other treatment that is rendered within said facility. A hospital may include but shall not be limited to such related on-premises facilities as laboratory and radiology services, out-patient departments, medical equipment rentals, patient and retail pharmacy, physical, speech and occupational therapy, transitional care and rehabilitation respite, palliative care, birthing facilities, pediatrics, mental health and behavioral medicine, specialty clinics, radiation oncology, alternative medicine treatment, mobile diagnostic services, meeting and conference facilities, stock rooms, laundries, staff and administrative offices.
Hospital, Community – An acute hospital in which a majority of the case mix consists of medical-surgical, pediatric, obstetric, and maternity cases, providing a broad range of health services primarily to those who work or live in Needham and surrounding communities, with no single dominant specialization.
Hotel or Motel – a building intended and designed solely for transient or overnight occupants and divided into separate units or rooms within the same building and with or without public dining facilities.
Independent Living Apartments – A building in the Elder Services Zoning District containing three or more dwelling units, which building houses only residential uses and support services accessory thereto, intended primarily as independent living units for individuals aged 55 years or older, and/or families with at least one family member aged 55 years or older, within a Continuing Care Retirement Community.
Indoor Athletic or Exercise Facilities – A commercial facility which as its primary purpose provides facilities for individual physical health activities, such as aerobic exercise, running and jogging, use of exercise equipment, saunas, showers, massage rooms and lockers. Such establishments are operated as a business even if open only to members and their guests on a membership basis and to the public at large paying a daily admission fee. All facilities must be contained within the building.
Landscaping – any grading or relocation of earth not resulting in the change of the elevation of any land within a Flood Plain District.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 6
Lot – a single area of land, in one ownership throughout, defined by metes and bounds or boundary lines as shown in a recorded deed or on a recorded plan. The area of a lot shall not include any part of a way, public or private, which adjoins the lot.
Lot, Corner – a lot at the point of intersection of, and abutting on, two or more intersecting streets, the angle of intersection of the street lines or, in the case of a curved street, street lines extended, being not more than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot Line – a recorded boundary separating a lot from a street or adjoining lots; for example, front, side and rear lot lines.
Medical Clinic – An institution or facility providing medical, surgical, dental, restorative or mental hygiene services to persons not accommodated overnight therein, under license as a clinic under Massachusetts General Laws, whether or not affiliated with a hospital or other health care facility.
Medical Laboratory – A facility for the provision of testing, analytical, diagnostic, pharmaceutical or other health care support services, equipment or procedures, whether or not owned by or affiliated with a hospital.
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center – A facility operated by a not-for-profit entity registered and approved by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health in accordance with 105 CMR 725.000 or succeeding regulation pertaining to the registration of such facilities, and pursuant to all other applicable state laws and regulations, also to be known as a Registered Marijuana Dispensary (RMD), that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as edible marijuana infused products, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to patients or their personal caregivers registered and qualified under the provisions of 105 CMR 725.000 (“Qualified Patients or Qualified Caregivers”) or succeeding regulation pertaining to the registration and qualification of Qualified Patients and Qualified Caregivers. A Medical Marijuana Treatment Center may include facilities which cultivate and/or process marijuana for medical use.
Medical Services Building – Premises with occupancy limited to doctor’s offices, dentist’s offices, orthodontic services, psychiatric, psychological and other mental health services, radiology and laboratory services, sale, and repair of medical devises and equipment or other health care or health care services, whether or not owned or affiliated with a hospital, but not including those licensed as a clinic.
Mixed-Use Building - A building in the Needham Center, Chestnut Street or Garden Street Overlay District in which the ground floor facing the street is used for such retail or restaurant uses as may be permitted by right or by special permit in the applicable overlay district, and other ground-floor and upper-floor space is used for other commercial use(s) or dwelling unit(s).
Mixed-Use Development - Two (2) or more buildings in the Chestnut Street Overlay District on one lot, with retail use(s) or mixed-use buildings facing the street and other buildings for
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 7
commercial use(s), mixed uses or multi-family dwelling(s) located to the rear of the lot, connected by walkways, landscaping and pedestrian amenities, and shared parking.
Motor Home – a vehicle with motive power designed for sleeping or living quarters for one (1) or more persons, which is not a dwelling and which may include a pick-up camper and beach buggy.
Needham Center Off-Street Parking Fund - A special revenue fund established under Chapter 438 of the acts of 2008 to support the provision of off-street parking in the area governed by the act.
Non-Conforming Building – a building or structure lawfully in existence or lawfully begun before the first publication of notice of the public hearing regarding a zoning by-law that would otherwise render said building or structure not in compliance with such a new or amended by-law, but not including a non-conforming building or structure resulting from a variance or other relief granted by the Board of Appeals.
Non-Conforming Use – a use of buildings, structures or land lawfully in existence or lawfully begun before the first publication of notice of the public hearing regarding a zoning by-law that would otherwise render said use not in compliance with such a new or amended by-law, but not including a non-conforming use resulting from a variance or other relief granted by the Board of Appeals.
Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensary – A facility registered and qualified as a Registered Marijuana Dispensary under the provisions of 105 CMR 725.000, which is located off-site from a separate location of the same RMD or from an affiliated RMD where marijuana or related products are cultivated or processed, and that is controlled and operated by the same registered and approved non-profit entity that operates the separate location or affiliated RMD where marijuana or related products are cultivated or processed, but which dispensary serves only to acquire, possess, transfer, transport, sell, distribute, dispense or administer processed marijuana for medical use, related products and supplies and educational materials to Qualified Patients or Qualified Caregivers, and which dispensary includes no cultivation or processing of such marijuana or related products.
Parking Space – an area available for parking one automobile and having not less than one hundred sixty-six and one-half (166.5) square feet, exclusive of driveways and approaches thereto, a free and unimpeded access to a way over unobstructed driveways or approaches and a minimum width of not less than nine (9) feet.
Personal Fitness Service Establishment – A commercial facility all the business of which involves instructional and/or directed exercise and fitness activities, including, but not limited to, personal training, yoga, spinning, pilates, exercise and fitness classes and lessons, and related activities; having at least one instructor or supervisor for every 15 clients; a maximum class size of 15 clients; a maximum occupancy at any one time of 20 persons; and a maximum total area of 2,500 square feet. Such establishments are operated as a business, even if open only to members and their
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 8
guests on a membership basis and not to the public at large paying a daily admission fee. All facilities must be contained within the building.
Pharmacy – A facility for the sale of prescription and/or non-prescription drugs, medications, and medical supplies.
Premises – a lot together with all buildings, structures and uses thereon.
Professional – a person who by education and experience is a member of a recognized profession such as a physician, dentist, architect, attorney, artist or engineer.
Public Utility – any person, firm, corporation or municipal department, board or commission authorized to furnish gas, steam, electric, waste disposal, communication facility, transportation or water to the public.
Residential Hospice House – a single-family detached dwelling, in which care is given to terminally ill patients who have medically documented prognoses of less than six months to live. Hospice services given in a residential hospice house under these By-Laws, must be provided by a non-profit, tax exempt, Massachusetts corporation, that holds a license as a hospice care program from the Department of Public Health of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, pursuant to G.L., Chapter 111, s.57D and 105 CMR s.141.000.
Retaining Wall - A wall or terraced combination of walls used at a grade change to hold soil and other earth material at a higher position. Retaining walls may be attached to or independent from other structures. The exposed side of a retaining wall shall be known as a “face”. The area between a lower wall and a successive higher wall shall be known as a “terrace.
Setback – front, side and rear – the minimum horizontal distance from a street line or a lot line, as the case may be, to any part of a building or structure, including overhang but not: (i) uncovered steps, fences or awnings; (ii) in a required front yard width, an uncovered landing, above a stair or stairs, which neither exceeds a total area of fifty (50) square feet nor projects more than five (5) feet from the face of a building; and (iii) in a required side or rear yard, an uncovered landing, above a stair or stairs, which neither exceeds a total area of twenty-five (25) square feet nor projects more than four (4) feet from the face of a building, where such landing is required by the State Building Code. Notwithstanding the above, in the Business, Chestnut Street Business, Center Business, Avery Square Business, Neighborhood Business, Highland Commercial-128, Elder Services and Hillside Avenue Business districts, the following exemptions shall apply: (i) eaves, cornices, friezes, and architraves shall not be regarded in the computation of the setback to the extent that they do not intrude into the setback area by more than one and one-half (1.5) feet, are a minimum of twelve (12) feet above the mean grade level at the façade on which the encroachment occurs, and have a cumulative area of not more than ten (10) percent of the wall area of the façade on which the encroachment occurs; and (ii) pilasters and columns shall not be regarded in the computation of the setback to the extent that they do not intrude into the setback area by more than one-half (.5) foot, are ornamental and non-structural in nature, and have a cumulative width of not more than five (5) percent of the length of the façade on which the encroachment occurs. In
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 9
measuring the required setback from any street line, the applicable minimum front setback requirement shall be used.
Story – that part of a building between any floor, other than a basement, and the floor or roof next above.
Half-Story or ½ Story – For all single-family detached dwellings and two-family detached dwellings located in all Districts, and apartment and multi-family dwelling units permitted by Special Permit in the Center Business District and Chestnut Street Business District and located in the half-story directly above the second floor, that portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the lower surface of a sloping roof next above where the area contained therein has a finished ceiling height exceeding 5’-0”. Dormers installed in a sloping roof directly above the second story of a structure shall be limited in size as follows: (1) The total length of the front wall(s) of a dormer(s) shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the eave length of the portion of the roof in which the dormer is built. In no case shall a single dormer exceed twenty feet (20’) in width. (2) A roof line overhang shall be continued between the dormer and the story next below so as to avoid the appearance of an uninterrupted wall plane extending beyond two stories. (3) The vertical plane of the side wall of any dormer shall not be closer than eighteen inches (18”) from the vertical plane of the intersection of the roof and the main building end wall nearest the dormer. (4) No dormer may project above the main ridgeline of the building. There are no restrictions on dormers installed in a sloping roof directly above the first story of a structure. This definition shall apply to all single-family detached dwellings, two-family detached dwellings, and apartment and multi-family dwelling units permitted by Special Permit in the Center Business District and Chestnut Street Business District and located in the half-story directly above the second floor. For all other buildings the definition is, that part of a building under a sloping roof where the full-length rafters rest on the top beam of the story below.
Street or Way – any public way or any private way shown on a plan approved under the provisions of the Subdivision Control Law or in existence when the provisions of said Subdivision Control Law became effective in the Town of Needham, having in the opinion of the Planning Board suitable width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of land abutting thereon or served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon.
Structure – anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on the ground or attached to something located on the ground including an artificial or a constructed swimming pool having a depth of water of two (2) feet or more or a water surface area of at least one hundred (100) square feet when filled to capacity, but excluding a fence, boundary wall, retaining wall, public utility pole, public utility supporting device or a structure with less than one hundred square foot ground coverage and a height of less than eight (8) feet.
Telecommunications facility – facility for the operation, monitoring and maintenance of telecommunications switching equipment, data storage computers, internet connectivity routers, and ancillary equipment.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 10
Toxic or Hazardous Materials – all liquid hydrocarbon products including, but not limited to, gasoline, fuel and diesel oil, and also any other toxic caustic or corrosive chemicals, radioactive materials or other substance controlled as being toxic or hazardous by the Division of Hazardous Waste under the provisions of Chapter 21 (c), G.L.
Traffic Mitigation Fund – a fund to be established in the office of the Town Treasurer to be held in a separate account to be administered and operated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 200 of the Acts of 2001.
Trailer – a vehicle without motive power, designed to be and capable of being towed, including, but not limited to, a utility trailer, boat trailer, tent trailer and mobile home.
Uninterrupted Facade Length – As may be required by certain sections of this by-law, the term “uninterrupted facade length” shall mean the maximum horizontal length of a building facade, uninterrupted by a wall plane projection or recess having a depth of at least 3% of the length of the facade and extending at least 20% of the length of the facade.
1.4 Non-Conformance
1.4.1 Intent
The intent of this section is to define the application of this By-Law to otherwise lawful buildings, structures and uses which do not conform to its provisions; to prevent the expansion or change thereof except in conformity with the provisions of this section; and to provide for the discontinuance of said uses or for their eventual conversion to a conforming status.
1.4.2 Continuation
Any building or structure, or use of a building, structure or land which lawfully existed at the time of the adoption of this By-Law, or any amendment thereof, may be continued to the same extent except as otherwise provided herein.
1.4.3 Change
A non-conforming use shall not be changed other than to conforming use except as hereinafter set forth, and once so changed, shall not be permitted to revert to a non-conforming use.
1.4.4 Restoration
A lawful pre-existing non-conforming building or structure which has been damaged or destroyed by fire or other accidental cause may be rebuilt in the same location and to the dimensions not exceeding those that existed prior to the damage or destruction.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 11
1.4.5 Abandonment
A non-conforming use of any building, structure or land which has been abandoned shall not thereafter be returned to that non-conforming use or converted to any other non-conforming use. A non-conforming use shall be considered abandoned:
(a) when the intent to discontinue the use is stated by the owner or occupant, or is otherwise manifest or;
(b) when the use has been discontinued or the stock-in-trade, equipment or furnishings characteristic of the use have been removed from the premises, for twenty-four consecutive months; or
(c) when the non-conforming use has been replaced by a conforming use; or,
(d) when the non-conforming use has been changed to another non-conforming use under a special permit granted by the Board of Appeals.
1.4.6 Alteration
Except as otherwise provided in Section 1.4.7, a lawful pre-existing non-conforming use may be changed or extended and a non-conforming building may be structurally altered, enlarged or reconstructed only pursuant to a special permit issued by the Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 7.5.2. No such permit shall be issued except in accordance with the requirements of Section 7.5.2 nor unless the Board shall determine that such change, extension, alteration, enlargement or reconstruction would not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than using the existing non-conforming use or structure. The issuance of a special permit hereunder shall not authorize the violation of any dimensional, parking or intensity regulation with which the structure or use was theretofore in conformity.
1.4.7 Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings
1.4.7.1 Reconstruction
A lawful pre-existing non-conforming two-family detached dwelling located in a zoning district where two-family detached dwellings are prohibited constitutes a non-conforming use and may not be reconstructed except pursuant to Section 1.4.7.4. As used in Section 1.4.7 the term “reconstruction” shall be defined as the voluntary razing and rebuilding of a building or structure.
1.4.7.2 Alteration of Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 12
A lawful pre-existing non-conforming single-family or two-family dwelling which is non-conforming because of front, side and rear setback, build factor, area and/or frontage requirements of this By-Law may be altered, extended or structurally changed (but not reconstructed) as of right and without a special permit or finding by the Board as required in the preceding section provided that such alteration, extension or structural change complies with all front, side and rear setback, lot coverage, building height, and building story requirements of the current By-Law including but not limited to the provisions of Section 4.2.3 of this By-Law. Such alteration, extension or structural change shall not be considered an increase in the non-conforming nature of the dwelling. For purposes of this section, the extension of an exterior wall within a required setback area shall be deemed to create a new non-conformity and shall require the grant of a variance by the Board of Appeals.
1.4.7.3 Reconstruction of Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings Located in a Zoning District Where the Use is Permitted
A lawful pre-existing non-conforming single-family or two-family dwelling which is non-conforming because of front, side and rear setback, build factor, area and/or frontage requirements of this By-Law may be reconstructed as a matter of right and without a special permit or finding by the Board as required in the preceding section provided that the new building is built in compliance with all front, side and rear setback, lot coverage, building height, and building story requirements of the current By-Law including but not limited to the provisions of Section 4.2.3 of this By-Law.
1.4.7.4 Reconstruction of Two-Family Dwellings Located in a Single Residence A, Single Residence B or Rural Residence-Conservation District Where the Use is Prohibited
A lawful pre-existing non-conforming two-family dwelling located in a Single Residence A, Single Residence B or Rural Residence-Conservation District may be reconstructed as a matter of right and without a special permit or finding by the Board as required in the preceding section provided i) the building is rebuilt in the same location and in the same footprint as that which existed prior to the demolition up to the height limit of the current By-Law provided further, however, that any footprint that is violative of the side setback requirement shall not be increased as to height or story beyond that of the existing building absent a Special Permit from the Board of Appeals, or ii) the building is rebuilt in a different location on the lot in compliance with all front, side and rear setback, lot coverage, building height, and building story requirements of the current By-Law including but not limited to the provisions of Section 4.2.3 of this By-Law, and provided that the building as reconstructed has a footprint no greater in area than that of the original non-conforming building.
As used in this Section 1.4.7.4, the term “footprint” shall be defined as the area of the lot which is within the perimeter created by the vertical extension to the ground of the exterior walls of all fully enclosed portions of a building, including attached garages, porches, solariums and similar fully enclosed extensions, attachments and accessory annexes, plus eaves and roof overhangs. Not included in the footprint are unenclosed portions or extensions of buildings, including, but not limited to, unenclosed carports, decks, and porches.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 13
Upon application the Board of Appeals may issue a special permit allowing a lawful pre-existing non-conforming two-family dwelling located in a Single Residence A, Single Residence B or Rural Residence-Conservation District to be reconstructed with a footprint greater in area than that of the original non-conforming building provided the Board of Appeals finds that the reconstructed and enlarged building is appropriate in scale and mass for the neighborhood, with particular consideration of abutting properties, and that the proposed reconstruction and enlargement will not be substantially more detrimental than the existing non-conforming building to the neighborhood, provided further, however, that such reconstruction and enlargement shall not be allowed by special permit in the following circumstances:
(a) Reconstruction of a non-conforming two-family dwelling on a non-conforming lot resulting in a building footprint of greater than 1,800 square feet except as set forth in subsection (c), below;
(b) Reconstruction of a non-conforming two-family dwelling on a conforming lot resulting in a building footprint of greater than 2,500 square feet or lot coverage greater than 18%;
(c) Reconstruction of a non-conforming two-family dwelling on a lot that conforms in all respects other than not meeting the minimum frontage requirement of the By-Law resulting in a building footprint of greater than 2,500 square feet or lot coverage greater than 18%;
(d) Reconstruction of a non-conforming two-family dwelling on a lot where the building as reconstructed would not comply with all front, side, and rear setbacks, lot coverage, building height, and building story requirements of the current By-Law including but not limited to the provisions of Section 4.2.3 of this By-Law; and
(e) Reconstruction of a non-conforming two-family dwelling on a lot resulting in the construction of enclosed garage space servicing more than one car per dwelling unit.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section to the contrary, the Board of Appeals may allow reconstruction of a non-conforming two-family dwelling on a lot resulting in the construction of enclosed garage space servicing two cars per dwelling unit, provided the Board finds that:
a.i the additional enclosed garage space will be located in an accessory building where the accessory building is separate from and located to the rear of the back wall of the principal structure and where the enclosed garage space authorized under Section 1.4.7.4 (e) is located within the principal structure, or
a.ii. the additional enclosed garage space will be located in a tandem parking space located within the principal structure where such space is accessed through a single garage door and where such garage door shall be a standard single car garage door width; and
b. the additional enclosed garage space will not alter the character of the premises in which it is located, and
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 14
c. the additional enclosed garage space will not have a material adverse effect on the value of the land and buildings or structures in the neighborhood, or on the amenities thereof, and
d. the additional enclosed garage space will be appropriate in scale and mass for the neighborhood, taking into consideration the visual impact of the garage from the street.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, (1) the enclosed garage space for not more than one car per dwelling unit allowed pursuant to Section 1.4.7.4(e) and (2) the additional (second) enclosed garage space allowed by paragraph "a.i" immediately above and located in an accessory building of not more than 575 square feet per two vehicles, where the accessory building is separate from and not in front of the house, shall be excluded from the lot coverage calculation of Section 1.4.7.4 (a), 1.4.7.4 (b), 1.4.7.4 (c).
1.4.8 Non-Conforming Lots
Notwithstanding any other provision of this By-Law, an increase in the area or frontage of an existing improved lot which includes a conforming structure or building or pre-existing non-conforming structure or building shall not terminate the status of a structure or building as a pre-existing non-conforming structure if it continues to be non-conforming following such increase in area or frontage.
1.4.9 Conformance with Subsequent Amendments
Construction or operations under a building or special permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this By-Law unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of not more than six months after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
1.4.10 Substitution
The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for the replacement of a non-conforming use of a building, structure or land by another specified use not conforming to this By-Law, provided the replacement is less objectionable and detrimental to the neighborhood or any property in the neighborhood.
1.5 Variation
Where this By-Law imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises than is imposed by existing provisions of law or other by-laws, the provisions of the By-Law shall control. Where a provision of this By-Law may be in conflict with any other provision or provisions of this By-Law, the more stringent or greater requirement shall control. More
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 15
particularly, if a lot is located in more than one zoning district, the minimum area, frontage and all other dimensional requirements of the district in which fifty (50) percent or more of the lot is located shall apply throughout.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 16
2. USE DISTRICTS
2.1 Classes of Districts
Residential
RRC -- Rural Residence – Conservation
SRA -- Single Residence A
SRB -- Single Residence B
GR -- General Residence
A-1 -- Apartment – A-1
A-2 -- Apartment – A-2
A-3 -- Apartment – A-3
Commercial
B -- Business
CSB -- Chestnut Street Business
CB -- Center Business
ASB -- Avery Square Business
HAB -- Hillside Avenue Business
NB -- Neighborhood Business
HC-128 -- Highland Commercial-128
ES -- Elder Services
Industrial
IND -- Industrial
IND-1 -- Industrial – 1
NEBC -- New England Business Center
MU-128 -- Mixed Use-128
Institutional
I -- Institutional
Overlay
FP -- Flood Plain
AP -- Aquifer Protection
M -- Medical Overlay
AU -- Adult Uses
WCFT -- Wireless Communications Facilities Towers Overlay
NC -- Needham Center Overlay
LC -- Lower Chestnut Street Overlay
GS -- Garden Street Overlay
TMT -- Temporary Meteorological Towers Overlay District
LGSPI -- Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation Overlay District
MUOD -- Mixed-Use Overlay District
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 17
2.2 Location of Districts
Said districts are located and bounded as shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map of the Town of Needham, Mass.” dated September, 1924, as revised and amended to date and on file in the Office of the Town Clerk and as further described for Flood Plain Districts in Section 2.3. The Zoning Map with boundaries of the districts and all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made a part of this By-Law.
2.2.1
Where a district boundary is shown as following a street, railroad or utility, the boundary shall be the center line thereof as said line existed at the date of the adoption of the Zoning Map, unless otherwise indicated.
2.2.2
Where a district boundary is indicated as a property or lot line and the exact position of such line is not defined by measurements, the true location thereof shall be taken as the boundary line as said line existed at the date of the establishment of such boundary.
2.2.3
Where a district boundary is shown outside of a street, railroad or utility and approximately parallel thereto, the boundary shall be deemed parallel to the nearest line thereof, and the figure placed on the Zoning Map between the boundary and such line shall be the distance in feet between them, as measured at a right angle from such line otherwise indicated.
2.2.4
Where a district boundary is shown as following a watercourse, the boundary shall coincide with the center line thereof as said line existed at the date of the establishment of such boundary.
2.2.5
Where a district boundary shall include a numerical figure followed by the letters, M.S.L., it is at that number of feet above mean sea level.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 18
2.2.6
Where the location of a district boundary line is otherwise uncertain, the location thereof shall be determined with the distance in feet from other lines of bounds as given or as measured from the scale of the Zoning Map.
2.3 Description of Flood Plain Districts
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district. The areas included in the Flood Plain Districts are defined as follows:
2.3.1
All special flood hazard areas within the Town of Needham designated as Zone A, AE, or AH on the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Norfolk County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Needham are panel numbers 25021C0016E, 25021C0017E, 25021C0018E, 25021C0019E, 25021C0028E, 25021C0036E, 25021C0037E, 25021C0038E, and 25021C0039E dated July 17, 2012. The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 17, 2012. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Building Official, Conservation Commission and Engineering Department.
2.3.2
All that land along or sloping toward that portion of Rosemary Brook between Rosemary Lake and Central Avenue that is at or below the following elevations:
(a) Ninety (90) feet above mean sea level upstream of West Street
(b) Eighty-eight (88) feet above mean sea level between West Street and Central Avenue
2.3.3
All that land along or sloping toward that portion of Rosemary Brook between Central Avenue and the Needham-Wellesley town line that is at or below an elevation of eighty-five (85) feet above mean sea level.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 19
3. USE REGULATIONS
3.1 Basic Requirements
No building or structure shall be erected, altered or used and no premises shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as regulated by Section 3.1.2 and as permitted and set forth in Section 3.2, Schedule of Use Regulations, and in accordance with the following notation:
Y (Yes) Use Permitted (except major projects under Section
7.4.2, which require a special permit from the Planning Board)
SP (Special Permit) Use allowed under a special permit for an exception
by the Board of Appeals as provided here-after
SPP (Special Permit) Use allowed under a special permit by the Planning Board as provided hereafter
SPC (Complex Development) Use allowed under a special permit under the
provisions of Section 6.6 Complex Projects
N (No) Use Prohibited
Y# Allows for the use upon minor project site plan review with waiver of all requirements of Section 7.4.4 and 7.4.6 except as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with Section 6.9 by the Planning Board or Board of Selectmen in accordance with Section 6.9.
Uses permitted and uses allowed by the Board of Appeals or by the Planning Board shall be in conformity with all the density and dimensional regulations and any other pertinent requirements of this By-Law.
Notwithstanding the uses set forth in the Schedule of Use Regulations (Section 3.2), in all Industrial, Business and/or Commercial zoning districts, including Mixed Use-128 (a) if the Planning Board determines a use to be in the same general use category and is similar in kind to, and is similar in impact to, a use allowed by Section 3.2 as of right, that use shall be allowed and (b) if the Planning Board determines a use to be in the same general use category and is similar in kind to, and is similar in impact to a use allowed by Section 3.2 by special permit, that use may be allowed by the Planning Board by special permit.
3.1.2 Prohibited Uses
In any district no use will be permitted which will produce a nuisance or hazard from fire or explosion, toxic or corrosive fumes, gas, smoke, odors, obnoxious dust or vapor, harmful radioactivity, offensive noise or vibration, flashes, objectionable effluent or electrical interference which may affect or impair the normal use and peaceful enjoyment of any property, structure or
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 20
dwelling in the Town. Use of any premises in any district for landing or taking off of aircraft, including helicopters, is prohibited except for purposes of emergency.
3.2 Schedule of Use Regulations
3.2.1 Uses in the Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B, General Residence, Apartment A-1, Apartment A-2, Apartment A-3, Institutional, Industrial and Industrial-1 Districts.
The following schedule of use regulations shall apply in the RRC, SRA, SRB, GR, A-1, 2 & 3, I, IND and IND-1 districts.
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
AGRICULTURE
Farmers Market, not to exceed once a week, during the season from May 15 to November 30, which may take place on existing parking areas serving one of the following uses: (i) municipal/public uses, (ii) religious and educational uses protected by MGL Chapter 40A, Section 3 or (iii) in a commercially zoned district commercial uses, provided that the special permit granting authority determines that in addition to other necessary findings under Section 7.5.2 of the By-Law adequate parking and loading areas are maintained to serve such other uses during the Farmers Market.
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Farm, greenhouse, nursery,
truck garden, provided the
subject property contains a
minimum of two and one
half (2-1/2) acres
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 21
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
Salesroom or stand for
agricultural and horti-
cultural products provided
all products sold are grown
or produced on the
premises of the farm,
greenhouse, nursery or
truck garden, provided the
subject property contains a
minimum of two and one
half (2-1/2) acres
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Sale during the Christmas
season at a nursery or
green-house of cut
Christmas trees and
wreaths grown or
fabricated elsewhere than
on the premises
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Sale during Christmas
season by a non-profit
corporation or
organization of uncut or
cut Christmas trees and
wreaths grown or
fabricated elsewhere than
on the premises and
associated, related
merchandise, including the
outdoor display of trees,
wreaths and merchandise.
Outdoor display is
permitted on existing
parking spaces, except
that adequate parking and
loading must be
maintained.
SP
SP
SP
SP
Y
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 22
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
PUBLIC, SEMI-
PUBLIC &
INSTITUTIONAL
Church or other place of
worship, parish house,
rectory, convent and
other religious institution
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
School – public, religious,
sectarian or
denominational
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Public library and museum
and philanthropic
institution
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Public park and play-
ground and municipal
structure including a water
tower and reservoir
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Public passenger station
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Child care facility
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Other private school,
nursery, or kindergarten
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Convalescent or nursing
home, hospital
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Cemetery
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Private club not
conducted
as a business
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 23
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
RESIDENCE
Single-family detached
dwelling
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
PRD (See 4.2.11)
SP
SP
N
N
N
N
N
RC (See 4.2.12)
SP
SP
N
N
N
N
N
Two-family detached
dwelling
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
Conversion of a single-
family dwelling to a two-
family dwelling
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
Apartment or multi-family
dwelling
N
N
N
Y
N
N
N
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 24
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
The use of an owner-occupied structure for
shared elderly housing for
up to six elderly occupants
(age 60 or over);
provided, (1) that such
structure so used shall not
be sub-divided into
separate apartments, (2)
that occupancies therein
by non-owner occupants
shall be pursuant to an
agreement specifying a
term of occupancy of not
less than one year, (3) that
at any time there shall be
in the town no more than
fifty structures for which
permits have been issued
under authority of this
section, (4) that no more than 20 percent of such
structures shall be located
in any one precinct of the
town, and (5) that the number of structures for
which permits are granted
hereunder in any one year
shall not exceed five.
**Applies only to
structures in existence
prior to December 31,
1982, otherwise “N”.
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP**
N
N
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 25
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
The use of a single-family
detached dwelling for a
residential hospice house*
Y*
Y*
Y*
N
N
N
N
*provided that the following conditions in addition to those set forth at section 1.3 shall apply: (1) up to, but not more than two persons for each bedroom in a residential hospice house, may receive hospice care within the house, up to a maximum of sixteen persons in the RRC and SRA Districts and six persons in the SRB and GR districts, respectively; (2) there shall be not less than one parking space for each staff person living on the premises, plus one parking space for each two persons receiving hospice care on the premises; no parking space shall be in any setback area required by this by-law; (3) any dwelling used as a residential hospice house shall comply with the following requirements: (a) minimum lot area: 87,120 square feet in the RRC and SRA Districts and 20,000 square feet in the SRB and GR Districts, respectively, calculated in accordance with Section 4.2.6 of this By-Law; (b) minimum frontage 150 feet in the SRA and RRC Districts and 80 feet in the SRB and GR Districts, respectively; (c) front setback: 50 feet in the SRA and RRC Districts and 20 feet in the SRB and GR Districts, respectively; (d) side setback: 25 feet in the SRA and RRC Districts and 20 feet in the SRB and GR Districts and 20 feet in the SRB and GR Districts, respectively, except that in the SRB and GR districts buildings and structures on lots created by deed or plan endorsed or recorded before January 9, 1986, shall have a minimum side line setback of 10 feet; (e) rear setback: 25 feet in the SRA and RRC Districts and 10 feet in the SRB and GR Districts, respectively; (f) maximum stories: 2-1/2, and maximum height: 35 feet, except that single-family dwellings existing before the passage of this By-Law and containing more than 2-1/2 stories or being more than 35 feet in height, may be used as a residential hospice house not subject to these restrictions on height and number of stories, provided that no additions or alterations may be made that would increase the existing height or number of stories; (4) visual buffering in the form of a natural vegetative buffer between the residential hospice house and associated parking areas, and any abutting structure, shall be maintained if such vegetative buffer exists, or created using vegetation consistent with that already on the lot of the residential hospice house, or the surrounding area; (5) modifications to the exterior of an existing structure shall be consistent with the existing structure’s predominant character as a single-family home; whenever egress stairways or other exterior renovations are required for building code compliance, they shall be contained within the exterior walls of the dwelling; (6) the initial owner or operator of a dwelling used as a residential hospice shall apply to the Building Inspector for an occupancy permit before any persons receive hospice care within the residential hospice house, and shall demonstrate compliance with the preceding paragraphs 1 through 5; each subsequent owner or operator of a dwelling used as a residential hospice house shall apply to the Building Inspector for an occupancy permit and shall demonstrate continued compliance with the preceding paragraphs 1 through 5.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 26
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
Boarding house with no
arrangements of any
description for private
cooking or housekeeping
N
N
SP
SP
N
Y
Y
INSTITUTIONAL
Dormitory for a school
with no provisions for
private cooking or
housekeeping
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
BUSINESS
Retail establishments
serving the general public
containing 5750 or more
gross square feet of floor
area
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Retail establishments
serving the general public
containing less than
5750 gross square feet of
floor area or incidental
retail sales which are
accessory to a permitted
principal use which does
not involve 50% of the
total floor area or 5750
square feet of the principal
use, whichever is lesser. In
multi-tenanted structures
the provisions of this
section will individually
apply to each tenant or
use and not to the
aggregate total of the
structure
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 27
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
Retail trade or shop for
custom work or the
making of articles to
be sold at retail on the premises
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Manufacturing clearly incidental and accessory to a retail use on the same premises and the product is customarily sold on the premises
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Offices and banks
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Craft, consumer, professional or commercial service established dealing directly with the general public and not enumerated elsewhere in this section
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Theaters, indoor moving picture shows, bowling alleys, skating rinks, billiard rooms, and similar commercial amusement or entertainment places
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Personal fitness service establishment; provided, all required off-street parking is provided on-site for all land uses located on the subject site and in adherence with the requirements of Section 5.1.2, Required Parking, absent any waivers from the provisions of Subsections 5.1.1.5 and 5.1.1.6
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 28
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
Personal fitness service establishment; where there is insufficient off-street parking on-site to serve all land uses located thereon in adherence with the requirements of Section 5.1.2 but where it can be demonstrated that the hours, or days, of peak parking for the uses are sufficiently different that a lower total will provide adequately for all uses or activities served by the parking lot
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Indoor Athletic or Exercise Facilities
*Applies only to Industrial Districts any portion of which is located within 150 feet of the Route 128 boundary, otherwise N.
N
N
N
N
N
SP*
SP
Commercial garage for the storage or repair of vehicles; gasoline and oil filling station; trucking terminal, truck rental agency and similar material hauling enterprise; the parking of vehicles involved in rubbish disposal and oil delivery and the private parking of vehicles for compensation
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Laundry; coin-operated or self-service laundry or dry cleaning establishment; car wash
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 29
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
Lumber or fuel establishment; contractor’s, stone mason’s, junk or salvage yard
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Airport, heliport, landing strip or area for any type
of air-craft
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Hotel or motel
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Eat-in or take-out
restaurant or other eating establishment except a
lunch counter incidental
to a primary use
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Veterinary office and/or treatment facility
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Medical Clinic
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Medical Marijuana Treatment Center
N
N
N
N
N
N
SPP
Outdoor parking in conjunction with the sale or leasing of new or used vehicles on applications filed after September 28, 1978
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
MANUFACTURING
Wholesale distribution facilities or storage in an enclosed structure, excluding the storage of flammable liquids, gas or explosives
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 30
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
Industrial services, for
example, machine shop,
plumbing, electrical or
carpentry shop or similar
service
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Welding shop
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Stone cutting, shaping, or finishing in an enclosed building
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Autobody or auto paint shop, provided that all work is carried out inside the building
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Outside truck service or repair for others including body work
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Food processing primarily for wholesale use
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Bottling plant
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Equipment rental service
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Garment manufacturing
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Laboratory or place where scientific experimental
research is conducted not
including genetic or
biological research
laboratory
N
N
N
N
SP
Y
Y
Genetic biological
research
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Radio or television studio
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 31
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
Medical reference
laboratories other than
accessory to a medical office
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Dental prosthesis
laboratories other than
accessory to a dental
office
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Light non-nuisance manufacturing providing that all resulting cinders, dust, flashing, fumes,
gases, odors, smoke, noise, vibration, refuse matter, vapor, and heat are effectively confined in
a building or are disposed
in a manner so as not
to create a nuisance or hazard to safety or
health
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Any lawful purpose or special use not
enumerated elsewhere in this By-Law
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
More than one non-
residential building or
use on a lot where such
buildings or uses are not detrimental to each other and are in compliance
with all other
requirements of this
By-Law
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
SP
More than one municipal building and/or municipal use on a lot
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 32
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
ACCESSORY
Use of a room or rooms in a single or two-family dwelling as an office or studio by a resident professional person provided not more than one other person is regularly employed therein in connection with such use and that not more than 25% of the gross floor area, not in excess of 600 sq. ft., is regularly devoted to such use
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Customary home
occupation engaged in by
a resident of a single or two-family dwelling, which may include carpentry, cooking, preserving, dress-making, handicrafts, repair of small appliances or other small items and similar
activities, provided that (1) not more than one person is regularly employed therein in connection with such operation, (2) there is no exterior storage of material or equipment nor other exterior evidence of variation from the regular residential character of the premises, and (3) there is no advertising and signing and no public display or sale of goods on the premises.
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 33
USE
RRC
SRA
SRB
GR
A-1, 2
& 3
I
IND
IND-
1
The taking of not more
than four non-transient
boarders or the leasing
of not more than two rooms
with no provisions for
private cooking by a
resident family in a
single-family dwelling
SP
SP
SP
Y
SP
SP
SP
Café or lecture room associated with a
private school
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
SP
Research laboratory or statistical office associated with a private school, including printing, binding and electrotyping as incidental uses
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
SP
Off-street parking for vehicles associated with a principal use, located on a separate lot owned or leased by the owner of the land on which the principal use is located, within a zoning district in which the principal use is permitted
N
N
N
N
N
SP
SP
Seasonal temporary outdoor seating for restaurants serving meals for consumption on the premises and at tables with service provided by waitress or waiter
N
N
N
N
N
Y#
Y#
Other customary and proper accessory uses, such as, but not limited to, garages, tool sheds, greenhouses and cabanas
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 34
3.2.2 Uses in the Business, Chestnut Street Business, Center Business, Avery Square Business and Hillside Avenue Business Districts
The following schedule of use regulations shall apply in the B, CSB, CB, ASB, and HAB districts.
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
AGRICULTURE
Farmers Market, not to exceed once a week, during the season from May 15 to November 30, which may take place on existing parking areas serving one of the following uses: (i) municipal/public uses, (ii) religious and educational uses protected by MGL Chapter 40A, Section 3 or (iii) in a commercially zoned district commercial uses, provided that the special permit granting authority determines that in addition to other necessary findings under Section 7.5.2 of the By-Law adequate parking and loading areas are maintained to serve such other uses during the Farmers Market.
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Farm, greenhouse, nursery, truck garden, provided the subject property contains a minimum of 2 ½ acres
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Salesroom or stand for agricultural and horticultural products provided all products sold are grown or produced on the
premises of the farm, greenhouse,
nursery or truck garden, provided the
subject property contains a minimum of 2
½ acres
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Sale during the Christmas season at a
nursery or greenhouse of cut Christmas trees and wreaths grown or fabricated elsewhere than on the premises
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 35
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
Sale during Christmas season by a non-profit corporation or organization of uncut or cut Christmas trees and wreaths grown or fabricated elsewhere than on the premises and associated, related merchandise, including the outdoor display of trees, wreaths and merchandise.
Outdoor display is permitted on existing parking spaces, except that adequate parking and loading must be maintained
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
PUBLIC, SEMI-PUBLIC & INSTITUTIONAL
Church or other place of worship, parish house, rectory, convent and other religious institution
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
School – public, religious, sectarian or denominational
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Dormitory for a school with no provisions for private cooking or housekeeping
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Public library and museum and philanthropic institution
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Public park and playground and municipal structure including a water tower and reservoir
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Public passenger station
Y
SP
SP
Y
Y
Child care facility
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Other private school, nursery, or kindergarten
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Convalescent or nursing home, hospital
SP
SP
SP
Y
Y
Cemetery
SP
N
N
Y
Y
Private club not conducted as a business
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 36
RESIDENCE
Single-family detached dwelling
B
Y
CSB
N
CB
N
ASB
Y
HAB
Y
Planned residential development
N
N
N
SP
SP
Residential compound
N
N
N
SP
SP
Two-family detached dwelling
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Conversion of a single-family dwelling
to a two-family dwelling
N
N
N
Y
Y
Apartment or multifamily dwelling
*Allowed on second floor and in half-story directly above second floor only;
consistent with density requirements for A-1
N
SP*
SP*
SP
SP
The use of an owner-occupied structure for shared elderly housing for up to six elderly occupants (60+); provided, (1) that such structure so used shall not be subdivided into separate apartments, (2) that occupancies therein by non-owners occupants shall be pursuant to an agreement specifying a term of occupancy of not less than one year, (3) that at any time there shall be in the town no more than fifty structures for which permits have been issued under the authority of this section, (4) that no more than 20% of such structures shall be located in any one precinct of the town, and (5) that the number of structures for which permits are granted in any one year shall not exceed 5
*Applies only to structures in existence prior to Dec. 31, 1982, otherwise N
SP*
N
N
SP
SP
Boarding house with no arrangements of any description for private cooking or housekeeping
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 37
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
BUSINESS
Retail establishment serving the general public if containing 10,000 or more gross sq. ft. of floor area (“Complex Development”):
Grocery Store
Outdoor parking, storage or display of
motor vehicles in conjunction with the
sale or leasing of new or used motor
vehicles on applications filed after
September 28, 1978
Other outdoor display of goods
Y
SP
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N
SPC
N
N
N
N
N
Retail trade or shop for custom work
or the making of articles to be sold at
retail on the premises
Other retailing
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
SPC
SPC
N
N
Retail establishments serving the general public if containing more than 5750 but less than 10,000 gross sq. ft. of floor area:
Grocery store
Outdoor parking, storage or display of
motor vehicles in conjunction with the
sale or leasing of new or used motor
vehicles on applications filed after
September 28, 1978
Other outdoor display of goods
Retail trade or shop for custom work
or the making of articles to be sold at
retail on the premises
Other retailing
Y
SP
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 38
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
Retail establishments serving the general public if containing less than 5750 gross sq. ft. of floor area or incidental retail sales which are accessory to a permitted principal use which does not involve 50% of the total floor area or 5750 square feet of the principal use, whichever is lesser. In multi-tenanted structures the provisions of the section will individually apply to each tenant or use and not to the aggregate total of the structure:
Grocery store
* If under 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor
area
Y
Y
Y*
Y
SP
Outdoor parking, storage or display of
motor vehicles in conjunction with the
sale or leasing of new or used motor
vehicles on applications files after
September 28, 1978
Other outdoor display of goods
Retail trade or shop for custom work
or the making of articles to be sold
at retail on the premises
Other retailing
SP
Y
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
Y
Y
N
N
Y
SP
Manufacturing clearly incidental and accessory to a retail use on the same premises and the product in customarily sold on the premises
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Banks
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 39
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
Offices totaling more than 20,000 square feet, unless created through change of use from either retailing or any principal use listed below this one in Section 3.2.2, such as garment manufacturing:
For consumer sales or service
Others
* Allowed on second floor only
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y*
SPC
SPC
SPC
SPC
Smaller amounts of office space, or
offices created through change of use
from either retailing or any principal
use listed below this one in this
Section 3.2.2, such as garment manufacturing:
For consumer sales or service
Others
*Allowed on second floor only
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y*
Y
Y
Y
Y
Craft, consumer, professional or commercial service establishment dealing directly with the general public
and not enumerated elsewhere in this section
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Theaters and indoor moving picture shows; pool and billiard rooms
Y
SP
SP
SP
N
Electronic game and amusement arcades
Y
N
N
N
N
Bowling alleys, skating rinks, and similar commercial amusement or entertainment places
Y
N
N
N
N
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 40
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
Personal fitness service establishment; provided, all required off-street parking is provided on-site for all land uses located on the subject site and in adherence with the requirements of Section 5.1.2, Required Parking, absent any waivers from the provisions of Subsections 5.1.1.5 and 5.1.1.6
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Personal fitness service establishment; where there is insufficient off-street parking on-site to serve all land uses located thereon in adherence with the requirements of Section 5.1.2 but where it can be demonstrated that the hours, or days, of peak parking for the uses are sufficiently different that a lower total will provide adequately for all uses or activities served by the parking lot
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Automobile service station, excluding
repair services
SP
SP
N
N
N
Other commercial garage for the storage or repair of vehicles; gasoline and oil filling station; trucking terminal, truck rental agency and similar material hauling enterprise; the parking of vehicles involved in rubbish disposal and oil delivery and the private parking of vehicles for compensation
SP
N
N
N
N
Car wash
SP
N
N
N
N
Laundry; coin operated or self-service laundry or dry cleaning establishment
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Lumber or fuel establishment; contractor’s, stone mason’s, junk or salvage yard
SP
N
N
N
N
Airport, heliport, landing strip or area for any type of aircraft
N
N
N
N
N
Hotel or motel
SP
N
N
N
SP
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 41
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
Eat in or take-out restaurant or other eating establishment except a lunch counter incidental to a primary use:
Restaurant serving meals for
consumption on the premises and at
tables with service provided by
waitress or waiter
Take-out operation accessory to the
above
Take-out food counter as an accessory
to a food retail or other non-
consumptive retail establishment
Retail sales of ice cream, frozen
yogurt and similar products for
consumption on or off the premises
Take-out establishment primarily
engaged in the dispensing of
prepared foods to persons carrying
food and beverage away for
preparation and consumption
elsewhere
Fast-food establishment offering
over-the-counter sale of on/off
premises prepared food or beverage
primarily intended for immediate
consumption and prepared in such a
manner to be readily eaten from
easily disposable containers
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
N
N
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Veterinary office and/or treatment facility:
With boarding of animals
Without boarding of animals
SP
SP
N
SP
N
SP
N
SP
N
SP
Medical clinic
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 42
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
MANUFACTURING
Wholesale distribution facilities or storage in an enclosed structure, excluding the storage of flammable liquids, gas or explosives
SP
N
N
N
SP
Industrial services, for example, machine shop, plumbing, electrical or carpentry shop, or similar service
SP
N
N
N
SP
Welding shop
N
N
N
N
N
Stone cutting, shaping, or finishing in an enclosed building
N
N
N
N
N
Autobody or auto paint shop, provided that all work is carried out inside the building
N
N
N
N
N
Outside truck service or repair for others including body work
N
N
N
N
N
Food processing primarily for wholesale use
N
N
N
N
N
Bottling plant
N
N
N
N
N
Equipment rental service
Y
N
N
SP
SP
Garment manufacturing
SP
N
N
SP
SP
Laboratory or place where scientific experimental research is conducted not including genetic or biological research laboratory
SP
N
N
SP
SP
Genetic biological research
N
N
N
N
SP
Radio or television studio
SP
N
N
SP
SP
Medical reference laboratories other than accessory to a medical office
SP
N
N
SP
SP
Dental prosthesis laboratories other than accessory to a dental office
SP
N
N
SP
SP
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 43
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
Light non-nuisance manufacturing providing that all resulting cinders, dust, flashing, fumes, gases, odors, smoke,
noise, vibration, refuse matter, vapor,
and heat are effectively confined in a building or are disposed in a manner
so as not to create a nuisance or hazard
to safety or health
SP
N
N
SP
SP
Any lawful purpose or special use not enumerated elsewhere in this By-Law
SP
N
N
N
N
More than one non-residential building or use on a lot where such buildings or uses are not detrimental to each other and are in compliance with all other requirements of this By-Law
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
More than one municipal building and/or municipal use on a lot
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
ACCESSORY
Use of a room or rooms in a single or two-family dwelling as an office or studio by a resident professional person provided not more than one other person is regularly employed therein in connection with such use and that not more than 25% of the gross floor area, not in excess of 600 sq. ft., is regularly devoted to such use
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Customary home occupation engaged in by a resident of a single or two-family dwelling which may include carpentry, cooking, preserving, dressmaking, handicrafts, repair of small appliances or other small items and similar activities, provide that (1) not more than one person is regularly employed therein in connection with such operation, (2) there is no exterior storage of material or equipment nor other exterior evidence of variation from the regular residential character of the premises, and (3) there is no advertising and signing and no public display or sale of goods on the premises
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 44
USE
B
CSB
CB
ASB
HAB
The taking of not more than four non-transient borders or the leasing of not more than two rooms with no provisions for private cooking by a resident family in a single-family dwelling
Y
N
N
Y
Y
Café or lecture room associated with a private school
SP
N
N
SP
SP
Research laboratory or statistical office associated with a private school, including printing, binding, and electrotyping as incidental uses
SP
N
N
SP
SP
Lunch counter incidental to a principle use
Y
SP
SP
Y
Y
Other customary and proper accessory uses, such as, but not limited to, garages, tool sheds, greenhouses and cabanas
Y
SP
SP
Y
Y
Off-street parking for vehicles associated with a principle use, located on a separate lot owned or leased by the owner of the land on which the principle use is located, within a zoning district in which the principle use is permitted
SP
SP
SP
SP
SP
Other accessory uses incidental to lawful principle uses
Y
SP
SP
Y
Y
Seasonal temporary outdoor seating for restaurants serving meals for consumption on the premises and at tables with service provided by waitress or waiter
Y#
Y#
Y#
Y#
N
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 45
3.2.3 Uses in the Neighborhood Business District
3.2.3.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted within the Neighborhood Business District as a matter of right:
(a) Farm, greenhouse, nursery, truck garden, provided the subject property contains a minimum of 2 ½ acres.
(b) Salesroom or stand for agricultural and horticultural products provided all products sold are grown or produced on the premises of the farm, greenhouse, nursery or truck garden, and provided the subject property contains a minimum of 2 ½ acres.
(c) Sale during the Christmas season at a nursery or greenhouse of cut Christmas trees and wreaths grown or fabricated elsewhere than on the premises.
(d) Churches, synagogues, and temples; includes associated dwellings for religious personnel and associated buildings used for religious purposes.
(e) Elementary or secondary school, trade or vocational school for elementary and secondary school students; operated by a public agency, or by a religious sect or denomination, or a non-profit educational corporation; includes associated buildings and land used for educational purposes.
(f) Public or private, college or technical school, trade or vocational school operated for college age students; operated by a public agency, or by a religious sect or denomination, or a non-profit educational corporation; includes buildings, land or other facilities used for educational purposes but not including space used for revenue producing purposes not directly associated with the education of students.
(g) Child care facility.
(h) Public library and museum and philanthropic institution.
(i) Public parks, playgrounds, municipal buildings or uses.
(j) Single-family detached dwelling.
(k) Two-family detached dwelling, provided they comply with the reconstruction provisions of Section 1.4.7.4.
(l) Retail shop for the sale of convenience goods often bought on a daily basis such as candy, newspapers and tobacco products, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per establishment.
(m) Retail shop for the sale of books, stationary, drugs, sporting goods, jewelry, photographic equipment and supplies, flowers, novelties, cards, footwear, and the like
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 46
which are typically of a size that a customer can carry them by hand, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per establishment.
(n) Retail shop for the sale of apparel, fabrics and accessories, hardware, paint, wallpaper, lawn and garden supplies and equipment, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per establishment.
(o) Grocery store, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per establishment.
(p) Beauty salon, day spa, barber shop, tailor, dressmaker, shoe repair, photographic processing, photocopying and reduction services but not commercial printing, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per establishment.
(q) Medical, dental or psychiatric office, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet per company.
(r) Real estate sales or rental office, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per company.
(s) Use of a room or rooms in a single or two-family dwelling as an office or studio by a resident professional person provided not more than one other person is regularly employed therein in connection with such use and that not more than 25% of the gross floor area, not in excess of 600 square feet, is regularly devoted to such use.
(t) Customary home occupation engaged in by a resident of a single or two-family dwelling which may include carpentry, cooking, preserving, dressmaking, handicrafts, repair of small appliances or other small items and similar activities, provided that (1) not more than one person is regularly employed therein in connection with such operation, (2) there is no exterior storage of material or equipment nor other exterior evidence of variation from the regular residential character of the premises, and (3) there is no advertising and signing and no public display or sale of goods on the premises.
(u) The taking of not more than four non-transient borders or the leasing of not more than two rooms with no provisions for private cooking by a resident family in a single-family dwelling.
(v) Professional offices, not listed in (q), provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per company.
(w) Offices for consumer sales and/or services totaling no more one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per company.
(x) General office uses, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per company.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 47
As to uses (l)-(x) above, all operations must be conducted entirely within an enclosed building. Storage of equipment and products outdoors during non-operating hours is prohibited. Commercial delivery and/or maintenance trucks must be parked during non-operating hours in a garage or in an outdoor area not within the required setback for the principal building and shall be screened from the view of the abutting lots and street(s). If operations of the aforementioned uses are in whole or in part conducted outdoors during operating hours, such uses shall be deemed to be uses permitted by special permit pursuant to Section 3.2.3.2.
3.2.3.2 Uses Permitted By Special Permit
The following uses are permitted within the Neighborhood Business District only upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority under such conditions as they may require:
(a) Public passenger station.
(b) Private school, nursery, or kindergarten not otherwise classified under Section 3.2.3.1.
(c) Bank, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet gross floor area per company.
(d) Laundry or dry cleaning pick-up station with processing done elsewhere; self-service laundromat; provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet per establishment.
(e) Commercial garage for motor vehicle maintenance and minor repairs limited to engine tune-up, lubrication and installation of replacement parts, adjustment or replacement of brakes or tires, but not including engine overhaul, body work or painting.
(f) Retail sales of ice cream, frozen yogurt and similar products for consumption on or off the premises, provided the gross floor area so used does not exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet per establishment.
(g) Take-out food counter as an accessory to a food retail or other non-consumptive retail establishment.
(h) Lunch counter incidental to a principal use.
(i) More than one non-residential building or use on a lot where such buildings or uses are not detrimental to each other and are in compliance with all other requirements of this By-Law.
(j) Other accessory uses incidental to lawful principal uses.
(k) Medical, dental or psychiatric office exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet gross floor area per company.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 48
(l) Professional offices, not listed in 3.2.3.1(q), exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet gross floor area per company.
(m) Offices for consumer sales and/or services exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet gross floor area per company.
(n) General office uses exceeding one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet gross floor area per company.
(o) Uses (l)-(x) of Section 3.2.3.1 conducting operations in whole or in part outdoors during operating hours.
Uses conducted in whole or in part outdoors during operating hours and/or storing equipment and product outdoors during non-operating hours shall be required to provide such screening and landscaping as deemed necessary by the SPGA to shield neighboring residential uses. Except for use (e), commercial delivery and/or maintenance trucks must be parked during non-operating hours in a garage or in an outdoor area not within the required setback for the principal building and shall be screened from the view of the abutting lots and street(s).
3.2.4 Uses in the New England Business Center District
3.2.4.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted within the New England Business Center District as a matter of right:
(a) Uses exempt from local zoning control pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3.
(b) Public parks and playgrounds, municipal buildings or uses.
(c) Professional, business or administrative office, but not including a medical clinic or Medical Services Building or medical, surgical, psychiatric, dental, orthodontic, or psychologist group practices comprised of three or more such professionals (hereinafter “Group Practices”) or physical therapy, alternative medicine practices, wellness treatments, including but not limited to, acupuncture, yoga, chiropractic and/or nutrition services. “Professional” shall include professional medical, surgical, psychiatric, dental, orthodontic or psychologist practice by a group of two or fewer such professionals (“Non-group Practice”).
(d) Bank or Credit Union.
(e) Wholesale distribution facilities in an enclosed structure, excluding the storage of flammable liquids, gas or explosives.
(f) Medical laboratory or laboratory engaged in scientific research and development, and experimental and testing activities including, but not limited to, the fields of biology,
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 49
genetics, chemistry, electronics, engineering, geology, medicine and physics, which may include the development of mock-ups and prototypes.
(g) Radio or television studio.
(h) Light non-nuisance manufacturing, including but not limited to the manufacture of electronics, pharmaceutical, bio-pharmaceutical, medical, robotic, and micro-biotic products, provided that all resulting cinders, dust, flashing, fuses, gases, odors, smoke, noise, vibration, refuse matter, vapor, and heat are effectively confined in a building or are disposed of in a manner so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to safety or health.
(i) Telecommunications facility housed within a building.
(j) On the ground floor of a building, consumer and commercial service establishments dealing directly with the general public; business service centers; retail establishments; pharmacies (not affiliated with Group Practices as defined in Section 3.2.4.1, physical therapy, alternative medicine, wellness treatments such as acupuncture, yoga, chiropractic and/or nutrition services); day care uses (other than adult day care establishments requiring a special permit under Section 3.2.4.2 (b) hereof); and laundry and dry-cleaning pick-up stations where processing is done elsewhere. Except for day care uses, each business establishment shall be limited to 15,000 square feet of floor area.
(k) Other customary and proper accessory uses incidental to lawful principal uses. Further provided, accessory uses for seasonal temporary outdoor seating for restaurants serving meals for consumption on the premises and at tables with service provided by waitress or waiter shall be allowed upon minor project site plan review with waiver of all requirements of Section 7.4.4 and 7.4.6 except as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with Section 6.9 by the Planning Board or Board of Selectmen in accordance with Section 6.9.
(l) More than one building on a lot.
(m) More than one use on a lot.
3.2.4.2 Uses Permitted by Special Permit
The following uses are permitted within the New England Business Center District upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority under such conditions as they may require:
(a) Public light-rail train station.
(b) Adult day care facility.
(c) Private school, nursery, or kindergarten not otherwise classified under Section 3.2.4.1.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 50
(d) Hotel.
(e) Indoor athletic or exercise facilities and/or outdoor pool(s) associated with such facilities.
(f) Eat in or take-out restaurants or other eating establishments, including coffee shops. Further provided that drive-thru restaurants or other eating establishments are prohibited. Each eat in or take-out restaurant or other eating establishments, including coffee shops, shall be limited to 15,000 square feet of floor area.
(g) External automatic teller machine, drive-up window or auto-oriented branch bank accessory to a bank or credit union permitted under Section 3.2.4.1(d) hereof.
(h) Off-street parking for vehicles associated with a principal use located on a lot that comprises land in two or more districts where the use is not otherwise allowed in the district in which the parking is to be located.
(i) Group Practices as defined in Section 3.2.4.1 and alternative medicine practices, physical therapy, and wellness treatments facilities including, but not limited to, acupuncture, yoga, chiropractic and/or nutrition services. Such uses may have customary and proper accessory uses incidental to the lawful principal uses, including but not limited to, pharmacies. If the principal use is located on the ground floor, then the affiliated pharmacy may be located there also.
3.2.4.3 Special Permit, Parking Garage
Notwithstanding the dimensional requirements and the use table of this By-Law the Planning Board is authorized to issue a special permit for a parking garage and/or a parking structure for more than three (3) vehicles, including both enclosed and open structures, above and below ground, that serve uses located in the NEBC, MU-128 and HC-128 districts, where the parking garage and/or parking structure is located in the immediate vicinity of and on the same side of Highland Avenue as the uses it serves, subject to such setback requirements as the Board may impose.
3.2.4.4 Special Permit, Intensity of Use
Projects that seek a floor area ratio beyond what is permitted by right pursuant to Section 4.8 shall require a special permit and shall be subject to Section 6.8 Special Permit Conditions in the New England Business Center District. Provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall impair the rights conferred by Section 1.4 of this By-Law.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 51
3.2.5 Uses in the Highland Commercial-128 District
3.2.5.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted within the Highland Commercial-128 District as a matter of right:
(a) Uses exempt from local zoning control pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3.
(b) Public parks and playgrounds, municipal buildings or uses.
(c) Retail establishment or combination of retail establishments serving the general public where each establishment contains less than 10,000 square feet of floor area and where all items for sale or rent are kept inside a building.
(d) Manufacturing clearly incidental and accessory to a retail use on the same premises and the product is customarily sold on the premises.
(e) Craft, consumer or commercial service establishment dealing directly with the general public.
(f) Professional, business or administrative office, but not including a medical clinic or Medical Services Building or Group Practices or alternative medicine practices, physical therapy, and wellness treatment facilities including, but not limited to, acupuncture, yoga, chiropractic and/or nutrition services, all as defined in Sections 1.3 and 3.2.4.1.
(g) Bank or Credit Union.
(h) Medical laboratory or laboratory engaged in scientific research and development, and experimental and testing activities including, but not limited to, the fields of biology, genetics, chemistry, electronics, engineering, geology, medicine and physics, which may include the development of mock-ups and prototypes but not the manufacture of finished products. Not allowed on the first floor.
(i) Other customary and proper accessory uses incidental to lawful principal uses. Further provided, accessory uses for seasonal temporary outdoor seating for restaurants serving meals for consumption on the premises and at tables with service provided by waitress or waiter shall be allowed upon minor project site plan review with waiver of all requirements of Section 7.4.4 and 7.4.6 except as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with Section 6.9 by the Planning Board or Board of Selectmen in accordance with Section 6.9.
(j) More than one building on a lot.
(k) More than one use on a lot.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 52
3.2.5.2 Uses Permitted by Special Permit
The following uses are permitted within the Highland Commercial-128 District upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority under such conditions as they may require:
(a) Public light-rail train station.
(b) Adult day care facility.
(c) Private school, nursery, or kindergarten not otherwise classified under Section 3.2.5.1.
(d) Retail establishment or combination of retail establishments serving the general public where each establishment contains more than 10,000 but less than 25,000 square feet of floor area and where all items for sale or rent are kept inside a building.
(e) Laundry or dry-cleaning pick-up station with processing done elsewhere.
(f) Equipment rental service but not including any business that uses outside storage.
(g) Hotel.
(h) Restaurant serving meals for consumption on the premises and at tables with service provided by waitress or waiter.
(i) Take-out operation accessory to the above restaurant.
(j) Take-out food counter as an accessory to a food retail or other non-consumptive retail establishment.
(k) Retail sales of ice cream, frozen yogurt and similar products for consumption on or off the premises.
(l) Take-out establishment primarily engaged in the dispensing of prepared foods to persons carrying food and beverage away for preparation and consumption elsewhere.
(m) Fast-food establishment offering over-the-counter sale of on/off premises prepared food or beverage primarily intended for immediate consumption and prepared in such a manner to be readily eaten from easily disposable containers.
(n) Veterinary office and/or treatment facility including convalescent stays but not the boarding of animals.
(o) Indoor athletic or exercise facilities.
(p) Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensary, subject to the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 53
(q) External automatic teller machine, drive-up window or auto-oriented branch bank accessory to a bank or credit union permitted under Section 3.2.5.1(g) hereof.
(r) Off-street parking for vehicles associated with a principal use located on a lot that comprises land in two or more districts where the use is not otherwise allowed in the district in which the parking is to be located.
(s) Other customary and proper accessory uses incidental to lawful principal uses.
3.2.5.3 Special Permit, Parking Garage
Notwithstanding the dimensional requirements and the use table of this By-Law the Planning Board is authorized to issue a special permit for a parking garage and/or a parking structure for more than three (3) vehicles, including both enclosed and open structures, above and below ground, that serve uses located in the NEBC, MU-128 and HC-128 districts, where the parking garage and/or parking structure is located in the immediate vicinity of and on the same side of Highland Avenue as the uses it serves, subject to such setback requirements as the Board may impose.
3.2.5.4 Special Permit, Intensity of Use
Projects that seek a floor area ratio beyond what is permitted by right pursuant to Section 4.5 shall require a special permit and shall be subject to Section 6.8 Special Permit Conditions in the Highland Commercial-128 District. Provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall impair the rights conferred by Section 1.4 of this By-Law.
3.2.6 Uses in the Mixed Use-128 District
3.2.6.1 Permitted Use
The following uses are permitted within the Mixed Use-128 District as a matter of right:
(a) Uses exempt from local zoning control pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3.
(b) Public parks and playgrounds, municipal buildings or uses.
(c) Retail establishment or combination of retail establishments serving the general public where each establishment contains less than 10,000 square feet of floor area and where all items for sale or rent are kept inside a building.
(d) Manufacturing clearly incidental and accessory to a retail use on the same premises and the product is customarily sold on the premises.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 54
(e) Craft, consumer or commercial service establishment dealing directly with the general public.
(f) Laundry or dry cleaning pick-up station with processing done elsewhere.
(g) Professional, business or administrative office, but not including a medical clinic or Medical Services Building or Group Practices or alternative medicine practices, physical therapy, and wellness treatment facilities including, but not limited to, acupuncture, yoga, chiropractic and/or nutrition services, all as defined in Sections 1.3 and 3.2.4.1.
(h) Bank or Credit Union.
(i) Wholesale distribution facilities in an enclosed structure, excluding the storage of flammable liquids, gas or explosives.
(j) Medical laboratory or laboratory engaged in scientific research and development, and experimental and testing activities including, but not limited to, the fields of biology, genetics, chemistry, electronics, engineering, geology, medicine and physics, which may include the development of mock-ups and prototypes.
(k) Radio or television studio.
(l) Light non-nuisance manufacturing, including but not limited to the manufacture of electronics, pharmaceutical, bio-pharmaceutical, medical, robotic, and micro-biotic products, provided that all resulting cinders, dust, flashing, fuses, gases, odors, smoke, noise, vibration, refuse matter, vapor, and heat are effectively confined in a building or are disposed of in a manner so as not to create a nuisance or hazard to safety or health.
(m) Telecommunications facility housed within a building.
(n) Other customary and proper accessory uses incidental to lawful principal uses. Further provided, accessory uses for seasonal temporary outdoor seating for restaurants serving meals for consumption on the premises and at tables with service provided by waitress or waiter shall be allowed upon minor project site plan review with waiver of all requirements of Section 7.4.4 and 7.4.6 except as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with Section 6.9 by the Planning Board or Board of Selectmen in accordance with Section 6.9.
(o) More than one building on a lot.
(p) More than one use on a lot.
3.2.6.2 Uses Permitted By Special Permit
The following uses are permitted within the Mixed Use-128 District upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority under such conditions as they may require:
(a) Public light-rail train station.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 55
(b) Adult day care facility.
(c) Private school, nursery, or kindergarten not otherwise classified under Section 3.2.6.1.
(d) Retail establishment or combination of retail establishments serving the general public where each establishment contains more than 10,000 but less than 25,000 square feet of floor area and where all items for sale or rent are kept inside a building.
(e) Equipment rental service but not including any business that uses outside storage.
(f) Hotel.
(g) Eat-in or take-out restaurant or other eating establishment except that a lunch counter incidental to a primary use shall be permissible by right.
(h) Veterinary office and/or treatment facility and/or animal care facility, including but not limited to, the care, training, sitting and/or boarding of animals.
(i) Indoor athletic or exercise facilities.
(j) Medical Marijuana Treatment Center, subject to the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board.
(k) External automatic teller machine, drive-up window or auto-oriented branch bank accessory to a bank or credit union permitted under Section 3.2.6.1(h) hereof.
(l) Off-street parking for vehicles associated with a principal use located on a lot that comprises land in two or more districts where the use is not otherwise allowed in the district in which the parking is to be located.
3.2.6.3 Special Permit, Parking Garage
Notwithstanding the dimensional requirements and the use table of this By-Law the Planning Board is authorized to issue a special permit for a parking garage and/or a parking structure for more than three (3) vehicles, including both enclosed and open structures, above and below ground, that serve uses located in the NEBC, MU-128 and HC-128 districts, where the parking garage and/or parking structure is located in the immediate vicinity of and on the same side of Highland Avenue as the uses it serves, subject to such setback requirements as the Board may impose.
3.2.6.4 Special Permit, Intensity of Use
Projects that seek a floor area ratio beyond what is permitted by right pursuant to Section 4.9 shall require a special permit and shall be subject to Section 6.8 Special Permit Conditions in the
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 56
Mixed Use-128 District. Provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall impair the rights conferred by Section 1.4 of this By-Law.
3.3 Uses in Flood Plain District
The purpose of the Flood Plain District is to protect the streams, rivers, and other watercourses in the Town and their adjoining lands; to protect the health and safety of persons and property against the hazards of flooding; to preserve and maintain the ground water table for water supply purposes; to protect the community against detrimental use and development of lands adjoining such water courses; to conserve the watershed areas of the Town for the health, safety, welfare of the public; and to preserve the balance of the components of the ecosystem of the watercourses and adjoining land.
The Flood Plain District shall be considered as overlying other use districts established by this By-Law. Within the Flood Plain District, the requirements of the underlying district continue to apply insofar as they comply with the provisions of this section. In the event there is a conflict or difference between the provisions of the overlying and underlying district the more restrictive shall apply. Compliance with these provisions shall not be construed as satisfying the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 131.
3.3.1 Prohibited Uses
The following uses are prohibited, regardless of other requirements:
(a) Manufacture, use, transport, storage or disposal of toxic or hazardous materials.
(b) Sanitary landfill; junkyard; salvage yard; and other solid waste disposal.
(c) Encroachments including fill, replacement of soil with impervious material, new construction, substantial improvements (the cost of which exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure), or other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels in the Town during the occurrence of a 100-year flood.
3.3.2 Permitted Uses
(a) Uses directly related to the conservation of water, plants, and wildlife.
(b) Outdoor recreation activities and facilities, including unpaved play areas, nature study, boating, fishing and hunting where otherwise legally permitted which do not require removal or transfer of earth.
(c) Wildlife management areas, landings, foot, bicycle and/or horse paths and bridges, provided such uses do not affect the natural flow pattern of any watercourse.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 57
(d) Grazing and farming, including truck gardening and harvesting of crops.
(e) Forestry and nurseries.
(f) Removal from a watercourse of silt and other accumulated debris which tends to interfere with the natural flow patterns of the watercourse.
(g) Dwellings for sustained human habitation lawfully existing which shall not hereafter be enlarged or extended to increase ground coverage.
3.3.3 Uses Requiring a Special Permit
The Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit for the following:
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements (the cost of which exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvements) of residential structures which have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above the flood plain elevation defined on the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Rate Maps (the 100-year flood plain elevation) and the Town of Needham Zoning Map. No new construction or substantial improvement shall be permitted unless it can be demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the proposed development will not increase the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements (the cost of which exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the improvement) of non-residential structures which have the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated to or above the flood plain elevation defined on the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Rate Maps (the 100-year flood elevation) and the Town of Needham Zoning Map or are flood proofed and watertight to the applicable flood elevation. In the case where watertight flood proofing is permitted, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify to the Building Inspector that the methods used are adequate to withstand flood depth pressures and velocities impact and the uplift of forces and other factors associated with the 100-year flood. No new construction or substantial improvement shall be permitted unless it is demonstrated by the applicant that the cumulative effect of the proposed development will not increase the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood.
(c) Small non-residential structures of less than 100 square feet of floor area used in connection with recreation or the growing, harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on the premises.
(d) Any driveway and walkway ancillary to uses otherwise permitted by this section.
(e) Tennis courts or other uses requiring a similarly prepared surface.
(f) Water and sewer pumping stations.
(g) Any use not expressly permitted or prohibited.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 58
(h) Swimming pools, together with structures, walkways, mechanical systems accessory thereto, and fences.
(i) Any use permitted in the underlying district in which the land is situated, subject to the same use and development restrictions as may otherwise apply thereto, provided that the land designated as being within the Flood Plain District is found by the Board of Appeals not, in fact, to be subject to flooding. The Board of Appeals shall refer each question on this matter to the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, Board of Health, and Department of Public Works, and shall not act until these agencies have reported their recommendations or 45 days have elapsed after such referral and no report has been received.
3.3.4 Special Permit Criteria
In granting a special permit, the Board of Appeals shall consider, among other factors, the following:
(a) Geographic location of proposed building and security of driveway or walkway access during flooding.
(b) Foundation elevations of proposed building and security of foundation during flooding, including assurance that foundations would not be undermined and that the proposed building would not be floated off, swept away, or battered during flooding.
(c) Disposal of sewage from the proposed building and containment of sewage during flooding.
(d) Safety of water, sewage, gas, electric and fuel utilities from breaking, igniting, electrocution or other dangers during flooding.
(e) Soil structure and the general character of development in the neighborhood.
(f) The preservation of the natural water channel passage of flood flows.
(g) The retention of existing flood water storage capacity.
3.3.5 General Provisions Relating to Flood Plain District
(a) All development in the Flood Plain District, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit shall be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws and with the following: (i) Section of the Massachusetts State Building Code which addresses floodplain and coastal high hazard areas (currently 780 CMR); (ii) Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00); (iii) Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00); and (iv) Minimum
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 59
Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5). Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above referenced state regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of these state regulations.
(b) All subdivision proposals in the Flood Plain District shall be reviewed to assure that: (i) such proposals minimize flood damage; (ii) all public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and (iii) adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals or other developments of greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, within unnumbered A zones, as shown on the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated July 17, 2012.
(d) Within areas designated Zone A, AH, and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, as shown on the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Floodway Map, and Flood Insurance Study, dated July 17, 2012, the best available Federal, State, local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(e) Within Zone AH on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
3.3.6 National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Requirements
Reference is hereby made to the Norfolk County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and Flood Insurance Study dated July 17, 2012 – both of which are on file in the office of the Town Clerk, Planning Board, Building Official, Conservation Commission and Engineering Department. In granting special permits authorized above under Subsections 3.3.3 and 3.3.4, the Board of Appeals shall, as appropriate, require the following as conditions of approval:
(a) Require that new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewerage systems be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into said systems, as well as discharges from said systems into flood waters;
(b) Require that new adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards in flood-prone areas, and more specifically, require adequate drainage around proposed structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from such structures; and
(c) Require that adjacent communities, the site coordination office and the NFIP State Coordinator at the Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a water course, and that a copy of such notification be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Administrator.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 60
3.4 Aquifer Protection District
3.4.1 Purpose of District
The purpose of this Aquifer Protection District is to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of drinking water for the residents, institutions, and businesses of the Town of Needham; to preserve and protect existing and potential sources of drinking water supplies; to conserve the natural resources of the town; and to prevent temporary and permanent contamination of the environment.
3.4.2 Scope of Authority
The Aquifer Protection District is an overlay district superimposed on the zoning districts. This overlay district shall apply to all new construction, reconstruction, or expansion of existing buildings and new or expanded uses. Applicable activities or uses which fall within the Aquifer Protection District must comply with the requirements of this district as well as with the underlying zoning. Uses that are prohibited in the underlying zoning districts shall not be permitted in the Aquifer Protection District.
3.4.3 Definitions
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
(a) Aquifer – Geologic formation composed of rock, sand, or gravel that contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable water.
(b) Aquifer Protection District – The zoning district defined to overlay other zoning districts in the Town of Needham delineated on a map entitled, “Zoning Map of the Town of Needham, Massachusetts” as originally dated September 1924 and revised to May 15, 1989, and as revised and amended to date and on file in the Office of the Town Clerk. The aquifer protection district may include specifically designated recharge areas.
(c) Impervious Surface – Material or structure on, above, or below the ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate directly into the soil.
(d) Mining – the removal or relocation of geologic materials such as topsoil, sand, gravel, metallic ores, or bedrock.
(e) Recharge Areas – Areas that collect precipitation or surface water and carry it to aquifers. Recharge areas may include areas designated as Zone I, Zone II, or Zone III.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 61
(f) Toxic or Hazardous Material – Any substance or mixture of physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual, or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human health if such substance or mixture were discharged to land or water of the Town of Needham. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation, synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis, and all substances defined as Toxic or Hazardous under Massachusetts General Laws (MGL) Chapter 21C and 21E and 310 CMR 30.00, and also include such products as solvents and thinners in quantities greater than normal household use.
(g) Zone II – The area of an aquifer which contributes water to a well under the most severe pumping and recharge conditions that can be realistically anticipated (180 days of pumping at safe yield with no recharge from precipitation), as defined in 310 Code of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR) 22.00.
(h) Zone III – The land area beyond the area of Zone II from which surface water and groundwater drain into Zone II, as defined in 310 CMR 22.00.
3.4.4 Establishment and Delineation of Aquifer Protection District
For the purposes of this district, there are hereby established within the town certain aquifer protection areas, consisting of aquifers or recharge areas which are delineated on a map entitled “Zoning Map of the Town of Needham, Massachusetts” as originally dated September 1924 and revised to May 15, 1989, and as revised and amended to date and on file in the Office of the Town Clerk.
3.4.5 District Boundary Disputes
If any land designated as lying within an Aquifer Protection District is proved not to possess the characteristics by which such districts are delineated and which this By-Law seeks to protect, the Special Permit Granting Authority may permit uses of the land otherwise prohibited or requiring a special permit under this section if it finds that such use will not be detrimental to the environment or the health, safety and general welfare of the community. Resolution of such boundary disputes shall be through a Special Permit application to the Special Permit Granting Authority. Any application for a special permit for this purpose shall be accompanied by adequate documentation. The burden of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in question to show where the bounds should properly be located. At the request of the owner(s), the town may engage a professional engineer (civil or sanitary), hydrologist, geologist, or soil scientist to determine more accurately the boundaries of the district with respect to individual parcels of land, and may charge the owner(s) for all or part of the cost of the investigation.
3.4.6 Use Regulation
In the Aquifer Protection District the following regulations shall apply:
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 62
(a) Permitted Uses – The following uses are permitted within the Aquifer Protection District, provided that all necessary permits, orders, or approvals required by local, state, or federal law are also obtained:
(1) conservation of soil, water, plants, and wildlife;
(2) outdoor recreation, nature study, boating, fishing, and hunting where otherwise legally permitted;
(3) foot, bicycle and/or horse paths, and bridges;
(4) normal operation and maintenance of existing water bodies and dams, splash boards, and other water control, supply and conservation devices;
(5) maintenance, repair, and enlargement of any existing structure, subject to Section 3.4.6 (b) (prohibited uses) and Section 3.4.6 (c) (special permitted uses);
(6) residential development, subject to Section 3.4.6 (b) (prohibited uses) and Section 3.4.6 (c) (special permitted uses);
(7) farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry, harvesting, and grazing, subject to Section 3.4.6 (b) (prohibited uses) and Section 3.4.6 (c) (special permitted uses);
(8) necessary public/utilities designated so as to prevent contamination of groundwater. Underground storage tanks related to these activities are not categorically permitted.
(b) Prohibited Uses -- The following uses are prohibited within the Aquifer Protection District:
(1) landfills and open dumps as defined in 310 CMR 19.006;
(2) storage of liquid petroleum products, except the following:
i. normal household use, outdoor maintenance, and heating of a structure;
ii. waste oil retention facilities required by statute, rule, or regulation;
iii. emergency generators required by statute, rule, or regulation;
iv. treatment works approved under 314 CMR 5.00 for treatment of ground or surface waters;
provided that storage, listed in items i through iv above, is in free-standing containers within buildings or above ground with secondary containment adequate to contain a spill the size of the container’s total storage capacity.
(3) land filling of sludge or septage as defined in 310 CMR 32.05;
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 63
(4) storage of sludge and septage, unless such storage is in compliance with 310 CMR 32.30 and 310 CMR 32.31;
(5) individual sewage disposal systems that are designed in accordance with 310 CMR 15.00 to receive more than 110 gallons of sewage per quarter acre under one ownership per day, or 440 gallons of sewage on any one acre under one ownership per day, whichever is greater, except the replacement or repair of an existing system that will not result in an increase in design capacity above the original design;
(6) storage of deicing chemicals unless such storage, including loading areas, is within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate;
(7) storage of animal manure unless covered or contained;
(8) earth removal, consisting of the removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel, or any other earth material to within 6 feet of historical high groundwater as determined from monitoring wells and historical water table fluctuation data compiled by the United States Geological Survey, except for excavations for building foundations, roads, or utility works;
(9) facilities that generate, treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste subject to MGL 21C and 310 CMR 30.00, except the following:
i very small quantity generators as defined under 310 CMR 30.00;
ii household hazardous waste collection centers and events under 310 CMR 30.390;
iii waste oil retention facilities required by MGL Chapter 21, Section 52A;
iv water remediation treatment works approved under 314 CMR 5.00.
(10) automobile graveyards and junkyards, as defined in MGL Chapter 140B, Section 1;
(11) treatment works that are subject to 314 CMR 5.00 including privately owned sewage treatment facilities, except the following:
i the replacement or repair of an existing treatment works that will not result in a design capacity greater than the design capacity of the existing treatment works;
ii the replacement of existing subsurface sewage disposal system(s) with wastewater treatment works that will not result in a design capacity greater than the design capacity of the existing system(s);
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 64
iii treatment works approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection designed for the treatment of contaminated groundwater.
(12) storage of liquid hazardous materials, as defined in MGL Chapter 21E, unless in a free standing container within a building or above ground with secondary containment adequate to contain a spill the size of the container’s total storage capacity;
(13) industrial and commercial uses which discharge process wastewater on-site;
(14) stockpiling and disposal of snow and ice containing deicing chemicals if brought in from outside the district;
(15) storage of commercial fertilizers and soil conditioners, as defined in MGL Chapter 128, Section 64, unless such storage is within a structure designated to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate;
(16) the use of septic system cleaners which contain toxic or hazardous chemicals.
(c) Uses and Activities Requiring A Special Permit – The following uses and activities are permitted within the Aquifer Protection District only upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority under such conditions as they may require:
(1) enlargement or alteration of existing uses that do not conform to the Aquifer Protection District;
(2) the application of pesticides, including herbicide, insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides, for non-domestic or non-agricultural uses in accordance with state and federal standards. The special permit shall be granted if such standards are met. If applicable, the applicant should provide documentation of compliance with a Yearly Operating Plan (YOP) for vegetation management operations under 333 CMR 11.00 or a Department of Food and Agriculture approved Pesticide Management Plan or Integrated Pest Management (IPM) program under 333 CMR 12.00;
(3) the application of fertilizers for non-domestic or non-agricultural uses. Such applications shall be made in a manner so as to minimize adverse impacts on groundwater due to nutrient transport, deposition, and sedimentation;
(4) those activities that involve the handling of toxic or hazardous materials in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use permitted in the underlying zoning (except as prohibited under Section 3.4.6.b). Such activities shall require a special permit to prevent contamination of groundwater;
(5) the construction of dams or other water control devices, ponds, pools or other changes in water bodies or courses, created for swimming, fishing, or other
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 65
recreational uses, agricultural uses, or drainage improvements. Such activities shall not adversely affect water quality or quantity;
(6) any use that will render impervious more than 15% or 2,500 square feet of any lot, whichever is greater. A system for groundwater recharge must be provided which does not degrade groundwater quality. For non-residential uses, recharge shall be by storm water infiltration basins or similar system covered with natural vegetation, and dry wells shall be used only where other methods are not feasible. For all non-residential uses, all such basins and wells shall be preceded by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contamination. Any and all recharge areas shall be permanently maintained in full working order by the owner.
3.4.7 Procedures For Issuance of Special Permit
(a) Special Permit Granting Authority – The Special Permit Granting Authority under this By-Law shall be the Planning Board. Such special permit shall only be granted if the Special Permit Granting Authority determines, after recommendations from the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission and the Needham Department of Public Works that the intent of this By-Law, as well as its specific criteria, are met. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall not grant a special permit under this section unless the petitioner’s application materials include, in the Special Permit Granting Authority’s opinion, sufficiently detailed, definite, and credible information to support positive findings in relation to the standards given in this section. The Special Permit Granting Authority may impose such conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems appropriate. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall document the basis for any departures from the recommendations of the other Needham boards or agencies in its decision.
(b) Review by Other Boards or Agencies – Upon receipt of the special permit application, the Special Permit Granting Authority shall transmit one copy to the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, and the Needham Department of Public Works for their written recommendations. Failure to respond in writing within 35 days of receipt by the Board shall indicate approval or no desire to comment by said agency. The necessary number of copies of the application shall be furnished by the applicant.
(c) Special Permit Approval Criteria – The Special Permit Granting Authority may grant the required special permit only upon finding that the proposed use meets the following standards, those specified in Section 3.4.6 of this By-Law, and any regulations or guidelines adopted by the Special Permit Granting Authority. The proposed use must:
(1) in no way, during construction or thereafter, adversely affect the existing or potential quality or quantity of water that is available in the Aquifer Protection District, and
(2) be designed to avoid substantial disturbance of the soils, topography, drainage, vegetation, and other water-related natural characteristics of the site to be developed.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 66
(d) Rules and Regulations – The Special Permit Granting Authority may adopt, and from time to time amend, Rules and Regulations consistent with the provisions of this By-Law, the Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules of the Planning Board and Chapter 40A and other provisions of the General Laws, and shall file a copy of said Rules and Regulations with the Town Clerk.
(e) Application Contents – In addition to the requirements of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 9 and the Rules and Regulations of the Special Permit Granting Authority, the applicant shall file ten copies of a site plan and attachments. The site plan shall be drawn at a proper scale as determined by the Special Permit Granting Authority and shall be stamped by a professional engineer. All additional submittals shall be prepared by qualified professionals. The site plan and its attachments shall at a minimum include the following information where pertinent:
(1) a complete list of chemicals, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, fuels, and other potentially hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises in quantities greater than those associated with normal household use:
(2) for those activities using or storing such hazardous materials, a hazardous materials management plan shall be prepared and filed with the Fire Chief, Board of Health and Local Emergency Planning Committee. The plan shall include:
i provisions to protect against the discharge of hazardous materials or wastes to the environment due to spillage, accidental damage, corrosion, leakage, or vandalism, including spill containment and clean-up procedures;
ii provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces;
iii evidence of compliance with the Regulations of the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act 310 CMR 30.00, including obtaining an EPA Identification number from the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
(3) proposed down-gradient location(s) for groundwater monitoring well(s), should the Special Permit Granting Authority deem the activity a potential groundwater threat.
(f) Technical Assistance – To assist its review of applications for special permits, the Special Permit Granting Authority may engage a professional geologist, hydrologist, soil scientist, or Massachusetts registered professional engineer experienced in groundwater evaluation or hydro geology to review the application for completeness, accuracy and effectiveness of remediation and shall charge the applicant for the cost of such review. The Special Permit Granting Authority may retain a professional geologist, hydrologist, soil scientist, or Massachusetts registered professional engineer hereunder only for reviewing the applicant’s projections of the impact of the proposed activity on the purposes of the district described in Section 3.4.1, verifying information contained in the
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 67
application, and verifying the inclusion of the subject land within the Aquifer Protection District, whichever is proposed.
(g) Violations – Written notice of any violations of this Section shall be given by the Building Inspector to the responsible person as soon as possible after detection of a violation or a continuing violation. Notice to the assessed owner of the property shall be deemed notice to the responsible person. Such notice shall specify the requirement or restriction violated and the nature of the violation, and may also identify the actions necessary to remove or remedy the violations and preventive measures required for avoiding future violations and a schedule of compliance. A copy of such notice shall be submitted to the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Needham Department of Public Works, and Water Division. The cost of containment, clean-up, or other action of compliance shall be borne by the owner and/or operator of the premises.
For situations that require remedial action to prevent adverse impact to the water resources within the Aquifer Protection District, the Town of Needham, the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, or any of their agents may order the owner or operator of the premises to remedy the violation. If said owner and/or operator does not comply with said order, the Town of Needham, the Building Inspector, the Board of Health, or any of their agents, if authorized to enter upon such premises under the terms of the special permit or otherwise, may act to remedy the violation. The remediation cost shall be assessed to the owner and/or operator of the premises.
3.4.8 Severability
A determination that any portion or provision of this overlay protection district is invalid shall not invalidate any other portion or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any special permit previously issued thereunder.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 68
3.5 Adult Uses Overlay Districts
3.5.1 Purpose and Intent
It has been documented in numerous other towns and cities throughout the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and elsewhere in the United States that adult entertainment uses are distinguishable from other business uses and that the location of adult entertainment uses degrade the quality of life in the areas of the community where they are located, with impacts including increased levels of crime, blight, and late hours of operation resulting in noise and traffic late into the night. Therefore, this By-Law is enacted pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 9 and Section 9A to serve the compelling Town interests by regulating and limiting the location of adult entertainment enterprises as defined herein. This regulation will promote the Town of Needham’s great interest in protecting and preserving the quality of its neighborhoods, commercial districts, and the quality of life through effective land use planning.
3.5.2 Establishment of Districts and Relationship to Underlying Districts
The Adult Uses Overlay Districts are established as districts which overlay the underlying districts so that any parcel of land lying in an Adult Use Overlay District shall also lie in one or more of the other zoning districts in which it was previously classified, as provided for in this Zoning By-Law.
3.5.3 Definitions
The following terms shall be specifically applicable to the Adult Uses regulations and shall have the meanings provided below:
Adult Bookstore – an establishment having at least fifteen (15%) percent of its stock in trade, books, magazines, and other matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Video Store – an establishment having at least fifteen (15%) percent of its stock in trade, videos, movies, or other film material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Paraphernalia Store – an establishment having at least fifteen (15%) percent of its stock devices, objects, tools, or toys which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Motion Picture Theater – an enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 69
Adult Live Entertainment Establishment – any establishment which provides live entertainment for its patrons, which includes the display of nudity, as that term is defined in M.G.L. Chapter 272, Section 31.
Adult Use – Adult Bookstore, Adult Video Store, Adult Paraphernalia Store, Adult Motion Picture Theater, and/or Adult Live Entertainment Establishment as herein defined.
3.5.4 Permitted Uses
(a) All uses permissible and as regulated within the underlying district.
3.5.5 Special Permit Uses
The following uses are prohibited except upon the issuance of a Special Permit from the Board of Appeals: Adult Bookstore, Adult Video Store, Adult Paraphernalia Store, Adult Motion Picture Theater, or Adult Live Entertainment Establishment. Such permit shall require specific improvements, amenities, and locations of proposed uses for which such permit may be granted.
3.5.6 Special Permit Standards for Adult Uses
No Special Permit may be granted by the Board of Appeals for an Adult Bookstore, Adult Video Store, Adult Paraphernalia Store, Adult Motion Picture Theater, or Adult Live Entertainment Establishment unless the following conditions and limitations are satisfied:
(a) No Adult Bookstore, Adult Video Store, Adult Paraphernalia Store, Adult Motion Picture Theater, or Adult Live Entertainment Establishment may be located less than 500 feet from a child-care facility, park, playground, recreational areas where large numbers of minors regularly travel or congregate, another Adult Use, or any establishment licensed under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 138, Section 12, or any establishment with a common victualler’s license that allows consumption of alcoholic beverages on its premises, nor less than 700 feet from any residential district designated by this By-Law. The distances specified above shall be measured by a straight line from the nearest property line of the premises on which the Adult Uses is to be located to the nearest property line of any of the designated uses set forth herein.
(b) No merchandise or services prohibited as obscene or indecent under any federal or Massachusetts law or regulation or found to be obscene by any superior or higher federal or state court in any of the New England states shall be disseminated or available therein.
(c) No signs, graphics, pictures, publications, videotapes, movies, covers, or other implements, items, or advertising that fall within the definition of Adult Bookstore, Adult Video Store, Adult Paraphernalia Store, Adult Motion Picture Theater, or Adult Live Entertainment Establishment merchandise, or are erotic, prurient, or related to violence, sadism, or sexual exploitation shall be displayed in the windows of, or on the
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 70
building of any Adult Bookstore, Adult Video Store, Adult Paraphernalia Store, Adult Motion Picture Theater, or Adult Live Entertainment Establishment, or be visible to the public from the pedestrian sidewalks or walkways or from other areas, public or semi-public, outside such establishments, or from vehicles on Route 128 (Interstate 95).
(d) All building openings, entries, and windows shall be screened in such a manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment by the public.
(e) Appearance of buildings for Adult Uses shall be consistent with the appearance of buildings in similar (but not specifically “adult”) use in Needham, not employing unusual color or building design which would attract attention to the premises.
(f) No Special Permit for an Adult Use shall be issued to any person convicted of violating the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 119, Section 63 or M.G.L. Chapter 272, Sections 28, 29, 29A, 29B, and 35A. No Special Permit for an Adult Use shall be issued to any corporation, partnership, trust or any other legal entity if any of its directors, partners, trustees, principals, managers, employees or beneficial owners have been convicted of violating the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 119, Section 63 or M.G.L. Chapter 272, Sections 28, 29, 29A, 29B, and 35A. If any person who is a director, partner, trustee, principal, manager, employee or owns a beneficial interest in such legal entity is convicted of violating M.G.L. Chapter 119, Section 63 or M.G.L. Chapter 272, Sections 28, 29, 29A, 29B, and 35A, the Special Permit shall terminate herewith.
(g) Special Permits granted for Adult Uses shall be subject to the provisions of Section 7.5.2 Special Permits of this By-Law.
(h) The Adult Use shall comply with all dimensional and parking requirements set forth in Section 5.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements of this By-Law. In addition, no off-site parking as is allowed by right in Section 5.1.3 (m) and as is allowed by Special Permit in Section 3.2.1, shall be permitted.
(i) If the Adult Use allows for the showing of films or videos within the premises, the booths in which the films or videos are viewed shall not be closed off by curtains, doors, or screens. All such booth openings shall be clearly seen from the center of the establishment.
(j) Special Permits granted for Adult Uses shall be subject to annual renewal.
(k) Special Permits shall be granted for Adult Uses only upon determination of the Board of Appeals that the location and design of the facility are in harmony with its surroundings, and that adequate safeguards exist through licensing or other means to assure on a continuing basis that activities therein will not be patently contrary to prevailing standards of adults in the community and will not involve minors in any way.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 71
(l) A Special Permit issued under this Section shall terminate upon any one of the following occurrences:
(1) There is a change in the location of the adult use;
(2) There is a sale, transfer or assignment of the business or the license;
(3) There is any change in legal or beneficial ownership or management of the applicant;
(4) There is a violation of the Special Permit;
(5) If minors are to be involved.
(m) Private duty police security detail shall be paid for by the Adult Use Business as deemed necessary by the Needham Chief of Police.
3.5.7 Lapse of Special Permit
Any Special Permit granted under this section shall lapse within one year of the date of grant, not including the time required to pursue or await the termination of an appeal referred to in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 17, if substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause, or in the case of permit for construction, if construction has not begun within one year of the date of grant, except for good cause.
3.5.8 Severability
If any section or portion of this By-Law is ruled invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such ruling will not affect the validity of the remainder of the By-Law.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 72
3.6 Medical Overlay District
3.6.1 Purpose of District
The purpose of the Medical Overlay District is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community through guiding the development and use of health care and related activities, primarily serving those who work or live in Needham with quality health care while minimizing potential adverse impacts upon nearby residential and other premises. Those purposes are to be achieved through establishing controls specifically for medical-related uses at locations where either such uses already exist or they would be appropriate because of access and other locational considerations.
3.6.2 Scope of Authority
The Medical Overlay District is superimposed over rather than replacing underlying zoning districts. The regulations of this overlay district shall govern all new construction, reconstruction or expansion of new or existing buildings, and new or expanded uses, regardless of whether the use is medical-related or not, and regardless of whether the requirements of Section 3.6 are more or less restrictive than those of the comparable regulations for the underlying district at that location. Provisions of Section 3.6 shall supersede those of Section 3.2 Schedule of Use Regulations, Sections 4.2 through 4.7 (Dimensional Regulations), and Section 5.1.2 Required Parking. On all other matters, the provisions of the underlying districts shall continue to govern.
3.6.3 Allowed Uses The following uses are allowed by right:
1. Community Hospital
2. Medical Clinic
3. Medical Services Building
4. Any of the following, but only if ancillary to and contained within a common structure with a community hospital:
(a) Health Care Facility
(b) Medical Laboratory
(c) Pharmacy
5. All uses allowed by right in the underlying zoning district at that location.
6. Buildings and uses accessory to 1-5 above, such as parking garage, gift shop, cafeteria, and day care facilities.
3.6.4 Special Permit Uses
All uses permitted by special permit in the underlying district at that location may be allowed upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority under such conditions as that Authority may require.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 73
3.6.5 Multiple Buildings and Uses
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3.2 (Schedule of Use Regulations), in the Medical Overlay District more than one building and/or use on a lot is allowed as a matter of right, so long as each building and/or use is in compliance with the requirements of Section 3.6 of this By-Law.
3.6.6 Dimensional Regulations for the Medical Overlay District
3.6.6.1 Lot Area, Frontage and Setback Requirements
The lot area and lot frontage requirements of the underlying districts shall govern development in the Medical Overlay District. The following setback requirements shall apply in place of those of the underlying district, including standing in place of provisions contained in Section 4.2.13 Reduction in Dimensional Regulations By Special Permit and in Section 4.4.8 of the Zoning By-Law imposing special limitations on premises located in business districts but abutting residential districts.
(a) Front Setback: twenty (20) feet, except twenty-five (25) feet measured from any street having traveled way width exceeding thirty-five (35) as of October 8, 1998, and except thirty (30) feet from any street having a traveled way width less than thirty (30) feet as of October 8, 1998.
(b) Side and rear setback: ten (10) feet, except twenty (20) feet where measured from a residential district boundary not contained within the Medical Overlay District, and except that no setback is required where a lot principally used for a community hospital, medical clinic, or medical services building abuts another of those uses.
(c) Notwithstanding the above, parking structures containing four or more parking spaces shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from any street having a travel way width of less than thirty (30) feet.
3.6.6.2 Building Height Requirements
Maximum building height shall be fifty-five (55) feet. However, portions of a building exceeding the building height allowed in the underlying zoning district shall be set back from any street having a right-of-way width of less than fifty (50) feet behind a forty-five (45) degree bulk control plane beginning at the required setback line and the building height allowed in the underlying zoning district, except where no setback is required by Section 3.6.6.1. Mechanical penthouses above the roof shall be excluded from height limitations provided that they occupy not more than 30% of roof area and are set back from the roof edge by a distance no less than their height.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 74
3.6.6.3 Building Bulk and Lot Coverage
Notwithstanding anything in the By-Law to the contrary, the maximum floor area ratio in the Medical Overlay District shall equal 1.0 exclusive of parking garages, interior portions of buildings devoted to off-street parking, and deck or rooftop parking. Uses in the Medical Overlay District shall not be subject to any other limitations on floor area ratio, lot coverage, or building bulk such as are contained in Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.2.5, 4.2.6, 4.2.7, 4.4.2, and 4.4.7.
3.6.7 Required Number of Parking Spaces
Notwithstanding anything in the By-Law to the contrary, in the Medical Overlay District the off-street parking requirements for hospitals, health care facilities, medical clinics, and medical services shall be the following:
(a) The site contains only a Medical Services Building or Medical Clinic, then at least seven (7) parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be provided.
(b) If the site contains only a Health Care Facility, then at least one (1) parking space for every two beds plus one parking space for each employee on the two largest shifts combined shall be provided.
(c) If the site contains a Hospital or a combination of Hospital with a Medical Service Building, Medical Clinic, and/or Health Care Facility, then the required number of parking spaces shall be computed as follows:
(1) For facilities designated as short visit ambulatory medical, dental and related health services (out-patient facilities in which a physician, physician’s assistant or nurse practitioner typically sees three (3) or more patients per hour); seven (7) parking spaces per 1,000 square feet gross floor area.
(2) For all other facilities, the required number of parking spaces equals the sum of the following (not including beds, employees, or floor area in the short visit ambulatory facilities included under (1) immediately above):
(i) One parking space for each two hospital beds, critical care/intensive care beds, and observation beds; plus
(ii) One parking space for each two full-time equivalent employees who are generally on-site during the largest shift, including both hospital employees and other hospital-affiliated employees; plus
(iii) Two and one-half (2.5) parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area designated for longer visit ambulatory diagnostic, treatment and rehabilitation services such as radiology, rehabilitation services, emergency services, day surgery, medical day care and radiation oncology. Such services are characterized as requiring substantially more clinic time per visit than the services provided in the sort visit facilities designated under (1) above.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 75
3.6.8 Site Plan Review Requirements
For major projects in the Medical Overlay District, the Planning Board shall consider, in addition to all the factors listed in Section 7.4.6(b), the extent to which the traffic impact and driveway openings are consistent with the maintenance of the suburban, residential character of all predominantly residential streets and portions of streets nearby the premises (for example, such as School, Lincoln, Grant, Warren, Pleasant, and Kimball Streets relative to the BI-Deaconess site as of 1998); provided that a project proponent shall (i) compare the vehicle-trip volumes projected for those streets five years in the future with and without the proposed projects, and (ii) describe its efforts to manage traffic and locate and design driveway openings so as to minimize any increase in traffic on such streets.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 76
3.7 Wireless Communications Facilities Towers Overlay District
3.7.1 Purpose of District
The purpose of the Wireless Communications Facilities Towers Overlay District is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community while accommodating the communications needs of the general public. Those purposes are to be achieved by minimizing the adverse visual effect of wireless communication equipment towers, facilities and devices, by providing safeguards for the general public, by avoiding potential damage to adjacent properties, by maximizing the use of existing towers and buildings, by concealing new equipment within or on existing towers or buildings, and by encouraging co-location of equipment to accommodate the needs of wireless communication in order to reduce the number of towers needed to service the community.
3.7.2 Scope of Authority
The Wireless Communications Facilities Towers Overlay District shall be considered as overlying other use districts established by this By-Law. Within the Wireless Communications Facilities Towers Overlay District, the requirements of the underlying district continue to apply except as may be specifically superseded herein. The provisions of this section 3.7 shall not be applicable to towers presently in existence or to towers that may be constructed in the future that serve commercial television or radio communications purposes. The scope of authority of this section 3.7 shall be limited to personal wireless services and equipment related thereto as defined in section 6.7.2 of this By-Law.
3.7.3 Uses in the Wireless Communications Facilities Towers Overlay District
3.7.3.1 Permitted Uses
All uses permissible and as regulated within the underlying district. See Section 6.7 Wireless Communications Facilities.
3.7.3.2 Special Permit Uses
(a) All uses permitted by special permit in the underlying district at that location may be allowed upon the issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals under such conditions as that Board may require.
(b) Free-standing monopoles and free-standing lattice towers which meet the following criteria:
1. Free-standing monopoles and free-standing lattice towers shall be no higher than 199 feet.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 77
2. The minimum distance from the base of a free-standing monopole or a free-standing lattice tower to any property line shall be the height of the facility/mount, including any antennas or other appurtenances. In reviewing a special permit application for a wireless communications facility, the Board of Appeals may reduce the required setback distance for a free-standing monopole or a free-standing lattice tower to 125 feet from the property line, if it finds that a substantially better design will result from such reduction. In making such a finding, the Board of Appeals shall consider both the visual and safety impacts of the proposed use.
3. Monopoles are the preferred mount for such structures. The applicant for a wireless communication lattice tower shall demonstrate that such installation will reduce the number of standalone facilities needed for wireless communication facilities by enabling greater co-location of wireless communication equipment than would otherwise have been achievable on a monopole installation.
4. Co-location of wireless communication equipment on existing towers and buildings is encouraged. The applicant for a wireless communication monopole or lattice tower shall demonstrate that the communication equipment planned for the proposed structure cannot be accommodated on an existing or approved tower or structure or building within one-half mile search radius of a proposed monopole or lattice tower for one or more structural, technical, economic or other reasons as documented by a qualified engineer or other qualified professional including, but not limited to the following:
(a) no such tower or building exists.
(b) the structural capacity of the existing tower or structure is inadequate and cannot be modified at a reasonable cost, the proposed equipment will interfere with the usability of existing equipment.
(c) the owner of an appropriate building or structure has effectively denied permission to co-locate by unreasonable delay or commercially unreasonable terms or conditions.
(d) the height of an existing tower or structure is not adequate to permit the proposed equipment to function.
In the event that co-location is found to be not feasible, a written statement of the reasons for the infeasibility shall be submitted to the Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals may retain a technical expert in the field of RF engineering to verify if co-location at the site is not feasible or is feasible given the design configuration most accommodating to co-location. The cost for such a technical expert will be at the expense of the applicant, said fee should be reasonable, customary and actual. The Board of Appeals may deny a special permit to an applicant that has not demonstrated a good faith effort to provide for co-location.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 78
5. Every special permit issued by the Board of Appeals for a new monopole or lattice tower shall be automatically subject to the condition that the permit holder must allow co-location upon the structure by other wireless communication providers upon commercially reasonable terms and conditions and without unreasonable delay, if such co-location is technically feasible. It is expressly provided that any requirement imposed by a permit holder which requires the payment of rent in excess of industry standards or which allows co-location only if the requesting party provides comparable space on one of its structures to the permit holder shall be deemed to be commercially unreasonable.
3.7.4 Establishment and Delineation of Wireless Communications Facilities Tower Overlay District
For the purposes of this district, there are hereby established within the town certain wireless communications facilities towers overlay districts, consisting of areas which are delineated on a map entitled, “Zoning Map of the Town of Needham, Massachusetts”: as originally dated September 1924 and revised to May 15, 1989, and as revised an amended to date and on file in the Office of the Town Clerk.
3.7.5 Severability
A determination that any portion or provision of this overlay protection district is invalid shall not invalidate any other portion or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any special permit previously issued thereunder.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 79
3.8 Needham Center Overlay District
3.8.1 Purposes of District
The purposes of the Needham Center Overlay District are to encourage redevelopment of existing properties and infill development of an appropriate scale, density, mix of uses and design for a suburban downtown, substantially as set forth in the Needham Center Development Plan dated March 30, 2009, and to establish sub-districts in which to achieve these purposes in a manner compatible with surrounding areas; to create and sustain a vibrant, walkable downtown area; and to create opportunities for housing within walking distance of goods and services, public transportation, and the civic life of the town. Toward these ends, development in the Needham Center Overlay District shall be permitted to exceed the density and dimensional requirements that normally apply in the underlying zoning district(s) provided that such development complies with the design guidelines and all other requirements of this Section.
3.8.2 Scope of Authority
In the Needham Center Overlay District, all requirements of the underlying district shall remain in effect except where these regulations provide an alternative to such requirements, in which case these regulations shall supersede. In the event that a proponent wishes to develop in accordance with the regulations hereunder, the rules and regulations of the Needham Center Overlay District shall apply, and by filing an application for a Special Permit, site plan review or building permit under this Section 3.8, the owner shall be deemed to accept and agree to them. In such event, where the provisions of the Needham Center Overlay District are silent on a zoning regulation that applies in the underlying district, the requirements of the underlying district shall apply.
If the proponent elects to proceed under the zoning provisions of the underlying district, the zoning bylaws applicable in the underlying district shall control and the provision of the Needham Center Overlay District shall not apply.
3.8.3 Use Regulations
3.8.3.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the Needham Center Overlay District as a matter of right:
(a) Uses exempt from local zoning control under M.G.L. c.40A, s. 3.
(b) Public, semi-public and institutional uses permitted as of right in the underlying district.
(c) Business uses permitted as of right in the underlying district.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 80
(d) Mixed-use building, not exceeding five dwelling units per building, with dwelling units allowed above the ground floor only.
(e) Accessory uses permitted as of right in the underlying district.
3.8.3.2 Special Permit Uses
The following uses are permitted in the Needham Center Overlay District only upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Planning Board under such conditions as it may require:
(a) Business uses allowed by special permit in the underlying district.
(b) Mixed-use building containing six or more dwelling units, with dwelling units located on floors above the ground floor or on the ground floor, provided that:
(1) Entrances to ground-floor dwelling units are located on the side or rear of the building, not from any side facing the street, or the entrances may be from a first-floor lobby serving other uses in the building; and
(2) The ground floor of the front façade contains only retail or restaurant uses allowed as of right or by special permit.
(c) Accessory uses permitted by special permit in the underlying district.
3.8.3.3 Multiple Buildings and Uses
In the Needham Center Overlay District, more than one use may be located on a lot as a matter of right and/or more than one building may be located on a lot by special permit, provided that each building and/or its use(s) are in compliance with the requirements of Section 3.8 of this By-Law.
3.8.3.4 Enclosed Parking
Enclosed parking in the Needham Center Overlay District shall conform to the requirements for the Center Business District in Section 4.4.6.
3.8.4 Dimensional Regulations
3.8.4.1 Lot Area, Frontage and Setback Requirements
The following lot area, frontage and setback requirements shall apply to development in the Needham Center Overlay District:
(a) Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 81
(b) Minimum Lot Frontage: 80 feet.
(c) Minimum Front Setback: 0 feet from the front property line.
(d) Maximum Front Setback: The lesser of 3 feet from the front property line, or the average setback of existing buildings within 100 feet on the same side of the street as the proposed development. The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to waive this requirement when the applicant proposes to provide a pedestrian plaza, outdoor cafeteria or similar amenity in front of a building facing Great Plain Avenue, Highland Avenue, Chestnut Street, or Chapel Street.
(e) Minimum Side and Rear Setback: For lots abutting a residential district, fifty (50) feet; for all other lots, no minimum yard setback shall apply. Where side and rear yard setbacks of fifty (50) feet are required, no accessory uses shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet closest to the district boundary and all other requirements of Sections 4.4.8.3 and 4.4.8.5 shall apply. The remaining twenty-five (25) feet may be used for an accessory use, not including a building or structure. By special permit from the Planning Board, however, an underground parking structure may be permitted within the fifty (50) foot side and rear yard setbacks provided that the garage structure shall be located entirely below the grade of the existing lot and set back at least ten (10) feet from the district boundary or ten (10) feet from the lot line, whichever is greater, and the twenty-five (25) feet closest to the district boundary shall be suitably landscaped over the surface of the garage structure in accordance with Section 4.4.8.5.
3.8.4.2 Building Height Requirements
The maximum building height in the Needham Center Overlay District shall be as follows:
(a) In Sub-District A: The minimum building height shall be two stories and twenty-seven feet and the maximum building height shall be two and one-half stories and thirty-five feet as of right. By Special Permit from the Planning Board, the maximum height of a building may be increased up to the following limits: three stories and thirty-seven (37) feet, or four stories and forty-eight (48) feet, provided that the fourth story is contained under a pitched roof or recessed from the face of the building, as shown in the Design Guidelines under Subsection 3.8.8 below.
(b) In Sub-District B: The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet and two and one-half stories as of right, or by Special Permit from the Planning Board, thirty-seven (37) feet and three stories, provided that the third story is contained under a pitched roof or recessed from the face of the building, as shown in the Design Guidelines under Section 3.8.8 below.
Buildings developed under the regulations of the Needham Center Overlay District shall not be further subject to the maximum height regulations of the underlying district, as contained in Section 4.4.3.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 82
3.8.4.3 Building Bulk and Other Requirements
Except as provided in subsections (a) and (b) below, the maximum floor area ratio in the Needham Center Overlay District shall be the same standard that applies in the Center Business District under Section 4.4.2(b), except that the area of a building devoted to underground parking shall not be counted as floor area for purposes of determining the maximum floor area ratio. Buildings developed under the regulations of the Needham Center Overlay District shall not be subject to any other limitations on floor area ratio or building bulk in Section 4.4.2.
(a) The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to increase the maximum floor area ratio to 2.0 in Sub-Districts A and B, subject to the decision standards in Section 3.8.7.
(b) The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to increase the maximum floor area ratio to 3.0 in Sub-Districts A and B, subject to the decision standards in Section 3.8.7 and the following additional requirements:
(1) Off-street parking located on the site or provided through a shared agreement on another property within 1,000 feet of the site, in a form acceptable to the Planning Board, shall be required as a condition of special permit approval; and
(2) No waivers of minimum parking requirements or payment of fees in lieu of off-street parking spaces under Section 3.8.5 shall be allowed.
3.8.5 Off-Street Parking
Except as provided below, the off-street parking regulations in Section 5.1 and the regulations for enclosed parking in the Central Business District in Section 4.4.6 shall apply in the Needham Center Overlay District.
(a) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces in Section 5.1.2 shall apply except as follows:
(1) For retail stores or services, there shall be one space per 300 square feet of floor area, except that no parking spaces shall be required for a retail establishment with less than eight hundred (800) square feet of floor area.
(2) For any building in which more than forty (40) percent of the usable floor area is located above the ground floor, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces for upper-story business uses shall be eighty (80) percent of the number of spaces that would be required under Section 5.1.2, except that this reduction shall not apply to medical, dental and related health services or clinics.
(3) For dwelling units in a mixed-use building, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be one and one-half spaces per dwelling unit except as provided in Section 3.8.6(h).
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 83
(b) In addition to the requirement for bicycle racks under Section 5.1.3(n), for a mixed-use building, bicycle racks facilitating locking shall be provided to accommodate one bicycle for every two (2) dwelling units.
(c) Except as provided in Section 3.8.4.3(b)(2) above, the Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to waive the requirements of Section 5.1.2 or Section 5.1.3, or the requirements of subsection (a) above, if a proposed development satisfies the conditions set forth in Section 5.1.1.6 and Section 3.8.5.1.
3.8.5.1 Needham Center Off-Street Parking Fund
(a) A Special Permit may be granted to allow payment of a fee in lieu of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required under this Section, if the Planning Board determines that:
(1) The applicant has reasonably demonstrated that it is uneconomic to accommodate all of the required parking spaces on the lot, given the area and shape of the lot, or under the building, given the size of the project;
(2) The applicant has reasonably demonstrated that it is infeasible to accommodate the required number of parking spaces through a combination of on-site parking and shared parking with an adjoining property; and
(3) The project has been designed to the extent feasible to reduce the required number of off-street parking spaces, e.g., by the inclusion of space for retail establishments with less than 800 sq. ft. of floor area, or a multi-story building with upper-story uses that qualify for reduced parking, as provided under Section 3.8.5(a).
(b) The fee shall be computed on a per-space basis and paid into a special revenue fund known as the Needham Center Off-Street Parking Fund, to be used solely for the purpose of providing shared or public parking benefiting uses within the area covered by the Needham Center Development Plan.
(c) The fee shall be determined by the Planning Board in accordance with the Needham Center Development Plan or the Town of Needham Capital Improvements Plan, as applicable, and paid by the applicant in two installments: one-half prior to the receipt of a building permit and one-half prior to receipt of a certificate of occupancy, unless the applicant chooses to pay the entire fee prior to receipt of a building permit.
3.8.6 Affordable Housing
Any mixed-use building with six or more dwelling units shall include affordable housing units as defined in Section 1.3 of this By-Law. The following requirements shall apply to a development that includes affordable units:
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 84
(a) The floor area of the affordable units shall not be counted for purposes of determining the maximum floor area permitted under Section 3.8.4.3.
(b) For a development with not more than ten dwelling units, at least one unit shall be an affordable unit; and for a development with eleven or more dwelling units, at least ten percent shall be affordable units. In the instance of a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
(c) If the applicant provides at least one-half of the affordable units for households with incomes at or below fifty (50) percent of area median income, the remaining affordable units may be sold or rented to households with incomes up to 100 percent of area median income even if the latter units are not eligible for the Subsidized Housing Inventory, regardless of any requirements to the contrary set forth in Section 1.3.
(d) Affordable units shall be dispersed within the building and not concentrated in one area or on one floor. They shall generally be comparable in size and energy efficiency to the development’s market-rate units.
(e) The affordable units shall be constructed in proportion to the number of market-rate units in the development. Proportionality shall be determined by the number of building permits or certificates of occupancy issued for the affordable units and market-rate units, as applicable, or otherwise in accordance with a schedule set by the Planning Board in conditions imposed on the Special Permit.
(f) The selection of eligible homebuyers or renters for the affordable units shall be in accordance with a marketing plan approved by the Needham Planning Board prior to the issuance of any building permits for the development.
(g) The affordable units shall be subject to an affordable housing restriction as defined in Section 1.3 of this By-Law with limitations on use, occupancy, resale prices or rents, as applicable, and which provides for periodic monitoring for compliance with the requirements of said restriction.
(h) For affordable units with not more than one bedroom, the minimum number of parking spaces under section 3.8.5 shall be reduced to one space per unit.
3.8.7 Site Plan Review
For any project seeking a Special Permit under Sections 3.8.4.1, 3.8.4.2, or 3.8.4.3, or for any project proceeding under these overlay district provisions which also constitutes a Major Project under Section 7.4.2, the Planning Board shall consider, in addition to the factors set forth in Section 7.4.6, the following criteria:
(a) The adequacy of existing facilities to serve the proposed development, including but not limited to water supply, sewer, natural gas and electric service;
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 85
(b) The degree to which the proposed project, viewed in its entirety, will make a significant contribution to the urban design and economic development goals set forth in the Needham Center Development Plan;
(c) The degree to which the proposed project is consistent with the purposes of the Needham Center Overlay District and conforms to the Design Guidelines in Section 3.8.8;
(d) The degree to which the applicant’s proposal has been designed to reduce or mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent properties or the surrounding area such as those resulting from excessive traffic congestion or excessive demand for parking;
(e) For applications involving an increase in building height or bulk by special permit, the degree to which the applicant has reasonably demonstrated that the additional height or floor area is desirable for the redevelopment of the site, considering the site’s location and physical characteristics and the condition of existing improvements;
(f) The degree to which the proposed project incorporates as many green building standards as practical, given the type of building and proposed uses;
(g) The degree to which the proposed project provides a significant public benefit through its inclusion of at least one of the following:
(1) Affordable housing units;
(2) Use of one or more renewable energy sources in the operation of the project;
(3) Off-street parking sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses, located on the site or provided through a shared parking arrangement acceptable to the Planning Board; or through payment of fees in lieu of off-street parking spaces except where such payment of fees is not allowed for a Special Permit under Section 3.8.4.3(b).
3.8.8 Design Guidelines
The Design Guidelines for the Needham Center Overlay District shall be as adopted by the Planning Board and available on file in the Needham Planning Department.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 86
3.9 Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District
3.9.1 Purposes of District
The purposes of the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District are to encourage redevelopment of existing properties in a manner that brings buildings close to the street, with landscaping and layouts and designs of sites and buildings conducive to pedestrian use; to reorganize and consolidate curb cuts through appropriate access management controls; and to create opportunities for Chestnut Street to serve as an attractive, safe, pedestrian-friendly street, substantially as set forth in the Needham Center Development Plan dated March 30, 2009. Toward these ends, development in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall be permitted to exceed the density and dimensional requirements that normally apply in the underlying zoning district(s) provided that such development complies with the design guidelines and all other requirements of this Section.
3.9.2 Scope of Authority
In the Lower Chestnut Street District, all requirements of the underlying district shall remain in effect except where these regulations provide an alternative to such requirements, in which case these regulations shall supersede. In the event that a proponent wishes to develop in accordance with the regulations hereunder, the rules and regulations of the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall apply, and by filing an application for a Special Permit, site plan review or building permit under this Section 3.9, the owner shall be deemed to accept and agree to them. In such event, where the provisions of the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District are silent on a zoning regulation that applies in the underlying district, the requirements of the underlying district shall apply.
If the proponent elects to proceed under the zoning provisions of the underlying district, the zoning bylaws applicable in the underlying district shall control and the provisions of the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall not apply.
3.9.3 Use Regulations
3.9.3.1 Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District as a matter of right:
(a) Uses exempt from local zoning control under M.G.L. c.40A, s. 3.
(b) All uses permitted as of right in the underlying district.
(c) Mixed-use building, not exceeding five dwelling units per building, with dwelling units allowed above the ground floor only.
(d) Accessory uses permitted as of right in the underlying district.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 87
3.9.3.2 Special Permit Uses
The following uses are permitted in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District only upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Planning Board under such conditions as it may require:
(a) Business uses allowed by special permit in the underlying district, excluding an automobile service station.
(b) Mixed-use building containing six or more dwelling units in a building, with dwelling units located on floors above the ground floor or on the ground floor, provided that:
(1) Entrances to ground-floor dwelling units are located on the side or rear of the building, not from any side facing the street, or the entrances may be from a first-floor lobby serving other uses in the building; and
(2) The ground floor of the front façade contains only retail, restaurant or office uses allowed by right or by special permit.
(c) Mixed-use development, provided that at least sixty (60) percent of the front side of the lot facing Chestnut Street, measured in percentage of linear feet of frontage, shall be occupied by a building or buildings located within twenty (20) feet of the street line, said building(s) to contain permitted business uses and which may contain upper-story dwelling units. Free-standing multi-family dwelling(s) associated with a mixed-use development shall be located toward the rear of the site and be connected to building(s) facing the street by means of landscaped walkways or a courtyard.
(d) Accessory uses permitted by special permit in the underlying district.
3.9.3.3. Multiple Buildings and Uses
In the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District, more than one use may be located on a lot as a matter of right and/or more than one building may be located on a lot by special permit, provided that each building and/or its use(s) are in compliance with the requirements of Section 3.9 of this By-Law.
3.9.3.4 Special Permit, Parking Garage
The Planning Board may issue a Special Permit for a parking garage or parking structure for more than three (3) vehicles, including both enclosed and open structures, above and below ground, serving uses within the area covered by the Downtown Development Plan, where the parking garage or structure is located within 1,000 feet of the uses it serves, subject to such setback requirements as the Planning Board may impose.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 88
3.9.4 Dimensional Regulations
3.9.4.1 Lot Area, Frontage and Setback Requirements
The following lot area, frontage and setback requirements shall apply to development in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District:
(a) Minimum Lot Area: 15,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum Lot Frontage: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum Front Setback: The lesser of 5 feet from the front property line or the average setback of abutting buildings within 100 feet on the same side of the street as the proposed development.
(d) Maximum Front Setback: 15 feet from the front property line.
(e) Minimum Side and Rear Setback:
(1) For lots abutting a residential district, fifty (50) feet from the lot line abutting the residential district; for all other lots, no minimum yard setback shall apply. Where side and rear yard setbacks of fifty (50) feet are required, the twenty-five (25) feet closest to the district boundary and all other requirements of Sections 4.4.8.2 and 4.4.8.5 shall apply. The remaining twenty-five (25) feet may be used for an accessory use, not including a building or structure. By special permit from the Planning Board, however, an underground parking structure may be permitted within the fifty (50) foot side and rear yard setbacks provided that the garage structure shall be located entirely below the grade of the existing lot and set back at least ten (10) feet from the district boundary or ten (10) feet from the lot line, whichever is greater, and the twenty-five (25) feet closest to the district boundary shall be suitably landscaped over the surface of the garage structure in accordance with Section 4.4.8.5.
(2) For lots adjacent to the MBTA right-of-way, there shall be a minimum yard setback of twenty-five (25) feet from the lot line abutting the MBTA right-of-way, and the first ten (10) feet of the setback shall be suitably landscaped and not used for any other purpose, including an accessory use, except that within said ten (10) feet the Planning Board may grant a special permit for surface parking, provided that the parking area is suitably landscaped. The remaining fifteen (15) feet may be used for an accessory use, not including a building or structure, except that within said fifteen (15) feet an underground parking structure is permitted if located entirely below the grade of the existing lot.
3.9.4.2 Building Height Requirements
The maximum building height in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall be two and one-half stories and thirty-five feet as of right. For lots having the required minimum frontage on Chestnut Street, the Planning Board may grant a Special Permit for a maximum building height
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 89
of three stories and thirty-seven feet or four stories and forty-eight (48) feet, provided that the fourth story is located under a pitched roof or recessed from the face of the building, as shown in the Design Guidelines under Section 3.9.8 below.
Buildings in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall not be further subject to the maximum height regulations of the underlying district, as contained in Section 4.4.3.
3.9.4.3 Building Bulk and Other Requirements
The maximum floor area ratio in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall be 0.70, except that for lots having the required minimum frontage on Chestnut Street, the Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to increase the maximum floor area ratio as provided in subsections (a) and (b) below. The area of a building devoted to underground parking shall not be counted as floor area for purposes of determining the maximum floor area ratio under this section. Uses in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall not be subject to any other limitations on floor area ratio or building bulk such as those contained in Section 4.4.2.
(a) The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to increase the maximum floor area ratio to 1.5, subject to the decision standards in Section 3.9.7.
(b) The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to increase the maximum floor area ratio to 2.0, subject to the decision standards in Section 3.9.7 and the following additional requirements:
(1) Off-street parking located on the site or provided through a shared agreement on another property within 1,000 feet of the site, in a form acceptable to the Planning Board, shall be required as a condition of special permit approval; and
(2) No waivers of minimum parking requirements or payment of fees in lieu of off-street parking spaces under Section 3.9.5 shall be allowed.
3.9.5 Off-Street Parking
Except as provided below, the off-street parking regulations in Section 5.1 shall apply in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District.
(a) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces in Section 5.1.2 shall apply except as follows:
(1) For any building in which more than forty (40) percent of the usable floor area is located above the ground floor, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces for upper-story business uses shall be eighty (80) percent of the number of spaces that would be required under Section 5.1.2, except that this reduction shall not apply to medical, dental and related health services or clinics.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 90
(2) For dwelling units in a mixed-use building or mixed-use development, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be one and one-half spaces per dwelling unit.
(b) In addition to the requirement for bicycle racks under Section 5.1.3(n), for a mixed-use building or mixed-use development, bicycle racks facilitating locking shall be provided to accommodate one bicycle for every two (2) dwelling units.
3.9.5.1 Needham Center Off-Street Parking Fund
(a) A Special Permit may be granted to allow payment of a fee in lieu of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required under this Section, if the Planning Board determines that:
(1) The applicant has reasonably demonstrated that it is uneconomic to accommodate all of the required parking spaces on the lot, given the area and shape of the lot, or under the building, given the size of the project;
(2) The applicant has reasonably demonstrated that it is not feasible to accommodate the required number of parking spaces through a combination of on-site parking and shared parking with an adjoining property; and
(3) The project has been designed to the extent feasible to reduce the required number of off-street parking spaces, e.g., a multi-story building with upper-story uses that qualify for reduced parking, as provided under Section 3.9.5(a).
(b) The fee shall be computed on a per-space basis and paid into a special revenue fund known as the Needham Center Off-Street Parking Fund, to be used solely for the purpose of providing shared or public parking benefiting uses within the area covered by the Downtown Needham Development Plan.
(c) The fee shall be determined by the Planning Board in accordance with the Needham Center Development Plan or the Town of Needham Capital Improvements Plan, as applicable, and paid by the applicant in two installments: one-half prior to the receipt of a building permit and one-half prior to receipt of a certificate of occupancy, unless the applicant chooses to pay the entire fee prior to receipt of a building permit.
3.9.6 Affordable Housing
Mixed-use buildings or mixed-use developments with six or more dwelling units shall include affordable housing units as defined in Section 1.3 of this By-Law. The following requirements shall apply to a development that includes affordable units:
(a) The floor area of the affordable units shall not be counted for purposes of determining the maximum floor area permitted under Section 3.9.4.3.
(b) All other requirements of Section 3.8.6 shall apply.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 91
3.9.7 Site Plan Review
For any project seeking a Special Permit under Sections 3.9.4.1, 3.9.4.2 or 3.9.4.3, or for any project proceeding under these overlay district provisions which also constitutes a Major Project under Section 7.4.2, the Planning Board shall consider, in addition to the factors set forth in Section 7.4.6, the following review criteria:
(a) The adequacy of existing facilities to serve the proposed development, including but not limited to water supply, sewer, natural gas and electric service;
(b) The degree to which the proposed project, viewed in its entirety, will make a significant contribution to the urban design and economic development goals set forth in the Needham Center Development Plan;
(c) The degree to which the proposed project is consistent with the purposes of the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District and conforms to the Design Guidelines under Section 3.9.8;
(d) The degree to which the applicant’s proposal has been designed to reduce or mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent properties or the surrounding area such as those resulting from excessive traffic congestion or excessive demand for parking;
(e) For applications involving an increase in building height or bulk by special permit, the degree to which the applicant has reasonably demonstrated that the additional height or floor area is desirable to redevelopment of the site, considering the site’s location and physical characteristics and the condition of existing improvements;
(f) The degree to which the proposed project incorporates as many green building standards as practical, given the type of building and proposed uses;
(g) The degree to which the proposed project provides a significant public benefit through its inclusion of at least one of the following:
(1) Affordable housing units;
(2) Use of one or more renewable energy sources in the operation of the project;
(3) Off-street parking sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses, located on the site or provided through a shared parking arrangement acceptable to the Planning Board; or provided through payment of fees in lieu of off-street parking spaces except where such payment of fees is not allowed for a Special Permit under Section 3.9.4.3(b).
3.9.8 Design Guidelines
The Design Guidelines for the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall be as adopted by the Planning Board and available on file in the Needham Planning Department.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 92
3.10 Garden Street Overlay District
3.10.1 Purposes of District
The purposes of the Garden Street Overlay District are to encourage redevelopment and a modest intensification of use of existing properties in a manner compatible in scale and design with adjacent residential neighborhoods, with layouts and designs of sites and buildings conducive to pedestrian use, substantially as set forth in the Needham Center Development Plan dated March 30, 2009.
3.10.2 Scope of Authority
In the Garden Street Overlay District, all requirements of the underlying district shall remain in effect except where these regulations provide an alternative to such requirements, in which case these regulations shall supersede. In the event that a proponent wishes to develop in accordance with the regulations hereunder, the rules and regulations of the Garden Street Overlay District shall apply, and by filing an application for a Special Permit, site plan review or building permit under this Section 3.10, the owner shall be deemed to accept and agree to them. In such event, where the provisions of the Garden Street Overlay District are silent on a zoning regulation that applies in the underlying district, the requirements of the underlying district shall apply.
If the proponent elects to proceed under the zoning provisions of the underlying district, the zoning bylaws applicable in the underlying district shall control and the provisions of the Garden Street Overlay District shall not apply.
3.10.3 Use Regulations
3.10.3.1 Permitted Uses
Uses permitted as of right in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall also be permitted as of right in the Garden Street Overlay District, excluding retail establishments.
3.10.3.2 Special Permit Uses
The following uses may be allowed by Special Permit in Garden Street Overlay District:
(a) Multi-family dwelling.
(b) Mixed-use building that includes six or more dwelling units or any retail use allowed in the underlying district, subject to the requirements of Section 3.9.3.2(b).
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 93
3.10.3.3 Multiple Buildings and Uses
In the Garden Street Overlay District, more than one use may be located on a lot as a matter of right and/or more than one building may be located on a lot by special permit, provided that each building and/or its use(s) are in compliance with the requirements of Section 3.10 of this By-Law.
3.10.4 Dimensional Regulations
3.10.4.1 Lot Area, Frontage and Setback Requirements
The following lot area, frontage and setback requirements shall apply to development in the Garden Street Overlay District:
(a) Minimum Lot Area: 15,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum Lot Frontage: 80 feet.
(c) Minimum Front Setback: The lesser of 10 feet from the front property line or the average setback of abutting buildings within 100 feet on the same side of the street as the proposed development.
(d) Minimum Side and Rear Setback: 10 feet.
3.10.4.2 Building Height Requirements
The maximum building height in the Garden Street Overlay District shall be two and one-half stories and thirty-five (35) feet or, by Special Permit from the Planning Board, three stories and thirty-seven (37) feet, provided that the third story is contained under a pitched roof or recessed from the face of the building, as shown in the Design Guidelines in Section 3.10.8 below. Buildings in the Garden Street Overlay District shall not be further subject to the maximum height regulations of the underlying district as contained in Section 4.4.3.
3.10.4.3 Building Bulk and Other Requirements
The maximum floor area ratio in the Garden Street Overlay District shall be 0.70. By Special Permit from the Planning Board, the maximum floor area ratio may be increased to 1.20 for a mixed-use building(s) and to 1.0 for a multi-family dwelling(s). The area of a building devoted to underground parking shall not be counted as floor area for purposes of determining the maximum floor area ratio under this section. Uses in the Garden Street Overlay District shall not be subject to any other limitations on floor area ratio or building bulk such as those contained in Section 4.4.2.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 94
3.10.5 Off-Street Parking
The off-street parking regulations that apply in the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District shall also apply in the Garden Street Overlay District.
3.10.6 Affordable Housing
Any building or combination of buildings with six or more dwelling units on the lot shall include affordable housing units as defined in Section 1.3 of this By-Law. The following requirements shall apply to a development that includes affordable units:
(a) The floor area of the affordable units shall not be counted for purposes of determining the maximum floor area permitted under Section 3.10.4.3.
(b) All other requirements of Section 3.8.6 shall apply.
3.10.7 Site Plan Review
For any project seeking a Special Permit under Section 3.10.4.2 or Section 3.10.4.3, or for any project proceeding under these overlay district provisions which also constitutes a Major Project under Section 7.4.2, the Planning Board shall consider, in addition to the factors set forth in Section 7.4.6, the following review criteria:
(a) The adequacy of existing facilities to serve the proposed development, including but not limited to water supply, sewer, natural gas and electric service;
(b) The degree to which the proposed project, viewed in its entirety, will make a significant contribution to the urban design and economic development goals set forth in the Needham Center Development Plan;
(c) The degree to which the proposed project is consistent with the purposes of the Garden Street Overlay District and conforms to the Design Guidelines under Section 3.10.8;
(d) The degree to which the applicant’s proposal has been designed to reduce or mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent properties or the surrounding area such as those resulting from excessive traffic congestion or excessive demand for parking;
(e) For applications involving an increase in building height or bulk by special permit, the degree to which the applicant has reasonably demonstrated that the additional height or floor area is desirable for redevelopment of the site, considering the site’s location and physical characteristics and the condition of existing improvements;
(f) The degree to which the proposed project incorporates as many green building standards as practical, given the type of building and proposed uses;
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 95
(g) The degree to which the proposed project provides a significant public benefit through its inclusion of at least one of the following:
(1) Affordable housing units;
(2) Use of one or more renewable energy sources in the operation of the project;
(3) Off-street parking sufficient to accommodate the proposed uses, located on the site or provided through a shared parking arrangement acceptable to the Planning Board; or provided through payment of fees in lieu of off-street parking spaces.
3.10.8 Design Guidelines
The Design Guidelines for the Garden Street Overlay District shall be as adopted, and as may be amended from time to time, by the Planning Board and available on file in the Needham Planning Department.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 96
3.11 Temporary Meteorological Towers Overlay District
3.11.1 Purposes of District
The purpose of the Temporary Meteorological Towers Overlay District is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community while accommodating the needs of the general public. Those purposes can be achieved by minimizing the adverse visual effect of temporary wind monitoring or meteorological test towers (“MET towers”), by providing safeguards for the general public, by avoiding damage to adjacent properties, by minimizing the environmental impacts of such facilities, while at the same time accommodating the testing of wind speeds, direction, and quantity of wind power a particular location can be expected to generate by permitting temporary wind monitoring or meteorological test towers.
3.11.2 Scope of Authority
The Temporary Meteorological Towers Overlay District shall be considered overlying other use districts established by the By-Law. Within the Temporary Meteorological Towers Overlay District, the requirements of the underlying district continue to apply except as may be specifically superseded herein. The scope of authority of this Section 3.11 shall be limited to temporary MET towers as defined in the following provisions.
3.11.3 Definitions
Meteorological or wind monitoring Towers (“MET Tower”): A temporary test tower equipped with mechanical devices to measure wind speeds, variability, and direction and used to determine how much wind power a site can be expected to generate. Such temporary towers are used to determine if a site can support a Wind Energy Facility by ascertaining the wind-to-electrical-energy conversion capability at a specific site.
Wind Energy Facility: All equipment, machinery and structures utilized in connection with the conversion of wind to electricity. This includes, but is not limited to, all transmissions, storage, collection and supply equipment, substations, transformers, site access, services roads and machinery associated with the use. A wind energy facility may consist of one or more wind turbines.
3.11.4 Uses in Temporary Meteorological Towers Overlay District
3.11.4.1 Permitted Uses
All uses permissible and as regulated within the underlying district.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 97
3.11.4.2 Special Permit Uses
(a) All uses permitted by special permit in the underlying district at that location may be allowed upon the issuance of a special permit by the designated Special Permit Granting Authority under such conditions as the Board may require.
(b) Free-standing MET towers which meet the following criteria:
1. MET towers shall be exempt from the height and other dimensional regulations of the By-Law and shall follow the height and setback requirements set forth in this section.
2. MET towers shall be no higher than 175 feet.
3. The minimum distance from the base of any MET tower to any property line or public or private street or way shall be equal to the height of the MET tower.
4. The minimum distance from the base of any MET tower to any dwelling, business or institutional use shall be equal to the height of the MET tower.
5. The purpose of the setbacks is to provide an area free of habitable structures; such setback does not need to be cleared of trees and vegetation and to the extent possible, existing on-site trees and vegetation shall be preserved.
6. Special Permit Criteria: All MET towers shall be constructed in locations to minimize any adverse visual, safety and environmental impacts. No special permit shall be issued unless the Board of Appeals, the Special Permit Granting Authority under this Section 3.11 finds that:
(a) the specific site is an appropriate location for such use;
(b) the use will not adversely affect the neighborhood;
(c) there will be no serious hazard to people or property from the use; no nuisance will be created by the use;
(d) adequate and appropriate facilities are provided for the proper operation of the use;
(e) the visual impact on the surrounding neighborhoods and community is minimized;
(f) no significant shadowing or flicking impacts the neighborhood;
(g) no significant negative impacts are occasioned by the use on the environment including rare species;
(h) the MET tower is painted with a non-reflective color that blends with the sky and/or other environmental considerations;
(i) all equipment is appropriately enclosed and/or shielded from view to avoid adverse visual impacts;
(j) the MET tower is lighted only if required by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other state or federal requirements; and
(k) any lighting of the MET tower is shielded from abutting properties.
7. All MET towers, related ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be secured to prevent unauthorized access, and the MET tower shall be designed and installed so as not to provide readily accessible steps or ladders to the public for a minimum of eight (8) feet above the ground.
8. All signs, other than manufacture or installers’ identification, warning signs or owner identification on a MET tower or other structure visible from any public road shall be prohibited. All signs shall comply with the By-Law.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 98
(c) Prior to the issuance of a building permit (after a special permit is issued by the Board of Appeals), the applicant shall be required to provide evidence of liability insurance, in an amount to be determined by the Board of Appeals and made part of the special permit, to cover loss or damage to persons or property occasioned by damage or injury caused by the MET tower.
(d) Proposed MET towers shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable electrical, construction, noise, safety and environmental and communications requirements. All MET tower facilities shall comply with the requirements set forth in this Section 3.11.
(e) A Special Permit issued for any MET tower shall be valid for two (2) years unless sooner revoked. At the end of that time period, unless extended by the Board of Appeals for not more than a total of five (5) years upon a showing of good cause for same, the MET tower shall be removed by the applicant. The site shall be restored to its original condition following removal of the MET tower.
(f) If the applicant fails to remove the MET tower in accordance with this section, the Town of Needham shall have authority, and any special permit issued hereunder shall so provide, to enter the subject property and remove the facility. The applicant may be required to provide a form of surety or bond at the time of issuance of the building permit to cover the costs of removal in the event the Town must remove the MET tower. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of costs associated with removal and restoration of the site to its original condition, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount of bond or surety shall be 150% of the cost at the time.
3.11.5 Submission Requirements
Ten (10) collated sets of application materials shall be submitted with any application for a MET tower. Application materials shall include all plans and materials required in this section:
(a) Documentation: Applications must include: name, address and telephone number of applicant and any co-applicants as well as any agents for same with original signatures; documentation of the legal right to install and use the proposed MET tower and proof of control over setback areas; proof of ability to obtain financial surety or bond; proof of liability insurance; certification of lighting requirements from the FAA; and certification of attainment from FCC relating to interference with radio or television reception (if required by the FCC).
(b) Site Plan Requirements:
1. A locus plan at a scale of one inch equals two-hundred feet which shows all property lines, the exact location of the proposed structure(s), public and private roads, street landscape features, dwellings and other structures within two-hundred feet of the property line. The zoning district designation shall be included on the plan.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 99
2. A plan showing the proposed location of the MET tower and any other structures proposed, including fencing, utility connections, access roads, parking areas and any other construction attendant to the MET tower.
3. A plan showing distances at grade from the MET tower to each building on the vicinity plan.
4. A plan showing proposed changes to the existing property including grading and vegetation removal.
5. A plan showing tree cover and average height of trees on the property and on adjacent properties within 200 feet of the property line.
6. A landscape plan showing existing trees and shrubs, as well as those proposed to be added.
7. Contours at each two feet Above Mean Sea Level for subject property and adjacent properties within 200 feet of the property line.
(c) Elevation: Elevations shall be either at 1/4 or 1/8 inch scale showing views at grade from the north, south, east and west for a 50’radius around the proposed MET tower. Elevations shall show all equipment, security barriers, structures, existing and proposed trees and shrubs and grade changes.
(d) Equipment Brochures: Equipment brochures for the proposed MET tower such as manufacturer’s specifications or trade journal reprints shall be provided for the tower, mounts, equipment shelters, cables as well as cable runs and security barrier, if any. Such information shall include the type of materials proposed.
(e) Photographs and Sight-line Diagrams: Color photographs of the current view shall be submitted from at least two locations to show existing conditions. Appearance of proposed MET tower shall be superimposed to scale on the existing condition photograph to accurately simulate the proposed MET tower. Sight-line diagrams from at least two locations shall be depicted in profile drawings at a scale of one inch equals forty feet. The diagrams shall show the lowest point of the MET tower visible from each location and all intervening trees and buildings.
(f) Certifications: The following information must be prepared and signed by a registered professional engineer: description of the MET tower and reasons for the proposed location, height and design; confirmation that MET tower complies with all applicable Federal and State standards; and, if applicable, a written statement that the proposed MET tower complies with, or is exempt from, applicable regulations administered by the FAA, the FCC, Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission, and the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
3.11.6 Severability
A determination that any portion or provision of this overlay district is invalid shall not invalidate any other portion or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any special permit previously issued thereunder.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 100
3.12 Elder Services Zoning District
3.12.1 Purposes of District
The purpose of the Elder Services Zoning District is to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community by encouraging the establishment of housing and other facilities in close proximity to each other primarily serving individuals 55 years or older who wish to live in independent apartments with convenient access to supportive services, while minimizing potential adverse impacts upon nearby residential and other properties. These purposes are to be achieved through establishing controls specifically for the proposed uses at locations where either such uses already exist or they would be appropriate because of access or other locational considerations.
3.12.2 Scope of Authority
The regulations of the Elder Services Zoning District shall govern all new construction, reconstruction or expansion of new or existing buildings, and new or expanded uses, regardless of whether the requirements of Section 3.12 are more or less restrictive than those of the General Residence Zoning District, of which the Elder Services Zoning District was formerly a part. Provisions of Section 3.12 shall supersede those of Section 3.2 Schedule of Use Regulations, Sections 4.2 through 4.10 (Dimensional Regulations) and Section 5.1.2 (Required Parking) except as otherwise specifically provided herein.
3.12.3 Allowed Uses
The following uses are allowed by right:
a) All uses allowed by right in the General Residence Zoning District as described in Section 3.2.1 of the Zoning By-Law.
3.12.4 Special Permit Uses
The following uses are allowed by Special Permit:
a) All uses allowed by Special Permit in the General Residence Zoning District, as set forth in Section 3.2.1 of the Zoning By-Law.
b) Independent Living Apartments.
c) Assisted Living and/or Alzheimer's/Memory Loss Facilities.
3.12.5 Multiple Buildings and Uses in the Elder Services Zoning District
More than one use may be located on a lot as a matter of right and more than one building may be located on a lot as a matter of right, provided that each building and/or its uses are in compliance with the requirements of Section 3.12 of this By-Law.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 101
3.12.6 Dimensional Regulations For the Elder Services Zoning District
Lot Area, Frontage and Setback Requirements
The following lot area, frontage and setback requirements shall apply to development in the Elder Services Zoning District:
a) Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet
b) Minimum Lot Frontage: 80 feet
c) Minimum Front Setback: 25 feet from the front property line
d) Minimum Side and Rear Setback: Minimum side and rear setbacks abutting a railroad right of way shall be 10 feet. Minimum side and rear setbacks not abutting a railroad right of way shall be 25 feet except that the minimum setback abutting residential properties on the north side of Putnam Street shall be 35 feet. For side and rear setbacks not abutting a railroad right of way, the Board of Appeals or other Special Permit granting authority may grant a Special Permit reducing the minimum side yard setback to no less than 20 feet and the minimum rear yard setback to no less than 10 feet. In acting upon such applications for such reductions, the Board shall consider, in addition to the criteria for special permits generally (Section 7.5.2), the criteria set forth in Section 4.2.13 (a)-(f).
3.12.7 Building Height Requirements
The maximum building height of buildings in the Elder Services Zoning District shall be 40 feet. The maximum number of stories (exclusive of the basement) shall be three, plus an unfinished, uninhabitable fourth story contained under a pitched roof with gables.
Provided further, however, that the existing nursing home structure shall be further limited so that any expansion of such structure in a northerly direction, the highest point of said structure along Gould Street, shall not be higher than a horizontal line drawn through the highest points of said existing nursing home structure and extended northward to the boundary of the Elder Services Zoning District. Such further limitation shall not be applicable to any future structures to be located to the west of said existing nursing home structure (as it may be extended) regardless of whether a physical connection will be constructed between such other future structures to the west and the existing nursing home structure (as it may be extended).
3.12.8 Building Bulk, Lot Coverage and Other Dimensional Requirements
Except as otherwise provided herein, the maximum floor to area ratio in the Elder Services Zoning District shall be 1.0. Parking garages, interior portions of buildings devoted to off-street parking and all other parking facilities shall not be utilized in computing floor to area ratio.
Buildings developed or re-developed under the regulations of the Elder Services Zoning District shall not be subject to any other limitations on floor to area ratio, lot coverage, building bulk, setbacks or other dimensional requirements as are contained in Sections 4.2 through 4.10.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 102
Notwithstanding anything in the By-Law to the contrary, including but not limited to the preceding two subparagraphs of this Section 3.12.8, the construction of single family detached dwellings, two family detached dwellings or the conversion of a single family dwelling to a two family dwelling, shall be governed by the dimensional and density requirements of the General Residence Zoning District.
3.12.9 Off-Street Parking
Except as provided below, the off-street parking regulations in Section 5.1 shall apply in the Elder Services Zoning District.
a) The minimum number of off-street parking spaces in Section 5.1.2 shall apply except as follows:
1) The off-street parking requirement for independent living apartments in the Elder Services Zoning District shall be 0.5 parking spaces for each dwelling unit.
3.12.10 Affordable Housing
Independent living apartments, as defined above (i.e. which excludes convalescent or nursing homes, assisted living and Alzheimer's/memory loss facilities) shall include Affordable Housing Units as defined in Section 1.3 of this By-Law. The following requirements shall apply to a development that includes Affordable Housing Units:
a) For a development with not more than 10 dwelling units, at least one unit shall be an Affordable Housing Unit; and for a development with 11 or more dwelling units, at least 10% shall be Affordable Housing Units. In the instance of a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
b) If the Applicant provides at least one-half of the Affordable Housing Units for households with incomes at or below 50% of area median income, the remaining Affordable Housing Units may be sold or rented to households with incomes up to 100% of area median income even if the latter units are not eligible for the subsidized housing inventory, regardless of any requirements to the contrary set forth in Section 1.3.
c) Affordable Housing Units shall be dispersed within the building or buildings and not concentrated in one area or one floor. They shall generally be comparable in size, energy efficiency, quality, convenience and unit specific real estate-related amenities to the development's market-rate units. Services and other amenities that may be purchased by residents on a voluntary basis are not to be considered unit specific real estate related amenities and are excluded from such comparability requirements.
d) The Affordable Housing Units shall be constructed in proportion to the number of market-rate units in a development. Proportionality shall be determined by the number
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 103
of building permits or certificates of occupancy issued for the Affordable Housing Units and market-rate units, as applicable.
e) The selection of eligible residents for the Affordable Housing Units shall be in accordance with a marketing plan approved by the Needham Planning Board prior to the issuance of any building permits for the independent living units.
f) The Affordable Housing Units shall be subject to an affordable housing restriction as defined in Section 1.3 of this By-Law with limitations on use, occupancy, resale prices or rents, as applicable, and which provides for periodic monitoring for compliance with the requirements of said restriction.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 104
3.13 Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation Overlay District
3.13.1 Purpose of District
The purpose of this bylaw is to regulate Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations in an established district(s) where they are allowed. The bylaw provides standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations. The standards aim to address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and to provide financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations. The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the construction, operation, maintenance and/or repair, and/or modification and/or removal of Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations.
3.13.2 Scope of Authority
The Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation Overlay District shall be considered as overlying other use districts established by this By-Law. Within the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation Overlay District, the requirements of the underlying district continue to apply except as may be specifically superseded herein. The scope of authority of this Section 3.13 applies to Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section. This section also applies to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these installations or related equipment.
3.13.3 Definitions
Designated Location: The locations permitted shall be within the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District, hereinafter referred to as “the Overlay”.
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation: A solar photovoltaic system, including ancillary structures, that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted and has a minimum nameplate capacity of 250kW DC.
Rated Nameplate Capacity: The maximum rated output of electric power production of the Photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC).
3.13.4 Allowed Uses
The following uses are allowed by right:
(a) All uses permissible and as regulated within the underlying district.
(b) A Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 105
3.13.5 Special Permit Uses
All uses permitted by special permit in the underlying district at that location may be allowed upon the issuance of a special permit by the designated Special Permit Granting Authority under such conditions as the Board may require.
3.13.6 General Requirements
The following requirements are common to all solar photovoltaic installations to be sited in the Overlay.
3.13.6.1 Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations
The construction and operation of all Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations shall be in compliance with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All buildings, structures and fixtures forming part of a Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation shall be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.
3.13.6.2 Building Permit and Building Inspection
No Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit.
3.13.6.3 Site Plan Review
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations shall undergo Major Project Site Plan Review by the Planning Board as described in Section 7.4 of the By-Law prior to construction, installation or modification as provided in this section. Application requirements for Site Plan Review shall be as provided below:
(a) General: All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a Professional Engineer or Professional Land Surveyor licensed to practice in Massachusetts.
(b) Required Documents: Pursuant to the Site Plan Review process, the project proponent shall provide the following documents in addition to those required under Section 7.4 of the By-Law.
1) A site plan showing:
i. Property lines and physical features, including roads, for the project site;
ii. Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening of vegetation or structures;
iii. Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic system signed by a
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 106
Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential shading from nearby structures;
iv. One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection methods, with all National electrical Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices;
v. Documentation of the major system components to be used, including the PV panels, mounting system, inverter, and associated electrical components. The site plan shall include containment fencing line, power lines and poles, and site access routes;
vi. Name, address and contact information for proposed system installer;
vii. Name, address, phone number and signature of the project proponent, as well as all co-proponents or property owners, if any;
viii. The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the project proponent.
2) Documentation of actual or prospective control of the project site and access thereto (see also Section 3.13.6.4);
3) An operation and maintenance plan (see also Section 3.13.6.5);
4) Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) comprising the site;
5) Proof of liability insurance;
6) Description of financial surety that satisfies Section 3.13.6.13.
The Planning Board may waive documentary requirements as it deems appropriate.
3.13.6.4 Site Control
The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective control of the project site and access thereto sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar photovoltaic installation.
3.13.6.5 Operation & Maintenance Plan
The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation, which shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, storm water controls, as well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the installation.
3.13.6.6 Utility Notification
No Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of the solar photovoltaic installation owner’s or operator’s intent to install an interconnected generator and an interconnection agreement and power purchase agreement (where appropriate) has been signed by the utility. Off-grid systems
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 107
shall be exempt from this requirement.
3.13.6.7 Dimension, Density and Parking Requirements
For Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations, front, side and rear setbacks shall be as follows:
(a) Minimum Lot Area: 20 acres;
(b) Minimum Front Setback: 50 feet;
(c) Minimum Side Setback: 50 feet from the property line of residentially used property;
(d) Minimum Rear Setback: 50 feet;
(e) Maximum Lot Coverage: 50%;
(f) Separation Distance: No separation distance is required between structures for ground mounted solar photovoltaic panels;
(g) Height: Height shall be determined by each individual panel measured to the grade level beneath that panel and shall not exceed 25 feet;
(h) Transition Areas: As long as the setbacks noted above are respected no further “Transition Area” (per Section 4.2.14) is required. No planting is required within the transition area if the abutting property is controlled by the Town of Needham and/or plantings are constrained by capped landfill requirements;
(i) Parking Requirement: No additional parking is required for this use as long as there is no full-time on-site system operator required following installation of the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation.
3.13.6.8 Design Standards
(a) Lighting: Lighting shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where feasible, lighting of the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(b) Signage: A sign for the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation consistent with the Town’s sign bylaw shall be required to identify the owner and provide the business name for the company (ies) that own and operate the installation, their business address, the name of a contact person, and a 24-hour emergency contact phone number.
(c) Utility Connections: Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to place cabling and utility connections from the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, ledge, wetland resources, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider.
(d) Conditions: All appurtenant structures, including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other. Whenever reasonable, structures shall be screened from
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 108
view by vegetation and/or joined and clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts. Methods such as the use of landscaping, natural features and fencing may be utilized.
(e) Fencing: A security fence shall be installed along or proximate to the perimeter of the system and shall be maintained for the lifetime of the system.
3.13.6.9 Safety and Environmental Standards
(a) Emergency Services: The Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Needham Fire Chief. The owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. The plan shall assure adequate access and staging for emergency services. All means of shutting down the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout the life of the installation.
(b) Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts: Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation and in accordance with applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws.
3.13.6.10 Maintenance
The Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security and safety measures. Site access for the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the Needham Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Services. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
3.13.6.11 Modifications
All material modifications to a Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation made after issuance of the required building permit shall require approval by the Planning Board.
3.13.6.12 Abandonment or Decommissioning
(a) Removal Requirements: Any Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with Section 3.13.6.12 (b) of this bylaw shall be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Planning Board by
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 109
certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
i. Physical removal of all solar photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site.
ii. Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste shall be in accordance with local, state, and federal regulations.
iii. Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to leave existing vegetation or designated below-grade foundations in place in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
(b) Abandonment: Absent notice to the Planning Board as provided above of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice requesting an extension due to extenuating circumstances, the Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation shall be considered abandoned when it fails to operate or its operations are discontinued for more than one year without the written consent of the Planning Board; or if the Building Inspector has determined that the installation is a hazard to public safety and the conditions have not been corrected within six (6) months.
The Town retains the right, after the receipt of an appropriate court order to enter and remove an abandoned or hazardous Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation that is not removed by the property owner within six (6) months from the date of abandonment, as described above, or the proposed date of decommissioning. As a condition of approval, an applicant shall agree to allow entry to remove an abandoned installation.
3.13.6.13 Financial Surety
Proponents of Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic projects shall provide a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal in the event the town must remove the installation and remediate the landscape, in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the Planning Board. Such surety will not be required for municipally-or state owned systems, but may be required for privately-owned systems even if located upon municipally-owned land. The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 110
3.14 Mixed-Use Overlay District
3.14.1 Purpose of District
The purposes of the Mixed-Use Overlay District (hereinafter referred to as the “MUOD”) include but are not limited to:
(a) Promoting a range and balance of land uses;
(b) Facilitating integrated physical design and encouraging interaction among activities;
(c) Permitting mixed use (commercial and residential) on individual development sites that are currently zoned within Mixed Use-128 and the northern Highland Commercial-128, i.e. the northern portion of Highland Commercial-128 abutting the Mixed Use-128 zoning district (hereinafter “the abutting Highland Commercial-128”);
(d) Permitting mixed use (commercial and residential) within the area currently zoned Mixed Use-128 and the abutting Highland Commercial-128;
(e) Establishing controls which will facilitate responsible development while protecting the public interest by limiting the aggregate amount of development;
(f) Permitting flexible development on individual lots;
(g) Promoting site features and layouts conducive to a variety of uses;
(h) Promoting a pedestrian-friendly living and working environment; and
(i) Providing housing in Needham.
3.14.2 Scope of Authority
The MUOD is an overlay district superimposed on the Mixed Use-128 and the abutting Highland Commercial-128 District. All uses permitted by right or by Special Permit in the pertinent underlying zoning district shall be similarly permitted in the MUOD, subject to further provisions of this Section. Where the MUOD authorizes uses not otherwise allowed in the underlying district, specifically multifamily residential, the provisions of the MUOD shall control. The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority (“SPGA”) for every MSP (as defined below) and any other Special Permit required for development for a MUOD Project whether permitted by Special Permit in the underlying zoning district or in the MUOD. Nothing herein shall be construed to supersede the provisions of other overlay districts applicable in the MUOD, except as set forth herein.
If the proponent elects to proceed under the zoning provisions of the underlying district, the Zoning By-Laws applicable in the underlying district shall control and the provisions of the Mixed-Use Overlay District shall not apply.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 111
3.14.3 Definitions
Concept Plan: An optional submittal for a Master Special Permit which provides a preliminary site plan for MUOD Projects detailing the proposed character, uses, site layout, impacts and amenities. The requirements of the Concept Plan are set forth in the following sections.
Master Special Permit (“MSP”): The Special Permit that an applicant must obtain prior to or in conjunction with obtaining any Site Plan Review approvals for a MUOD Project as provided in the Section 7.4 Site Plan Review.
MUOD Project: Residential uses alone or in combination with retail, commercial, office, municipal, and/or service establishments, as may be approved by the Planning Board for the MUOD by issuance of the MSP.
MUOD: The Mixed-Use Overlay District (“MUOD”) comprising the land presently part of the Mixed Use-128 District and the abutting Highland Commercial-128 District.
Site Plan Review: The Site Plan Review as provided in Section 7.4 that an applicant must obtain as part of approval for any MUOD Project.
3.14.4 Approval Process
3.14.4.1 Overview
Prior to applying for a building permit for a MUOD Project, the following review sequence is recommended.
(a) Concept Plan at the discretion of applicant.
(b) Master Special Permit application and Site Plan Review application.
3.14.4.2 Concept Plan
Prior to the application for approval of any MUOD Project, a Concept Plan may be filed with the Planning Board for review at a scheduled public meeting or meetings. The Concept Plan shall generally define the proposed MUOD Project’s character, uses, site layout, impacts and amenities. The Planning Board shall provide written commentary regarding whether the Concept Plan is in compliance with the provisions of this MUOD. A Concept Plan submission, if chosen to be made by an applicant, at a minimum shall include:
(a) A preliminary survey plan signed by a registered surveyor;
(b) A preliminary site development plan (signed by a registered architect or other pertinent design/engineering professional) showing the location and footprint(s) of all proposed buildings, general site grading with finish floor elevations, parking
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 112
locations and total spaces allocated, landscaping concepts, roads, walkways, egress and access roads, open space and wetlands;
(c) A preliminary utilities plan showing the proposed location of all germane utilities such as water supply, sewer service, storm water, gas, electric and other germane and or similar utilities;
(d) A preliminary subdivision plan, if applicable;
(e) Proposed buildings as to location, use classification, general architectural design, and size; and
(f) A zoning chart detailing uses and dimensional requirements (existing, required and proposed) including the need for special permits and/or waivers.
After review of the Concept Plan, the Planning Board shall provide written comments to the applicant regarding the consistency of the Concept Plan with the objectives and criteria of the MUOD. The Planning Board may, in its written comments, provide suggestions regarding any and all aspects of the Concept Plan. The Planning Board shall advise the applicant of the Planning Board’s comments within sixty (60) days following submittal of the Concept Plan, unless such time is extended by written agreement of the Planning Board and the applicant. The comments of the Planning Board on the submitted Concept Plan shall be advisory in nature and shall be without binding effect on either the Planning Board or the applicant. Said comments shall not be subject to appeal.
3.14.4.3 Master Special Permit (MSP)
Every MUOD Project must obtain a MSP issued by the SPGA. The purpose of the MSP is to specify the design, architectural character, site layout and improvements, traffic improvements, traffic impacts and their mitigation, adequate egress and access from and to the site, environmental impacts and their mitigation, specific locations and uses for buildings, public amenities, future division of the property, and other information required for the public and boards of the Town.
No MSP shall be granted unless the proposed project is in compliance with the performance standards set forth in Section 3.14.9.
A MSP shall govern all future development of a particular MUOD Project. All construction and associated improvements in a MUOD Project must be in compliance with the MSP.
The applicant must supply the Planning Board with sufficient copies of the application for a MSP, along with all supporting documents and plans, as are necessary to provide to other local boards, agencies, and officials for review and comment.
Any proposed structure or improvement to the site must be in compliance with the MSP. Anyone seeking in the future to construct any structure, or make any improvement not approved by the MSP, or change to a different use from that approved by MSP, must apply to the Planning Board for approval of such changes in such manner as the Planning Board determines applicable. Such change or modification must meet all the performance standards then in effect.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 113
3.14.4.4 Special Permit and Site Plan Review within the MUOD.
Within the MUOD, the uses permitted by right or by Special Permit in the pertinent underlying zoning district shall be similarly permitted in the MUOD, subject to further provisions of this Section.
In addition to the uses allowed by right or by special permit in the underlying zoning districts, the following residential uses are allowed by MSP in the MUOD: multifamily dwellings (defined herein as four or more dwelling units) and multifamily dwellings above commercial uses. Single, two-family, or three family dwellings are not allowed.
MSP and other special permits must be obtained prior to or in conjunction with the Site Plan Review application for a MUOD Project. In subsequent applications seeking modifications of a MSP to construct any structure or make any improvement to a MUOD Project not approved by the MSP, or change to a different MUOD Project use from that approved by the MSP, those modifications must be obtained prior to or in conjunction with the application to modify the Site Plan Review decision.
The purpose of the Site Plan Review shall be to ensure that any proposed building and site improvements are in compliance with the MSP, the uses approved therein, efficient site flow and improvements, requisite traffic improvements and mitigation of project impacts, adequate egress and access from and to the project, mitigation of environmental impacts, and designation of specific locations and uses for buildings, structures and public amenities. Site Plan Review shall include the following components for review and approval: building design and elevations, directional signage, landscaping, lighting, parking, and compliance with the MSP. The application shall also be reviewed for compliance with performance standards set forth in Section 3.14.9 and with the specific conditions of the proposed MUOD MSP.
The Planning Board shall hold its hearing on a MSP, other special permits, and Site Plan Review application only after receipt of complete applications.
After approval of the Site Plan Review application, special permits (if applicable), and MUOD MSP, no structure previously approved may be changed to a different use or changed structurally, and no exterior features may be changed, unless the Planning Board or its designee approves such changes in such manner as the Planning Board determines applicable to the particular change.
3.14.5 Special Permit Decision Criteria
Any special permits required for uses and/or dimensional requirements in the underlying zoning districts shall be subject to the criteria set forth in other sections of this Zoning By-Law in regards to the granting of special permits.
When the application is for a MSP, the Planning Board shall consider, in addition to the criteria set forth in other sections of the Zoning By-Law with regard to the granting of special
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 114
permits, whether the MUOD Project complies with the use regulations, dimensional requirements and performance standards set forth herein. The MSP shall be granted in the MUOD by the Planning Board only upon the Board’s written determination that the adverse effects, if any, of the proposed MUOD Project will not outweigh its beneficial impacts to the Town or the neighborhood, in view of the particular characteristics of the site.
3.14.6 Special Permit Conditions
Where the Planning Board grants any special permit and/or MSP, the Board may impose additional reasonable conditions, safeguards and limitations on time and use, including but not limited to the following:
(a) A phasing schedule for construction of each component part of the project which ensures integration of residential, nonresidential and municipal uses;
(b) A demolition and construction schedule, including a construction traffic management plan;
(c) Hours of operation, site maintenance, delivery and waste removal times and lighting schedule;
(d) Recording of approved special permits, MSP, and Site Plan Review decision in the Norfolk Registry of Deeds, and if registered land, in the Norfolk Registry District of the Land Court prior to the issuance of any building permits.
(e) All development shall be in compliance with plans approved in the MSP, other special permits and Site Plan Review decision and with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, rules and regulations and By-Laws.
(f) If circumstances so warrant, with respect to a MSP, continued monitoring of off-site impacts to traffic and the environment in appropriate locations with regard to MUOD development; and
(g) The Planning Board or its designated representative shall have the right to make inspections during the construction process at the applicant’s expense.
3.14.7 Time Limit
Until such time as the MSP and Site Plan Review decision are issued for a MUOD Project, and the appeal period following the Planning Board’s decisions has expired with no appeal having been filed, or any filed appeal has been finally determined by a court of competent jurisdiction, the provisions of the underlying zoning shall solely govern the use and development of the property comprising the MUOD. At the time the MSP and Site Plan Review decisions are final, provided that the requirements of the first paragraph of G.L. ch.40A, Section 6 are met, the zoning of the MUOD shall apply. If an applicant has not made effective use of an issued MSP within two years of its issuance, then the MSP shall expire; provided, however, that the Planning Board may, upon application filed prior to such expiration, extend the MSP for one additional time period of up to three years. Nothing in this section is intended nor shall it be construed to affect the protections afforded special permits under G.L. ch.40A, Section 6.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 115
3.14.8 Dimensional Requirements
The dimensional requirements of any MUOD Project shall be governed by the dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district(s) except as follows:
(a) Height Limit: 70 feet and up to 84 feet by special permit, except within 350 feet of a river, in which event the building shall be limited in height to 54 feet.
(b) Maximum Lot Coverage: 65%.
(c) Minimum set back requirements from all lot boundaries shall be consistent with the setback requirements of the underlying district.
(d) Maximum FAR: 3.0 (not to include parking garages or below grade parking).
(e) As to residential units, parking shall be provided at 1.5 parking spaces per unit, except affordable units may be allowed to provide only 1 parking space per unit. Commercial development shall meet off-street parking requirements of the underlying district.
(f) The Minimum Lot size for development for a MUOD Project shall be two (2) acres.
(g) Consistent with Section 4.9.3 of the Needham Zoning By-Law, the Planning Board by special permit may waive any applicable dimensional regulation, including the regulations noted above, by 25%. However, this ability to grant waivers shall not include the limits on height and/or lot size. The ability to grant waivers from the parking requirements for residential units shall be governed by the special permit provisions of Section 5.1.1.5 of the Needham Zoning By-Law.
3.14.9 Performance Standards
The development of a MUOD Project in the MUOD shall comply with the following performance standards in lieu of those set forth elsewhere in the Zoning By-Law:
3.14.9.1 Residential Development
(a) Residential Development Cap: In the MUOD district no more than 250 dwelling units shall be permitted.
(b) At least 40% but not more than 70% of all dwelling units within any MUOD Project shall be one-bedroom units.
(c) At least 12.5% of all dwelling units shall be Affordable Units as defined below.
3.14.9.2 Landscaping
The applicant shall prepare a landscaping plan showing that the MUOD Project will meet the landscaping requirements of the Needham Zoning By-Law and the following standards: promote the establishment, protection, and enhancement of the natural landscape; ensure appropriate use of plant material in new construction; preserve natural tree cover; and promote the inclusion of new tree planting in order to reduce visual blights, noise and glare, prevent soil erosion,
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 116
reduce stormwater runoff, increase ground water discharge, create shade and reduce solar overheating.
3.14.9.3 Massing
Any buildings proposed for a MUOD Project shall provide visual relief along the façade of each building.
Building design throughout a MUOD Project shall include designs which promote visual relief by varying roof lines, height and other aesthetic features.
3.14.9.4 Screening and Buffer Requirements
A MUOD Project shall provide an appropriate visual barrier, as determined by the Planning Board, between physical features of the MUOD Project and public streets and abutting properties. For example, dumpsters, trash handling areas, mechanical equipment at ground level or roof top, service entrances, utility facilities for building operation, loading docks or spaces and similar components shall be subject to visual barrier as determined by the Planning Board.
3.14.9.5 Stormwater Management
The stormwater management system serving any MUOD Project shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, rules, regulations and By-Laws.
3.14.9.6 Roadways
In order to assure there is adequate access and egress for emergency vehicles and normal traffic expected in the MUOD Project, and safe pedestrian access, the roadways serving the MUOD Project shall comply with the Zoning By-Law. An applicant must demonstrate that the adequacy of the roadways providing access and egress to and from the MUOD Project and within the site itself ensures safe vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
3.14.9.7 Parking and Loading Standards
An application for a MUOD MSP shall include a parking plan setting forth the number of parking spaces and loading areas, the location and design of same, including lighting and landscaping. If required by the Planning Board, the application shall also include a parking and loading study which support such plan. The required off street parking spaces may be accommodated by employing at-grade parking areas, parking garages or below grade parking areas. Further, podium parking, a form of below grade parking, shall be allowed if the parking structure is not more than 4 feet above finished grade and designed and/or landscaped in a manner that the Planning Board deems sufficient to properly buffer the podium parking structure from view.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 117
3.14.9.8 Affordable Units
The following standards shall apply in the MUOD. All MUOD Projects shall include Affordable Units; further at least 12.5% of the dwelling units shall be Affordable Units. The term “Affordable Unit” shall mean a dwelling unit reserved in perpetuity for rental or ownership by a household earning less than 80% of area median family income, and priced to conform with the standards of the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (“DHCD”) for rental or ownership units set forth in 760 CMR56, as amended from time to time, in order that such Affordable Unit shall be included in the DHCD Subsidized Housing Inventory. Affordable Units shall be subject to the following conditions:
(a) The Affordable Unit shall be affordable in perpetuity.
(b) Each Affordable Unit must be constructed and an occupancy permit obtained at the rate of at least one Affordable Unit for every seven market rate units.
(c) In computing the number of required Affordable Units, any fraction of a unit must be rounded up, and the result shall be the number of Affordable Units to be required.
(d) All required Affordable Units must be built within the MUOD Project and not off-site.
3.14.10 Peer Review
The Planning Board, at the expense of the applicant and pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 44, Section 53G, may engage qualified peer reviewers, including, but not limited to, traffic engineers, civil engineers, architects, landscape architects, wetlands scientists, lighting technicians, and experts on impacts, to review all Concept Plans, special permit applications, MSP, and Site Plan Review applications.
3.14.11 Rules and Regulations
The Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations for the implementation of this Section.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 118
4. DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
4.1 Basic Requirements
4.1.1 Applicability
No building or structure in any district shall be located, constructed, changed, enlarged or permitted and no use of premises in any district shall be permitted which does not conform to the density and dimensional regulations as set forth herein.
4.1.2 Exemptions for Recorded Lots
Nothing contained in Section 4.2 shall prevent the construction or placing of buildings or structures permissible as accessory uses under the provisions of this By-Law, nor shall it prevent the construction or placing of a building or structure upon a lot having less area or frontage, or both, than required in Section 4.2 if, at such time as the minimum area and frontage requirements for the Zone in which such lot is located were established or increased, such lot had less area or frontage, or both than provided by such new or increased requirements; and if such less area or frontage, or both did not result from an attempt to circumvent the intent of the By-Law, and if at the effective date of such new or increased requirements or January 10, 1963, whichever date is later, the owner did not have adjoining land available to increase the area or frontage, or both, of said lot to meet said new or increased requirement, or to make said lot less non-conforming as to frontage or area or both. The minimum area and frontage of any such lot shall be at least 5,000 square feet and 50 feet, respectively.
4.1.3 Reduction of Area, Frontage, and Setback Requirements
No lot shall be reduced in area or frontage if it already has or will be caused to have less area or frontage than required by this section, except by a taking by eminent domain or a conveyance for a public purpose. Such lots reduced in area or frontage by a taking by eminent domain or a conveyance for a public purpose shall be entitled to the protections afforded by statute and in this By-Law to pre-existing nonconforming lots. Further, if an existing structure is rendered nonconforming as to setback (or more non-conforming as to setback) by a taking by eminent domain or conveyance for a public way or access way or by the approval of a subdivision way for a third party, said structure shall be entitled to the protections afforded by statute and in this By-Law to pre-existing nonconforming structures. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the protections afforded by this section shall not apply to vacant lots existing prior to the effective date of this section which are less than 5,000 sq. ft. and/or with less than 50 feet of frontage.
4.1.4 Change of Subdivision Plans
Where the plan of a subdivision has been approved by the Planning Board or by a Board of Survey, or where a plan of the subdivision of land has been recorded in the Registry of Deeds by a
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 119
former owner of said land prior to March 26, 1925, and where either a minimum area or frontage for building lots has since been established for the district in which said land lies, or the minimum area or frontage for building lots applicable to said district has since been increased, the Planning Board may, upon the application of the present owner of said land, approve a change in said subdivision plan whereby the area and frontage of the building lots shown thereon may be increased although the area and frontage of said building lots as changed shall not then be as large as the required minimum area of frontage for building lots currently applicable to the zoning district in which said land lies. The approval of such change shall not, however, affect the location or grade of streets as shown on said plan or profile; nor shall it impose additional obligations upon the owner of said land with respect to the development thereof.
4.1.5 Minimum Required Lot Width
Building lots in all zoning districts recorded or endorsed after January 9, 1986 shall be required to have a minimum lot width for a distance that extends from the front line throughout the primary building or structure not less than the applicable minimum frontage for the district in which said lot is located, as specified in Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.3.1, 4.4.1, and 4.6.1; except, however, in the Single Residence A District such minimum required lot width shall be at least 120 feet. To measure lot width, start at a front corner (where a sideline meets the lot's line of frontage) and, at a right angle to that sideline, measure straight across the lot to the other sideline. This measurement need not be at a right angle from more than one sideline but it must cross the lot to meet the opposite sideline. Then take a series of measurements parallel to that first measured line, through the full depth of the primary building or structure on the lot. If any lot line on the side chosen for the starting point is a convex line, draw a straight line connecting the two far points of the convex line, and measure across the lot from that straight line; and if any lot line on the side chosen for the starting point is a concave line, draw a straight line connecting the two far points of that line and begin there, but measure across the lot from the point where the perpendicular line crosses the concave side lot line. For corner lots, the measurement shall be taken from front corners along both frontage lines.
4.1.6 Height and Setback Limitation Exception
4.1.6.1 Special Permit Uses
In all Districts, the Board of Appeals may by special permit approve an application for an increase in the height limits of this By-Law for light poles that illuminate outdoor recreation facilities, such as, but not limited to, playing fields and tennis courts, that are located on land owned by the Town of Needham and which are operated as a recreational or municipal use. In determining whether to grant a special permit, and in determining what conditions should be attached to the grant of a special permit, the Board of Appeals shall take into account the application’s compliance with the lighting standards, and other decision standards, set forth in this Section 4.1.6, and its compliance with the provisions of Section 7.5.2 of this by-law.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 120
4.1.6.2 Definitions
Certified Lighting Professional – A lighting professional that is certified by the National Council on Qualifications for Lighting Professionals (NCQLP) or a State licensed professional engineer, architect or landscape architect having at least 3 years of sports lighting-related experience.
Direct Light – Light emitted directly from the lamp, from the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens of a luminaire.
Foot Candle (fc) – Unit of illuminance; One lumen per square foot.
Full Cutoff (FCO) – A luminaire light distribution, specified by the IESNA, where zero candela intensity occurs at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and at all greater angles from nadir. Additionally, the candela per 1000 lamp lumens does not numerically exceed 100 (10 percent) at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above nadir. Nadir is the point directly vertically below the luminaire. A FCO luminaire is fully shielded.
Fully Shielded – Constructed in such a manner that no light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the luminaire, is projected above a horizontal plane passing through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire.
Glare – The sensation of visual discomfort or loss in visual performance and visibility produced by luminance within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted.
Indirect Light – Direct Light that has been reflected off the surface of any permanently constructed object other than the source luminaire.
IESNA or IES – Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. A professional association of lighting engineers and lighting manufacturers generally recognized as the definitive source for illumination recommendations in the United States. An IES photometric file is defined by IESNA standards.
Illuminance – The luminous flux incident per unit area, expressed in foot-candle (one lumen per square foot). Horizontal or vertical illuminance is that measured with a photometer cell mounted horizontally or vertically.
Lamp – The light source component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
Light Trespass – Direct or Indirect Light produced by an artificial light source and which shines outside the boundaries of the lot containing the luminaire.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 121
Luminaire – A complete outdoor lighting unit or fixture including a lamp or lamps, together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps, and to connect the lamps to the power supply, but not including a pole on which the luminaire may be mounted.
Outdoor Lighting – The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by a luminaire located outdoors.
Shielded – A luminaire employing a protective device to prevent glare. The luminaire shall have a generally downward distribution of light and must have a top shield to minimize upward light.
4.1.6.3 Exterior Lighting Plan
A Lighting Plan shall be submitted with all applications for a special permit. This Lighting Plan shall be certified to be valid and correct by a certified lighting professional and shall include the following information:
a) The location, height, shielding type of all existing and proposed outdoor luminaries, and the wattage rating and type of all lamps in each luminaire. Any existing off-site luminaries used to illuminate the lot shall be included in the Lighting Plan.
b) The manufacturer's specification data and technical drawings, including the luminaire lamp wattage; photometric data showing that the luminaire is fully shielded, including an electronic copy of the IES photometric file, or a reference to the file location on the manufacturer’s web site. Manufacturer’s photometric specification that the luminaire is rated IESNA Full Cutoff (FCO) is sufficient to show that it is fully shielded.
c) The data of previous sections a) and b) shall be organized into a table, with one line per luminaire.
d) A light illumination test, conducted by a certified lighting professional, to demonstrate the pre-development condition. The lighting levels shall be calculated with a photometer positioned at the boundaries of the lot on which the light poles are proposed, at such locations as are needed to adequately determine the level of existing light trespass onto adjacent streets and abutting lots.
e) A photometric plan of the proposed outdoor luminaries, showing the intensity of illumination expressed in foot-candles at ground level within the interior of the property and at the boundaries of the lot on which the light poles are proposed, at such locations as are needed to adequately determine the level of light trespass onto adjacent streets and abutting lots. The plan shall also include the following illumination information in a table format: Minimum; Maximum; Average; Average to Minimum and Maximum to Minimum.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 122
f) Calculations quantifying the light trespass of the proposed outdoor luminaries, at the property boundaries of each abutting lot and street.
4.1.6.4 Lighting and Light Pole Standards
The following lighting and light pole standards shall apply to illuminated outdoor recreation facilities:
a) The illumination of outdoor recreation facilities shall be by either shielded or fully-shielded luminaries, aimed toward the playing field or court, and shielded in directions away from the playing surface so as to minimize glare, lighting and light trespass onto adjacent areas. Light poles for recreational facilities may be as high as necessary to adequately illuminate the facility but shall be limited to a maximum height of 90 feet and a minimum front, rear or side yard setback of five (5) feet.
b) Additional shields that are installed to control light trespass and glare as required herein shall be designed so that the parts of the shields that are exposed to the direct light of the luminaire and visible from streets, or abutting lots that are in residential or conservation use, shall have a flat-back, low reflectivity finish.
c) Luminaries installed on one lot to illuminate another lot, or installed in a street, railroad, utility, or other right-of-way to illuminate an adjacent lot, are prohibited.
d) Strobe and flashing lights and laser illumination are prohibited.
e) Placement of pennants, streamers, banners, signs, advertising flags or similar items on light poles is prohibited.
f) Placement of speakers, sound systems or similar devices on light poles is prohibited.
g) Hours and method of operation shall be set by the Board of Appeals, as it deems necessary.
h) The luminaries shall be located and shielded so as to prevent undue light trespass onto adjacent streets or abutting lots. In determining undue light trespass the Board of Appeals shall consider the following factors:
(1) the land use of adjacent properties, and the location of residences and businesses thereon;
(2) the character of the abutting neighborhood (urban, suburban, rural);
(3) other existing light sources in the immediate vicinity of the lot;
(4) distance from the proposed light sources to abutting properties;
(5) the topography of the site and of adjacent property;
(6) existing and proposed landscaping, vegetation, and natural and artificial
screening; and
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 123
(7) existing and proposed direct and indirect light levels on the site and in the immediate vicinity of the site.
i) After the installation of the lights, a post-development light illumination test shall be conducted at the property lines and shall demonstrate that there has been no undue light trespass at the property lines, before the lights can be operated.
j) Submission and subsequent approval of a plan does not relieve the applicant of responsibility to demonstrate conformity to all sections of the bylaw, both in the individual luminaries as built, and for the entire lot as built. The certified lighting professional shall submit an as-built plan that correctly reflects the as-built installation, and shall certify that the as-built installation conforms to the requirements of this By-Law.
4.1.6.5 Special Permit Approval Criteria
In reviewing a special permit application under this section 4.1.6, the Board of Appeals shall make findings regarding the following factors:
a) the effects of extended operational hours, such as noise, traffic, light trespass and celebratory behavior;
b) the benefits that the additional hours of operation will provide;
c) the degree to which the proposal minimizes adverse visual impacts;
d) the extent to which the applicant has mitigated potential adverse effects;
e) compliance with the lighting and light pole standards of sections 4.1.6.4, including a determination as to whether the proposal would result in undue light trespass; and
f) compliance with the provisions of section 7.5.2.
After making findings on the factors set forth above, the Board shall determine whether the benefits, if any, of the proposed project outweigh its adverse impacts, if any. If the Board determines that the proposal would provide a net benefit to the Town, the Board may grant a special permit with or without specific conditions.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 124
4.2 Dimensional Regulations for Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B, General Residence, and Institutional Districts.
The terms used in the Table of Regulations in Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2 and 4.2.3 below are as defined in Section 1.3 of the By-law except as otherwise noted below.
The symbol “NR” means no requirements.
The symbol “1/2” as to maximum stories means Half-story under Story as defined in Section 1.3 of the By-Law.
The term “New Construction” means any one or any combination of the following: (a) Any construction of a structure on a vacant lot; (b) Any construction which involves demolition of more than 50% (fifty percent) of the building shell exclusive of demolition of a single story attached garage. For purposes of calculating the percentages of any demolition under this definition, all demolition shall be taken into account which commenced, or could have commenced, pursuant to an issued permit within two (2) years prior to the date of any request for any permit to construct, re-construct, alter, add, extend or otherwise structurally change any structure.
Front Yard Setback - the minimum horizontal distance from a front lot line of a lot to the nearest portion of the exterior wall sheathing of a building or structure. The following elements are permitted in the front yard setback: (i) uncovered steps; (ii) roof overhangs projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of a building; (iii) siding and trim projecting not more than 6 inches from the wall of a building; (iv) first floor bay windows that do not have a foundation nor create any floor area nor project more than 2 feet from the wall of a building, provided that the width of a single bay window is limited to 8 feet, total overall area of a bay or bays is limited to 25% of the first floor wall area where the bay or bays are installed, and roofs on bay windows may project an additional 6 inches into the setback; and (v) unenclosed, covered or uncovered landings or entrance porches located on the first floor and having no habitable space directly above, provided that no more than a maximum of 50 square feet of said landing or porch is allowed in the front setback and the maximum porch or landing projection into the front setback is limited to 5 feet.
Side Yard Setback - the minimum horizontal distance from a side line of a lot to the nearest portion of the exterior wall sheathing of a building or structure. The following elements are permitted in the side yard setback: (i) uncovered steps; (ii) roof overhangs projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of a building; (iii) siding and trim projecting not more than 6 inches from the wall of a building; (iv) unenclosed, covered or uncovered landings which neither exceed a total area of 25 square feet nor project more than 4 feet from the face of a building; (v) first floor bay windows that do not have a foundation nor create any floor area nor project more than 2 feet from the wall of a building, provided that the width of a single bay window is limited to 8 feet, total overall area of a bay or bays is limited to 25% of the first floor wall area where the bay or bays are installed, and roofs on bay windows may project an additional 6 inches into the setback; (vi) attached chimneys and fireplace enclosures projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of a building; and (vii) covered
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 125
basement entrances (bulkheads) which neither exceed a total area of 40 square feet nor a maximum height of 3.5 feet nor project more than 7.5 feet from the wall of a building.
Rear Yard Setback - the minimum horizontal distance from the rear line of a lot to the nearest portion of the exterior wall sheathing of a building or structure. The following elements are permitted in the rear yard setback: (i) uncovered steps; (ii) roof overhangs projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of a building; (iii) siding and trim projecting not more than 6 inches from the wall of a building; (iv) unenclosed, covered and uncovered landings which neither exceed a total area of 25 square feet nor project more than 4 feet from the face of a building; (v) first floor bay windows that do not have a foundation nor create any floor area nor project more than 2 feet from the wall of a building, provided that the width of a single bay window is limited to 8 feet, total overall area of a bay or bays is limited to 25% of the first floor wall area where the bay or bays are installed, and roofs on bay windows may project an additional 6 inches into the setback; (vi) attached chimneys and fireplace enclosures projecting not more than 2 feet from the wall of a building; and (vii) covered basement entrances (bulkheads) which neither exceed a total area of 40 square feet nor a maximum height of 3.5 feet nor project more than 7.5 feet from the wall of a building.
The term “Floor Area Ratio” means the floor area divided by the lot area. Floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of each building on a lot, as measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, but excluding basements, attics, half-stories located directly above the second floor, unenclosed porches, and up to 600 square feet of floor area intended and designed for the parking of automobiles whether in accessory buildings or structures, or in main buildings or structures.
Height - Height shall be measured using one of the following two alternative methods, the method to be determined at the discretion of the applicant: (1) the vertical distance from average original grade or finished grade, whichever is lower, of the land surrounding the footprint of the structure to the highest point of a structure or roof of a building. The average height shall be measured starting at one corner of the structure measuring the height of the structure to the highest point above grade, and measurements shall be taken every 10 linear feet. The height limit under this method is 35 feet. For purposes of this alternative, original grade shall be defined as the grade of the lot before any regrading, demolition or development begins. If an existing structure is to be demolished, the original grade shall be the grade determined prior to demolition of the structure. If there is no existing structure on the property, the natural grade of the property, prior to any modification, shall be considered the original grade; except in new subdivisions where the original grade shall mean the approved and recorded grade; or (2) the height of the structure measured from a single point in the street centerline which is the average elevation of the highest 1/3 of the property’s street frontage. The height limit under this method is 32 feet.
Lot Coverage - that portion of a lot that is covered or occupied by any building or structure, but excluding unenclosed, covered or uncovered landings or porches (unless such covered landings or porches have habitable space directly above), steps, roof overhangs, bay windows, chimneys and bulkheads as permitted in required setbacks as provided above, as well as outdoor fireplaces, decks, patios and pools.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 126
4.2.1 Table of Regulations for Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B, and General Residence Districts, for Buildings and Structures on Lots Created by Deed or Plan Endorsed or Recorded Prior to January 9, 1986 and Not Including New Construction
Except as otherwise provided in Section 4.2.4 for public, semi-public and institutional uses, no building or structure that is not New Construction shall be constructed, altered, or relocated on any lot created by deed or plan endorsed or recorded prior to January 9, 1986 except in conformance with these regulations:
District
Min. Lot Area (sf)
Min. Frontage
(ft)
Front Setback
(ft)
Side Setback (ft)
Rear Setback (ft)
Max. Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)
Max. % Lot Coverage
Max. Stories
Max. Height (ft)
Rural Residence Conser- vation
43,560
150
50
25
25
NR
15%
2-1/2
35
Single Residence A
43,560
150
30
15
(a)
15
(a)
NR
NR
2-1/2
35
Single Residence B
10,000
80
20
(g)(h)
14
(e)(f)
10
.36-.38(d)
25%-30%
(i)
2-1/2
35
(b)(c)
General Residence
10,000
80
20
(g)(h)
14
(e) (f)
10
NR
30%-35%
(j)
2-1/2
35
(b)(c)
(a) Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the Single Residence A District, a change in the area, frontage or configuration of an existing improved lot created by deed or plan, endorsed or recorded before January 9, 1986, which includes a conforming structure or building shall not change the minimum side or rear line setback requirement of 15 feet provided that (i) no other dimensional violations of the By-Law are created as a result of such change in the area, frontage or configuration of such existing improved lot, (ii) such lot otherwise continues to be a conforming lot in terms of minimum lot area, frontage and build factor following such change in the area, frontage or configuration of such existing improved lot, and (iii) such change in the area, frontage or configuration of such existing improved lot does not result in the creation of any additional building lot. The deed conveying land by reference to a plan showing such change in
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 127
the area, frontage or configuration of such existing improved lot shall contain a restriction affecting the land of both the grantor and the grantee prohibiting the creation of an additional building lot as a result of such conveyance.
(b) The maximum height at any point of any building or structure shall not exceed 41 feet above the lower of original or finished grade.
(c) If all or a portion of a basement wall is exposed for the full height of the wall, dormers in the one-half story above the basement wall shall not be permitted.
(d) The maximum floor area ratio shall be as follows: for lots containing less than 12,000 square feet – .38; and for lots containing 12,000 or more square feet – .36.
(e) The minimum side yard setback is 14 feet, and a maximum of 32 linear feet of structure may be built at the minimum setback line, as measured parallel to the side lot line, provided that the remaining length of structure along the side yard setback must be offset an additional 2 feet. Notwithstanding the above, the minimum side yard setback requirement for all buildings and structures on any lot that contains less than 80 feet of frontage shall be 12 feet, and a maximum of 32 linear feet of structure may be built at the minimum setback distance, as measured parallel to the side lot line, provided that the remaining length of structure along the side yard setback must be offset an additional 2 feet. In no case shall a side wall extension extend more than 32 linear feet without a 2 foot offset.
(f) Existing single family or two-family structures non-conforming for side yard setback and for which the building permit for the existing structure was issued prior to June 1, 2017, may be altered or structurally changed as-of-right to a 10-foot setback, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.4.7.2, provided any demolition of the existing structure does not exceed 50% of the building shell exclusive of demolition of a single story attached garage and further provided that the structure shall not be closer to the side lot line than the farthest extent of the existing structure. For the purposes of this footnote, the definition of “setback” in Section 1.3 of these By-Laws shall control.
(g) Attached garages shall have a minimum front yard setback of 25 feet. For corner lots the increased front yard setback of 25 feet is required along both frontage streets.
(h) Existing single family or two-family structures non-conforming for front yard garage setback and for which the building permit for the existing structure was issued prior to June 1, 2017, may be altered or structurally changed as-of-right to a 20-foot setback, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.4.7.2, provided any demolition of the existing structure does not exceed 50% of the building shell exclusive of demolition of a single story attached garage and further provided that the garage structure shall not be closer to the front lot line than the farthest extent of the existing garage structure. For the purposes of this footnote, the definition of “setback” in Section 1.3 of these By-Laws shall control.
(i) Buildings and structures created on any lot shall not result in lot coverage exceeding the following specified maximum percentages of the area of such lot: For lots containing less than 5,500 square feet – 30%; For lots containing at least 5,500 square feet but less than 6,000 square feet – 29%; For lots containing at least 6,000 square feet but less than 6,500 square feet – 28%; For lots containing at least 6,500 square feet but less than 7,000 square feet – 27%; For lots containing at least 7,000 square feet but less than 7,500 square feet – 26%; and For lots containing at least 7,500 square feet – 25%.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 128
(j) Buildings and structures created on any lot shall not result in lot coverage exceeding the following specified maximum percentages of the area of such lot: For lots containing less than 7,000 square feet – 35%; For lots containing at least 7,000 square feet but less than 7,500 square feet – 34%; For lots containing at least 7,500 square feet but less than 8,000 square feet – 33%; For lots containing at least 8,000 square feet but less than 8,500 square feet – 32%; For lots containing at least 8,500 square feet but less than 9,000 square feet – 31%; For lots containing at least 9,000 square feet – 30%.
4.2.2 Table of Regulations for Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B, and General Residence Districts, for Buildings and Structures, on Lots Created by Deed or Plan, Endorsed or Recorded on or After January 9, 1986 and Not Including New Construction
Except as otherwise provided in Section 4.2.4 for public, semi-public and institutional uses, no building or structure that is not New Construction shall be constructed, altered, or relocated on any lot created by deed or plan endorsed or recorded on or after January 9, 1986 except in conformance with these regulations:
District
Min. Lot Area (sf)
Min. Frontage
(ft)
Front Setback
(ft)
Side Setback (ft)
Rear Setback (ft)
Max. Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)
Max. % Lot Coverage
Max. Stories
Max. Height (ft)
Rural Residence Conser- vation
43,560
150
50
25
25
NR
15%
2-1/2
35
Single Residence A
43,560
150
30
25
15
NR
NR
2-1/2
35
Single Residence B
10,000
80
20
(f)(g)
14
(a)(e)
10
.36-.38
(d)
25%-30%
(h)
2-1/2
35
(b)(c)
General Residence
10,000
80
20
(f)(g)
14
(a)(e)
10
NR
30%-35%
(i)
2-1/2
35
(b)(c)
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 129
(a) The minimum side yard setback is 14 feet, and a maximum of 32 linear feet of structure may be built at the minimum setback line, as measured parallel to the side lot line, provided that the remaining length of structure along the side yard setback must be offset an additional 2 feet. Notwithstanding the above, the minimum side yard setback requirement for all buildings and structures on any lot that contains less than 80 feet of frontage shall be 12 feet, and a maximum of 32 linear feet of structure may be built at the minimum setback distance, as measured parallel to the side lot line, provided that the remaining length of structure along the side yard setback must be offset an additional 2 feet. In no case shall a side wall extension extend more than 32 linear feet without a 2 foot offset.
(b) The maximum height at any point of any building or structure shall not exceed 41 feet above the lower of original or finished grade.
(c) If all or a portion of a basement wall is exposed for the full height of the wall, dormers in the one-half story above the basement wall shall not be permitted.
(d) The maximum floor area ratio shall be as follows: for lots containing less than 12,000 square feet – .38; and for lots containing 12,000 or more square feet – .36.
(e) Existing single family or two-family structures non-conforming for side yard setback and for which the building permit for the existing structure was issued prior to June 1, 2017, may be altered or structurally changed as-of-right to a 12.5 foot setback, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.4.7.2, provided any demolition of the existing structure does not exceed 50% of the building shell exclusive of demolition of a single story attached garage and further provided that the structure shall not be closer to the side lot line than the farthest extent of the existing structure. For the purposes of this footnote, the definition of “setback” in Section 1.3 of these By-Laws shall control.
(f) Attached garages shall have a minimum front yard setback of 25 feet. For corner lots the increased front yard setback of 25 feet is required along both frontage streets.
(g) Existing single family or two-family structures non-conforming for front yard garage setback and for which the building permit for the existing structure was issued prior to June 1, 2017, may be altered or structurally changed as-of-right to a 20-foot setback, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.4.7.2, provided any demolition of the existing structure does not exceed 50% of the building shell exclusive of demolition of a single story attached garage and further provided that the garage structure shall not be closer to the front lot line than the farthest extent of the existing garage structure. For the purposes of this footnote, the definition of “setback” in Section 1.3 of these By-Laws shall control.
(h) Buildings and structures created on any lot shall not result in lot coverage exceeding the following specified maximum percentages of the area of such lot: For lots containing less than 5,500 square feet – 30%; For lots containing at least 5,500 square feet but less than 6,000 square feet – 29%; For lots containing at least 6,000 square feet but less than 6,500 square feet – 28%; For lots containing at least 6,500 square feet but less than 7,000 square feet – 27%; For lots containing at least 7,000 square feet but less than 7,500 square feet – 26%; and For lots containing at least 7,500 square feet – 25%.
(i) Buildings and structures created on any lot shall not result in lot coverage exceeding the following specified maximum percentages of the area of such lot: For lots containing less than 7,000 square feet – 35%; For lots containing at least 7,000 square feet but less than 7,500
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 130
square feet – 34%; For lots containing at least 7,500 square feet but less than 8,000 square feet – 33%; For lots containing at least 8,000 square feet but less than 8,500 square feet – 32%; For lots containing at least 8,500 square feet but less than 9,000 square feet – 31%; For lots containing at least 9,000 square feet – 30%.
4.2.3 Table of Regulations for Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B, and General Residence Districts, for Buildings and Structures Created Through New Construction on any Lot
Except as otherwise provided in Section 4.2.4 for public, semi-public and institutional uses, no building or structure created through New Construction shall be constructed, altered, or relocated on any lot except in conformance with these regulations:
District
Min. Lot Area (sf)
Min. Frontage
(ft)
Front Setback
(ft)
Side Setback (ft)
Rear Setback (ft)
Max. Floor Area Ratio
(F.A.R.)
Max. % Lot Coverage
Max. Stories
Max. Height (ft)
Rural Residence Conser- vation
43,560
150
50
25
25
NR
15%
2-1/2
35
Single Residence A
43,560
150
30
25
15
NR
NR
2-1/2
35
Single Residence B
10,000
80
20
(h)(i)
14
(a)(j)
20
.36-.38
(g)
25%-30%
(b)
2-1/2
35
(e)(f)
General Residence
10,000
80
20
(h)(i)
14
(a)(j)
20
NR
30%-35%
(c)
2-1/2
35
(e)(f)
(a) The minimum side yard setback is 14 feet, and a maximum of 32 linear feet of structure may be built at the minimum setback line, as measured parallel to the side lot line, provided that the remaining length of structure along the side yard setback must be offset an additional 2 feet. Notwithstanding the above, the minimum side yard setback requirement for all buildings and structures on any lot that contains less than 80 feet of frontage shall be 12 feet, and a maximum of 32 linear feet of structure may be built at the minimum setback distance, as measured parallel to the side lot line,
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 131
provided that the remaining length of structure along the side yard setback must be offset an additional 2 feet. In no case shall a side wall extension extend more than 32 linear feet without a 2 foot offset.
(b) Buildings and structures created on any lot shall not result in lot coverage exceeding the following specified maximum percentages of the area of such lot: For lots containing less than 5,500 square feet – 30%; For lots containing at least 5,500 square feet but less than 6,000 square feet – 29%; For lots containing at least 6,000 square feet but less than 6,500 square feet – 28%; For lots containing at least 6,500 square feet but less than 7,000 square feet – 27%; For lots containing at least 7,000 square feet but less than 7,500 square feet – 26%; and For lots containing at least 7,500 square feet – 25%.
(c) Buildings and structures created on any lot shall not result in lot coverage exceeding the following specified maximum percentages of the area of such lot: For lots containing less than 7,000 square feet – 35%; For lots containing at least 7,000 square feet but less than 7,500 square feet – 34%; For lots containing at least 7,500 square feet but less than 8,000 square feet – 33%; For lots containing at least 8,000 square feet but less than 8,500 square feet – 32%; For lots containing at least 8,500 square feet but less than 9,000 square feet – 31%; For lots containing at least 9,000 square feet – 30%.
(e) The maximum height at any point of any building or structure shall not exceed 41 feet above the lower of original or finished grade.
(f) If all or a portion of a basement wall is exposed for the full height of the wall, dormers in the one-half story above the basement wall shall not be permitted.
(g) The maximum floor area ratio shall be as follows: for lots containing less than 12,000 square feet – .38; and for lots containing 12,000 or more square feet – .36.
(h) Attached garages shall have a minimum front yard setback of 25 feet. For corner lots the increased front yard setback of 25 feet is required along both frontage streets.
(i) Existing single or two-family structures non-conforming for front yard garage setback where demolition exceeds 50% of the building shell exclusive of demolition of a single story attached garage and for which the building permit for the existing structure was issued prior to June 1, 2017 may be altered, extended or structurally changed (but not reconstructed) to a front yard garage setback of 20 feet upon receipt of a special permit from the Board of Appeals under Section 7.5.2 of the Zoning By-Law provided: (1) the new construction meets all other requirements of the Zoning By-Law; (2) the garage structure is sited no closer to the front lot line than the farthest extent of the existing garage structure; and (3) the Board determines that such change, extension or alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming structure. Said special permit may be granted notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.4.7.2. For the purposes of this footnote, the definition of “setback” in Section 1.3 of these Bylaws shall control.
(j) Existing single or two-family structures non-conforming for side yard setback where demolition exceeds 50% of the building shell exclusive of demolition of a single story attached garage and for which the building permit for the existing structure was issued prior to June 1, 2017 may be altered, extended or structurally changed (but not reconstructed) to a side yard setback of 10 feet upon a lot created by deed or plan endorsed or recorded prior to January 9, 1986 and to a side yard setback of 12.5 feet upon a lot created by deed or plan endorsed or recorded on or after January 9, 1986 upon receipt of a special permit from the Board of Appeals under Section 7.5.2 of the Zoning By-Law
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 132
provided: (1) the new construction meets all other requirements of the Zoning By-Law; (2) the structure is sited no closer to the side lot line than the farthest extent of the existing structure; and (3) the Board determines that such change, extension or alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming structure. Said special permit may be granted notwithstanding the provisions of Section 1.4.7.2. For the purposes of this footnote, the definition of “setback” in Section 1.3 of these Bylaws shall control.
4.2.4 Table of Regulations for Public, Semi-Public and Institutional Uses in the Rural Residence Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B and General Residence Districts and for the Institutional District
No building or structure for public, semi-public or institutional use, as listed in Section 3.2 Schedule of Use Regulations, shall be constructed, altered, or relocated on any lot except in conformance with these regulations:
District
Min. Lot Area (sf)
Min. Frontage
(ft)
Front Setback
(ft)
Side Setback (ft)
Rear Setback (ft)
Max. Floor Area Ratio (F.A.R.)
Max. % Lot Coverage
Max. Stories
Max. Height (ft)
Rural Residence Conser- vation
43,560
150
50
25
25
.30
15%
2-1/2
(g)
35
Single Residence A
43,560
150
35
(a)
25
25
(d)
.30
15%
2-1/2
(g)
35
Single Residence B
10,000
80
25
(b)
25
(c)
25
(d)
.30
15%
2-1/2
(g)
35
General Residence
10,000
80
25
(b)
25
(c)
25
(d)
.30
(h)
15%
(i)
2-1/2
(g)
35
Institutional
43,560
150
30
25
(e)
15
NR
15%
2-1/2
(f)
35
(f)
The terms used in the Table of Regulations above are as defined in Section 1.3 of the By-Laws.
The symbol “NR” means no requirements.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 133
(a) The setback area shall be kept open and landscaped with grass or other plant materials; such area shall be unpaved except for walks and driveways. The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit reducing the minimum front yard setback required by this footnote to no less than thirty (30) feet. (See Section 4.2.14)
(b) The setback area shall be kept open and landscaped with grass or other plant materials; such area shall be unpaved except for walks and driveways. The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit reducing the minimum front yard setback required by this footnote to no less than twenty (20) feet. (See Section 4.2.14)
(c) The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit reducing the minimum side yard setback required by this footnote to no less than twenty (20) feet. (See Section 4.2.14)
(d) The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit reducing the minimum rear yard setback required by this footnote in a Single Residence A District to no less than fifteen (15) feet and the minimum rear yard setback required by this footnote in Single Residence B and General Residence Districts to no less than ten (10) feet. (See Section 4.2.14)
(e) Buildings or structures on lots created by deed or plan, endorsed or recorded before January 9, 1986, shall have a minimum side line setback of 15 feet in the Institutional Districts.
(f) Buildings and structures located in an Institutional District devoted to educational uses and uses accessory thereto and located at least 800 feet from any public way in the Town of Needham in existence as of September 1, 1998, shall have a maximum height in accordance with the following limitation:
Roof Type Average Height (feet) Maximum Height at any
single point (feet)
Flat Roof 63* 68*
Sloping Roof
Top of Roof 85 90
Wall, cornice or
eave line 63* 68*
Gabled endwalls 63* 68*
There shall be no limit on the number of stories of such buildings. The foregoing limitations are not intended to supersede any of the requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code.
*The Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit to allow the average height of a structure to increase as much as an additional seven (7) feet above the average height listed.
(g) See the definition of Half-story, under Story in the Definitions section.
(h) The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit increasing the maximum Floor Area Ratio required by this footnote up to 0.60 for a municipal building or structure on a lot containing an acre or more of area.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 134
(i) The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit increasing the maximum lot coverage required by this footnote up to twenty-five (25) percent for a municipal building or structure on a lot containing an acre or more of area.
4.2.5 Build Factor Formula
In order to limit the degree to which a lot may have an irregular shape, the following build factor formula shall be used:
Lot Perimeter Squared Actual Lot Area
----------------------------------- Divided By -----------------------------------
Actual Lot Area Required Lot Area
Lots recorded or endorsed after August 22, 1985 shall be subject to a maximum Build Factor of 20 in Single Residence B and General Residence Districts and 30 in Single Residence A and Institutional Districts. Lots recorded or endorsed prior to August 22, 1985 may not be modified such that the Build Factor of the modified lot exceeds 20 in SRB and General Residence Districts or 30 in SRA and Institutional Districts. Lots recorded or endorsed after February 16, 1995 shall be subject to a maximum Build Factor of 30 in a Rural Residence Conservation District. Lots recorded or endorsed prior to February 16, 1995 may not be modified such that the Build Factor of the modified lot exceeds 30 in a Rural Residence Conservation District.
4.2.6 Lot Area Calculation
No portion of a lot which is covered by a water body shall be counted in calculating the area of a lot for purposes of determining the respective minimum lot areas as listed in the Tables 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, and 4.2.4 above. Not more than a combined total of thirty (30) percent of: (a) land located in a Flood Plain District; (b) land area subject to the Wetlands Protection Act and the Inlands Wetlands Act, M.G.L., Ch. 131, S. 40 and 40A (but not including any area defined as a buffer area under said statutes); and (c) land subject to federal flood storage restrictions included within the Charles River Valley Storage Project shall be counted in calculating the area of a lot for purposes of determining the respective minimum lot areas in Single Residence A, Single Residence B, General Residence and Institutional Districts. The provisions of the second sentence of this paragraph (a) shall apply in Single Residence A, Single Residence B and General Residence Districts to any lot created after May 8, 1989.
Not more than a combined total of ten (10) percent of: (a) land located in a Flood Plain District; (b) land areas subject to the Wetlands Protection Act and the Inland Wetlands Act, M.G.L., Ch. 131, S. 40 and 40A (but not including any area defined as a buffer area under said statutes); and (c) land subject to federal flood storage restrictions included within
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 135
the Charles River Valley Storage Project shall be counted in calculating the area of a lot for purposes of determining the minimum lot area in a Rural Residence-Conservation District as listed in the Tables 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, and 4.2.4 above.
4.2.7 Special Regulations for Rural Residence – Conservation District
(a) Lot Coverage No building or structure, or addition to any building or structure, but not including accessory buildings or structures, shall be erected or placed on a lot which will result in the covering by buildings or structures of more than fifteen percent (15%) of the lot area in a Rural Residence-Conservation District.
(b) Vegetative Buffer In a Rural Residence-Conservation District, the first thirty-five (35) feet of the required minimum front setback of fifty (50) feet, as measured from Chestnut Street and from the designated Scenic Roads of South Street and Charles River Street, shall remain as a natural vegetative buffer not to be cut or cleared except for normal maintenance and vehicular access, including private driveways and subdivision roadways.”
4.2.8 Height Limitation Exceptions
The maximum height regulation in Section 4.2.4 shall not apply to schools and municipal buildings which may contain three (3) stories or may be as high as forty-five (45) feet. In the case of schools and other municipal buildings, structures erected on a building and not used for human occupancy, such as chimneys, heating-ventilating or air-conditioning equipment, solar panels, mechanical equipment, mechanical flues or exhausts, elevator housings or equipment, generators, roof access, stairway enclosures, skylights, and the like may exceed the maximum building height provided that no part of such structure or equipment shall project more than 15 feet above the maximum allowable building height and the total horizontal coverage of all of such structures or projections on the building does not exceed thirty-three percent (33%) of the total roof area of the building. Notwithstanding the above height limitations, cornices and parapets may exceed the maximum building height provided they do not extend more than 5 feet above the highest point of the roof. Further provided, subject to the 15-foot maximum height limitation cited above, solar panels shall also be allowed on rooftops of schools and other municipal buildings with no limitation on the roof area coverage provided such panels are set back from the edge of the roof a distance at least equal to the height of the panel.
Notwithstanding the foregoing paragraph, a municipal building or structure located on a lot in excess of twenty (20) acres created by deed or plan, endorsed or recorded before September 1, 2012, may be as high as fifty (50) feet, provided the building or structure contains no more than one story, is used primarily for storage purposes and is located at least two hundred (200) feet from all property lines. Any municipal building which ceases to be a municipal building, because of a change of use or ownership, may continue to be used, maintained and reconstructed so as to contain up to the number of stories and the height which existed at the time of the change to non-municipal use or ownership. Notwithstanding the above, nothing contained herein shall in anyway limit the
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 136
rights conferred under footnote (f) of Section 4.2.4 Table of Regulations for Public, Semi-Public and Institutional Uses in the Rural Residence Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B and General Residence Districts and for the Institutional District.
In the case of schools or other buildings devoted to educational purposes and located in an Institutional District, including dormitories and accessory buildings, projections above a roof for housing elevator machinery, chimneys, ventilators, and mechanical flues or exhausts will not be subject to the heights limitations in Section 4.2.4, footnote (f) or this Section 4.2.8. Such projections shall not occupy an aggregate area of the roof exceeding thirty-three percent (33%) of the total ground coverage of the building and no housing for elevator machinery or mechanical equipment (other than chimneys, ventilators and mechanical flues or exhausts), or the equipment itself, shall extend more than fifteen (15) feet above the main roof elevation. At no point shall any such projection exceed 90 feet above grade. The Board of Appeals shall have the authority to grant a Special Permit to permit a height of twenty-five (25) feet above the main elevation over an area of the roof not exceeding twenty percent (20%) of the total ground coverage of the building, to a maximum height at any point of ninety (90) feet above grade. The remaining thirteen percent (13%) of the area of the roof where such projections are allowed shall extend no more than fifteen feet above the main roof elevation.
The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit authorizing the construction of radio and television antennae and antennae towers provided they are accessory to the principal permitted use and do not exceed fifty-five (55) feet in height. Neither the provisions of the previous sentence nor the maximum height regulations contained in Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3 and 4.2.4 shall apply to radio and television antennae and antennae towers that are accessory to a lawful residential use and fifty-five (55) feet or less in height; the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit authorizing construction of radio and television antennae and antennae towers higher than fifty-five (55) feet, provided they are accessory to a lawful residential use.
Towers, steeples, spires or domes of religious or government buildings or educational buildings located in an Institutional District are not limited by the maximum height regulations contained in this Section or in Section 4.2.4.
4.2.9 Minimum Side and Rear Line Setbacks: Accessory Structures
No accessory building or structure, excepting fences, shall be constructed, altered or relocated so that any part thereof shall be less than ten (10) feet from any other building or structure or less than five (5) feet from the side or rear lines of the lot on which such building or structure is located. Notwithstanding the foregoing five (5) foot setback from the rear or side lines of the lot, any accessory building or structure which exceeds fifteen (15) feet in height must comply with the underlying district’s rear and/or side setback requirements. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an accessory pergola need not comply with the requirements of the preceding sentences but said pergola must comply with all dimensional setback requirements from abutting properties and from streets and ways, and said pergola shall not be constructed or placed in a position where it would prevent the use of a designated fire lane or reduce access to any building. For purposes of this paragraph, “pergola” means an open frame structure consisting of colonnades or posts with a
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 137
latticework roof designed to support climbing plants, either standing alone or attached to another building or structure. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an accessory building or structure associated with a pool use which is less than eleven (11) feet in height and has less than one-hundred (100) square feet of ground coverage need not comply with the foregoing ten (10) foot distance from any other building or structure requirement as said requirement pertains to the placement of the accessory building or structure from the edge of the pool, provided that such accessory building or structure is placed no less than eight (8) feet from the edge of the pool.
4.2.10 Flexible Development Consistent with the Subdivision Control Law
(a) General -- The intent of Section 4.2.10 is to facilitate sensitive use of Town resources through allowing flexibility in meeting the basic objectives of the intensity of use requirements of Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.2.5, 4.2.6, 4.2.7, 4.2.8 and 4.2.9. These provisions shall apply in all Single Residence, General Residence, Rural Residence Conservation, and Institutional Districts.
(b) Dimensional Requirements -- Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.2.5, 4.2.6, and 4.2.7, the Planning Board may by special permit and in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law authorize the division of a parcel into lots to be governed by the following alternative frontage and lot area regulations rather than those otherwise applicable, provided that the parcel being divided has an area of at least four (4) times the minimum lot area requirement in that district.
(1) Number of Lots. The number of building lots allowed on any parcel shall be the number of lots into which the parcel could be divided and built upon under the normally applicable dimensional and waste disposal regulations. That number may, at the owner’s option, be determined prior to application by the Building Inspector following consultation with the Planning Board, or by an alternative “conventional” plan certified to comply with normal applicable regulations by both a Registered Land Surveyor and a Professional Engineer. In addition, any number of non-building lots reserved for open space or recreation may be created.
(2) Lot Frontage. Except on existing streets, the minimum frontage for any building lot shall be 2/3 the normally applicable minimum lot frontage. If the building lot width at the building line exceeds 2/3 of the normally applicable minimum lot frontage, the frontage may be further reduced to 40 feet. The frontage for any building lots having frontage only on an existing street shall be not less than the normal frontage requirement.
(3) Lot Area. The area of any individual building lot created shall be at least 70% of the normally applicable minimum lot area requirement.
(4) Setback. A setback shall be provided along all boundaries of the development except along streets where the front setback requirements of Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.2.5, 4.2.6, and 4.2.7 shall apply. Within the setback, no structure shall be erected and
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 138
vision obscuring vegetation shall be preserved or planted. The depth of the setback when Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.2.5, 4.2.6, and 4.2.7 do not apply shall be 20 feet.
(c) Special Permit Consideration. A special permit for flexible development shall be granted only if the Planning Board determines the following:
(1) Such alternative development better serves By-Law purposes than would development under otherwise applicable requirements.
(2) Traffic circulation and safety would be improved through a reduction in length of streets or creation of fewer or better located or designed driveways and street egresses from the development onto existing streets.
(3) Visual intrusion would be reduced by preserving some visual buffering between proposed dwellings and previously existing streets.
(4) At least one of the following three amenities will be provided:
-- protecting natural features by reducing the volume of cut and fill for roads and construction sites or the area of vegetation displaced or disturbed, or the area of environmentally sensitive lands disturbed by construction, or
-- maintaining water quality within Aquifer Protection Districts by reducing the number of on-site disposal systems or the amount of impermeable surfaces within the development, or
-- serving recreation and conservation needs by reserving common land in a condition appropriate to meet those needs.
(d) Documentation. All lots created under the provisions of Section 4.2.10 Flexible Development shall be shown on a recorded plan, indicating that Section 4.2.10 applies, and that no additional building lots are to be created through future land division of such lots. A restriction enforceable by the Town shall be recorded at the Registry of Deeds ensuring both the Town and the developer that no additional building lots shall be created and that areas designated for open space or recreational use are to be retained in that use.
(e) Design Review. At the time of filing an application for Flexible Development, the applicant shall also file an application and materials for design review in accordance with the procedures described in Subsection 7.7.3 of Section 7.7 Design Review.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 139
4.2.11 Planned Residential Development (PRD)
4.2.11.1 Purpose
To provide an alternative at density levels established by this By-Law to conventional development patterns which foster innovative site planning based on the natural characteristics of the land; to encourage the preservation of significant open space for conservation and recreation; to facilitate the economic and efficient provision of public utilities and services; to promote aesthetic and other amenities; and to insure development which is harmonious and compatible to the surrounding neighborhoods.
4.2.11.2 Standards
(a) Minimum Tract Size – Planned Residential Development (PRD) shall be permitted on a tract of land in the Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A and Single Residence B Districts having an area not less than 10 times the minimum lot area of the zoning district within which it is located and shall have frontage of at least 50 feet on a way.
(b) Number of Dwelling Units – The number of dwelling units shall be determined by one of the two following methods:
(1) The Net Usable Land Area within the tract divided by the minimum lot area requirement for the zoning district in which the tract is located. Net Usable Land Area shall equal 85% of the gross tract area minus 100% of all water bodies minus 70% of land located in a Flood Plain District minus 70% of the land subject to M.G.L. Ch. 131, S.40 and 40A and to federal flood storage restrictions included within the Charles River Valley Storage project.
(2) Submission of a “conventional” subdivision plan certified to comply with normal applicable regulations by both a Registered Land Surveyor and a Professional Engineer. In this case the number of dwelling units shall equal the number of legal building lots created.
(c) Open Space – No less than 40% of the PRD tract shall be designated as open space and shall not be covered with buildings, roads, driveways, parking areas or service areas, yards, exclusive use areas, patios, and gardens for the residents. Open space shall be available and reasonably accessible to each dwelling unit. No more than 50% of the open space shall be wetland or other land subject to seasonal or periodic flooding unless a greater percentage is specifically authorized by the Planning Board. Land designated as open space shall have a shape, dimension, character, and location suitable to assure its use for park, recreation, conservation, or agricultural purposes by at least all the residents of the PRD.
Provisions shall be made for the open space to be owned:
(1) In common by the owners of all units in the PRD; or
(2) by a trust or association of the owners of all units in the PRD; or
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 140
(3) by the Town; or
(4) otherwise as may be authorized by the Planning Board.
In all cases a perpetual restriction running to or enforceable by the Town shall be recorded in respect to such open space land. Such restriction shall provide that the open space shall be retained in perpetuity for one or more of the following uses: conservation, agriculture, recreation or park. Such restrictions shall be in a form or substance approved by the Planning Board.
(d) Permitted Uses – Single-family detached and attached structures without regard to form of ownership provided no more than 50% of such structures shall be attached and accessory uses incidental to the principal uses.
(e) Structure Location – the location, size, and shape of any structures to be constructed shall be appropriate to the terrain in which they are located and shall not be detrimental to the neighborhood and shall not adversely affect the character of the neighborhood. Structures with attached dwelling units shall contain no more than four units.
(f) Height – The maximum permitted height of any structure in a PRD shall be 35 feet or 2-1/2 stories.
(g) Area, Frontage and Setback Requirements – There shall be a minimum lot area in the case of a subdivision or exclusive use area (an area located adjacent to a dwelling unit and reserved for its exclusive use) in all other cases of 10,000 square feet in the RRC and SRA Districts and 5,000 square feet in the SRB District. Each lot or exclusive use area shall have frontage of at least 50 feet on a paved way or driveway. No structure shall be within 30 feet of another structure other than in the case of attached dwelling units. No building shall be erected within 30 feet of a way on which the PRD tract has frontage or 20 feet from the boundary line of the PRD tract.
(h) Parking – There shall be an adequate arrangement and number of parking spaces in relation to the dwelling units constructed. No more than six (6) parking spaces shall be grouped together.
(i) Drainage and Sewage Disposal – The PRD shall have adequate methods of sewage disposal and drainage. Said methods shall be subject to approval by the Public Works Department and/or the Board of Health.
(j) Ways, Interior Drives, and Utilities – The construction of all ways, interior drives and utilities shall be in accordance with the standards specified in the Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules of the Planning Board and subject to the recommendations of the Public Works Department. In the event the applicant chooses not to subdivide the tract under the Subdivision Control Act, the Planning Board shall require nevertheless sufficient security to insure compliance with the installation of
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 141
Ways, Interior Drives, and Utilities. Upon the written request of the applicant, the Planning Board may waive or modify the requirements of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations where it is demonstrated that such waiver or modification is consistent with the purpose of this section.
(k) Circulation – The PRD shall provide for the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement on the site and for adequate location of driveways in relation to street traffic. Said circulation shall be reviewed by the Fire Department for access by safety vehicles.
(l) Prohibition of Future Development – No tract, lot, or exclusive use area for which a special permit is granted under this section shall be further subdivided and such notation shall be shown on the plan.
4.2.11.3 Procedure
(a) Pre-application Review – To promote better communication and to avoid misunderstanding, the applicant is encouraged, prior to the preparation of a formal application, to meet with the Planning Board and Planning Director for general discussion relative to the site, proposed PRD plan and other issues relative to the proposed project.
(b) Application – The applicant shall submit a completed application form and 7 copies; and a project narrative which shall describe the development concept including in tabular form the number of units, type, size (number of bedrooms, floor area), ground coverage, parking spaces and area, and total ground coverage. Additionally, accompanying the application shall be a filing fee and a set of original development plans and ten (10) copies consisting of:
(1) Site plans – meeting, to the extent possible, the requirements set forth for a Definitive Plan in the Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules of the Planning Board;
(2) Elevations;
(3) Typical floor plan;
(4) Detailed plans of all entrances to the PRD tract;
(5) Detailed plans for disposal of sanitary sewage;
(6) Landscape plan;
(7) Details of landscape treatment at boundaries of the PRD tract and banks or waterways;
(8) Proposed deed restrictions; and
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 142
(9) Additional information as required by the Planning Board.
At the same time application materials shall be submitted to the Design Review Board, along with an application for design review, in accordance with the procedures described in Subsection 7.7.3 of Section 7.7, Design Review.
(c) Referral – Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Board shall transmit a set of application materials to the Department of Public Works, Town Engineer, Fire Department, Board of Health (if on-site sewage disposal is proposed) and to any other Town agency as deemed appropriate. Within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of said application materials, each of the Town agencies named above shall review and recommend in writing to the Planning Board regarding the proposed PRD; failure of any such town agency to submit a written report with recommendation within said thirty-five (35) day period shall be deemed lack of opposition thereto.
A preliminary design review report from the Design Review Board, as described in Section 7.7, shall satisfy the above referral requirement, if submitted to the Planning Board within the 35-day period. In addition, the Design Review Board shall also submit a final design review report within seventy-five (75) days of the date of its having received an application for design review related to a Planned Residential Development.
(d) Planning Board Review – a special permit shall be issued by the Planning Board acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority under this Section only if the Planning Board finds that the PRD is in harmony with the purpose of this section and the Planning Board finds the PRD to be sufficiently advantageous to the town and to the residential district in which it is located. In issuing a special permit, the Planning Board may impose such conditions and safeguards as public safety, welfare and convenience may require. Other than the case of a subdivision, copies of all recorded instruments shall be filed with the Planning Board prior to the issuance of a building permit.
4.2.12 Residential Compound
(a) Purpose – To provide limited residential development within large tracts of land in a manner which minimizes Town maintenance, responsibility and cost, and simultaneously preserves the existing character of the Town.
(b) Standards – A group of not more than five single-family dwellings sharing common frontage and private access road may be permitted by Special Permit by the Planning Board in all single-family residential districts subject to the following provisions:
(1) Tract Frontage – A Residential Compound may be permitted on a single tract of land in one ownership, having a minimum frontage on a way of 150 feet in the RRC and SRA Districts and 80 feet in the SRB District.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 143
(2) Density – A Residential Compound shall contain at least two acres per dwelling unit in the RRC and SRA Districts and 20,000 square feet per dwelling unit in the SRB District. Land which, at the time of submission of an application under this section, is subject to a perpetual restriction of the type described in M.G.L. Ch. 184, S.31 or any restriction similar thereto, shall not be included in the minimum tract size.
(3) Dimensional Requirements – No structure shall be closer than 30 feet from any other structure or way and 20 feet from any tract boundary line. No building lot within the Residential Compound shall be reduced in size below the minimum lot area required for the district in which it is located.
(4) Access – Each building lot in the Residential Compound shall have adequate and legally enforceable rights of access to a way via a private street or driveway.
(5) Open Space – Any land within the Residential Compound, not designated as a building lot, private road or driveway shall be designated as permanent open space. Such land shall have a shape, dimension, character and location suitable for conservation, outdoor recreational facilities of a non-commercial nature, agricultural, preservation of scenic or historic structures, and structures accessory to any of the above uses (including swimming pools, tennis courts, stables, greenhouses). Provisions shall be made for the open space to be owned:
i. in common by owners of all units in the Residential Compound; or
ii. by a trust or association of the owners of all units in the Residential Compound; or
iii. by the Town; or
iv. by the Needham Conservation Commission; or
v. otherwise as may be authorized by the Planning Board.
In all cases a perpetual restriction running to or enforceable by the Town shall be recorded in respect to such open land. Such restriction shall provide that the Open Space shall be retained in perpetuity for one or more of the following uses: conservation, agriculture, recreation, or park. Such restriction shall be in a form or substance approved by the Planning Board.
(c) Limitation on Subdivision – No Residential Compound for which a special permit has been issued under this Section may be subdivided or further developed and a notation to this effect shall be shown on the plan.
(d) Other Restrictions – The approved plan of the Residential Compound shall contain statements indicating the following: that the land lies within an approved Residential Compound; that development of the land is permitted only in accordance with the land uses indicated thereon; that the town will not be requested to accept or maintain the private
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 144
access, drainage, open space or any other improvements within the Compound. Further, all deed restrictions with respect to ownership, use and maintenance of permanent open space shall be referenced on, and recorded with, the plan.
(e) Procedure for Approval – The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board a completed application form, a filing fee, and an original and 10 copies of development plans showing the following:
(1) Site Plans – meeting to the extent applicable the requirements set forth in a Definitive Plan in the Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules of the Planning Board and including proposed locations of all structures.
(2) Detailed plans of all entrances from the public street;
(3) Detailed plans of disposal of sanitary sewage;
(4) Landscape plan;
(5) Proposed deed restrictions;
(6) Additional information as required by the Planning Board.
(f) Referral – Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Board shall transmit a set of application materials to the Department of Public Works, Town Engineer, Fire Department, Board of Health (if on-site sewage disposal is proposed) and to any other Town agency as deemed appropriate. Within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of said application materials, each of the Town agencies named above shall review and recommend in writing to the Planning Board regarding the proposed Residential Compound; failure of any such agency to submit a written report with recommendations within said thirty-five (35) dy period shall be deemed lack of opposition thereto.
(g) Planning Board Review – A special permit shall be issued by the Planning Board acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority under this section only if the Planning Board shall find that the Residential Compound is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this section and that it is designed in such a manner to make it sufficiently advantageous to the town and to the residential district(s) in which the Residential Compound is located. If a special permit is granted, the Planning Board shall impose as a condition of approval that copies of all recorded instruments be filed with the Planning Board prior to the issuance of any building permit.
(h) Compliance with the Subdivision Control Law – The Planning Board approval of a special permit hereunder shall not substitute for compliance with the Subdivision Control Law nor oblige the Planning Board to approve a related Definitive Plan for subdivision, nor reduce any time periods for Board consideration under that Law. However, in order to facilitate processing, the Planning Board may, insofar as practical under law, adopt regulations establishing procedures for submission of a combined Special Permit
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 145
Application/Subdivision Plan which shall satisfy the Board’s regulations under the Subdivision Control Law. Except where the Residential Compound does not constitute a subdivision under the Subdivision Control Law, a Definitive Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board consistent with their Subdivision Regulations and in substantial conformity with the approved Development Plan.
4.2.13 Reductions in Dimensional Regulations by Special Permit
In Single Residence A, Single Residence B and General Residence Districts, the minimum front setback and the minimum side and rear line setback requirements for a building or structure devoted to a public, semi-public or institutional use, as listed in Section 3.2 Schedule of Use Regulations, may be reduced by special permit granted by the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 4.2.4. In acting upon such applications for such reductions, the Board shall consider the following, in addition to the criteria for special permits generally (Section 7.5.2):
(a) Whether, and by how much, building scale will exceed nearby structures,
(b) whether, and by how much, shadowing on abutting land or streets will be increased, or privacy will be diminished,
(c) whether any resulting building prominence is appropriate, in light of the functional or symbolic role of the structure,
(d) whether there are fire protection concerns created by the reduction,
(e) whether the requested reduction is necessary for the proposal to proceed, and
(f) what the community benefits are from the proposal, including consideration of taxes, employment, and service.
4.2.14 Screening for Public, Semi-Public and Institutional Uses
4.2.14.1 Transition Areas
Where a building or structure devoted to a public, semi-public or institutional use, as listed in Section 3.2 Schedule of Use Regulations, is to be placed within a Rural Residence-Conservation, Single Residence A, Single Residence B or General Residence District, a landscaped transition and screening area shall be provided along those segments of the lot lines necessary to screen the public, semi-public or institutional use from buildings located on abutting lots. The transition area shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet wide, as measured at its narrowest point, and shall be suitably landscaped as specified at Section 4.2.14.3. The transition area may be provided within the minimum yard required for a building.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 146
4.2.14.2 Use of Transition Areas
Only necessary driveways or interior drives shall be located across a required transition area. No building, structure, parking area, play area or interior street may be located in this transition area. A transition area may be used for passive recreation; it may contain pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails, provided they do not reduce the effectiveness of the transition area as a year-round visual screen. No other uses are permitted in a transition area.
4.2.14.3 Transition Area Standards and Requirements
The following standards shall apply to the installation and maintenance of all landscaping, transition and screening areas required by this section:
(a) Composition of Landscaping, Transition and Screening Areas – A landscaped transition and screening area shall consist of a landscaped strip and may included fences, walls or berms which shall serve to provide an effective year round visual screen at the time of installation.
(b) Height of Screening – Visual screening comprised of a mixed planting of deciduous and coniferous trees and shrubs and walls or fences shall have a minimum overall height of six feet at the time of installation.
(c) Type of Plant Materials – A variety of plant material shall be selected to provide an effective visual screen, to be maintained at a minimum height of six feet. Plantings shall be a mixture of deciduous and coniferous trees and shrubs for the screening to maintain its effectiveness throughout the winter months. Ground cover, grass, mulch or other equivalent landscape treatment, shall be provided in all landscaped transition and screening areas. Where existing vegetation is used as the required planting, no ground cover, grass, mulch or equivalent treatment shall be required, provided all man-made debris has been removed from within the transition area.
(d) Size of Plant Materials – All trees required by this section shall have a minimum caliper of three inches at the time of planting.
(e) Maintenance – The owner of the lot shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping materials installed in accordance with this section. All plant material shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, replaced when necessary and kept free of debris. After the initial planting, all plant materials not surviving after the first winter and through the following growing season shall be replaced in kind.
4.2.14.4 Exceptions, Special Permits
Where, due to the size, shape or topography of a lot, the strict provisions of this section would reduce the usable area of a lot so as to preclude a reasonable use of the lot, the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit to modify the transition area requirements where the side of a building, a barrier and/or the land between the building and lot line has been specifically designed, through a
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 147
combination of architectural and landscaping techniques, to minimize potential adverse impacts on abutting lots. The application for a special permit must demonstrate, in detail, the problems imposed by these requirements and provide an effective alternative. Any modification of the required transition areas may be made subject to such conditions as are determined by the Board of Appeals to assure adequate screening and buffering between particular uses. In determining what, if any conditions are necessary, the Board of Appeals shall consider:
(a) the proximity to a residential development;
(b) the topography of the site and of adjacent property;
(c) the nature of the use and/or activity on the site;
(d) the land use of adjacent property;
(e) the width and use of all abutting public rights-of-way; and
(f) the potential for impact of any nuisance activities such as noise, light or glare.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 148
4.3 Dimensional Regulations for Apartment Districts
4.3.1 Table of Regulations
No apartment or multi-family building or group of buildings shall be constructed, altered or relocated on any lot except in conformance with these regulations:
Min. Min. Max. Max. Min. Max.
Lot Area Frontage Dwelling Units FAR Setbacks (ft) Height*
(sf) (ft) (Per Acre)** Front/Side/Rear (ft)
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-1 20,000 120 18 0.5 25/20/20 3 Stories–40
A-2 43,560 150 8 0.3 40/40/40 3 Stories–40
A-3 43,560 150 4 0.3 40/40/40 2-1/2 Stories–35
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* No more than three (3) floors to be used for human occupancy. See height limitation exceptions in Section 4.7.2. Provided further, however, in the Apartment-2 Zoning District, there shall be a maximum of 4 stories, a maximum height of 50 feet, and four (4) floors may be used for human occupancy, if (i) the structure or portion of the structure that is four stories and permitted to be used for human occupancy is utilized as a convalescent or nursing home and uses that are supportive and/or accessory to such convalescent or nursing home, and (ii) the height of the structure that exceeds 40 feet is utilized as a convalescent or nursing home and supportive and/or accessory uses thereto provided further that the maximum square footage of the structure or structures benefitting from the provisions of this section shall be limited to 110,000 square feet. If a structure contains two or more uses, then only that portion of the structure that is utilized as a convalescent or nursing home, and supportive and/or accessory uses thereto, can reach a maximum height of 50 feet.
** The total area used in calculating density shall exclude 100% of all water bodies; 70% of land located in a Flood Plain District; and 70% of land subject to M.G.L., Ch. 131, S. 40 and S. 40A, and to federal flood storage restrictions included within the Charles River Valley Storage Project.
4.3.2 Driveway Openings
(a) In that portion of a lot between an apartment house or houses and the exterior line of any way upon which the lot abuts, there may be opened not more than two (2) driveway openings onto each such way. Said driveway openings shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width and shall not be less than 150 feet from another such opening or within 50 feet of each other if the driveway openings do not exceed fifteen (15) feet in width. In no event shall a driveway opening be within fifty (50) feet from the sideline of an intersecting way. When there are
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 149
two (2) driveways of varying widths, the required distance between them will be governed by the driveway with the greatest width.
(b) In order to preserve the residential character of the Town, an additional driveway opening may be provided if the following conditions are met:
(1) The lot area shall have a minimum of two acres:
(2) Such additional openings shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in width, with the distance between to be recommended by the Planning Board through its Site Plan Review, as per Section 7.4 of this By-Law;
(3) Such additional openings shall not serve more than four (4) parking spaces, including garages;
(4) The total number of openings on any given way shall not exceed the quotient of the total lot frontage on such way divided by 1-3/4 of the required lot frontage in that density zone.
4.3.3 Open Space
Except for driveways and walks, the front setback area shall be kept open and in lawn or landscaped, unparked on and unbuilt upon. The area between a lot line and a line five (5) feet from and parallel thereto shall be kept open and in lawn or landscape, unparked on and unbuilt upon.
4.3.4 Building Location
No part of a building or structure shall be located less than twenty (20) feet from any part of any other building or structure on the same lot, provided, however, that (a) any apartment house or other building used for dwelling purposes and permitted in that apartment district may be connected by a covered walkway, corridor, or breeze way to (i) any other apartment house or other such building on the same lot or (ii) any garage on the same lot permitted as an accessory use to the building to which it is so connected, and (b) at least seventy-five (75) percent of the perimeter of each building so connected to another building be accessible.
4.3.5 Setbacks for Other Uses
Front, side, and rear line setbacks for any permitted building or structure, other than an apartment house (or a structure accessory thereto), shall be the same as required in Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3, 4.2.4, 4.2.5, 4.2.6, 4.2.7 and 4.7.1 and 4.7.3.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 150
4.4 Dimensional Requirements for Commercial Districts
The following regulations shall apply to Business, Chestnut Street Business, Center Business, Avery Square Business, Hillside Avenue Business, and Neighborhood Business districts.
4.4.1 Minimum Lot Area and Frontage
Minimum Lot Area Minimum Frontage
10,000 Sq. Ft. 80 Feet
4.4.2 Maximum Building Bulk
(a) In a Business District, no building or structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or arranged so that it covers more than the percentage of the total lot area as specified in Table 1. No lot or building or structure thereon shall be changed in size as to violate these provisions.
TABLE 1
USES
LOT TYPE
1
Story
2
Story
3
Story
Auditorium,
)
Theaters,
)
Bowling Alleys,
)
Interior
25%
N/A
N/A
Skating Rinks,
)
Corner
35%
N/A
N/A
Places of Assembly
)
Billiard Rooms,
)
Private Clubs,
)
Restaurants and
)
Interior
40%
25%
25%
Other Food
)
Corner
50%
35%
35%
Establishments
)
Funeral Parlors
)
Other Uses
)
Permitted in Business
)
Interior
40%
35%
25%
Districts
)
Corner
50%
45%
35%
N/A – not applicable
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 151
(b) Buildings and structures which are located on property in the Center Business District are not limited to the maximum lot coverage requirements of this Section 4.4.2 as specified in Table 1, but shall have a maximum floor area ratio of 1.0 or the floor area ratio in existence on January 1, 1990, whichever is greater. (See also Section 4.4.5, third paragraph, second sentence.) Notwithstanding the foregoing to the contrary and subject to all other requirements of the district, the Planning Board acting as a special permit granting authority may issue a special permit in the Center Business District that exempts the floor area of an underground parking garage and the floor area of the underground portion of a building devoted in whole or in part to the parking of automobiles from being counted as floor area for purposes of determining maximum floor area ratio.
(c) Buildings and structures which are located on property in the Chestnut Street Business District are not limited to the maximum lot coverage requirements of this Section 4.4.2 as specified in Table 1, but shall have a maximum floor area ratio of 0.7. Notwithstanding the foregoing to the contrary and subject to all other requirements of the district, the Planning Board acting as a special permit granting authority may issue a special permit in the Chestnut Street Business District that exempts the floor area of an underground parking garage and the floor area of the underground portion of a building devoted in whole or in part to the parking of automobiles from being counted as floor area for purposes of determining maximum floor area ratio.
(d) Buildings and structures which are located on property in the Neighborhood Business District are not limited to the maximum lot coverage requirements of this Section 4.4.2 as specified in Table 1, but shall have a maximum floor area ratio of 0.5.
(e) In other Commercial Districts (ASB, HAB) there is no limitation on lot coverage, but buildings shall not be constructed, reconstructed, extended, enlarged or arranged so that the following floor area ratios are exceeded. The limits for mixed uses on the same premises shall be interpolated between the limits below in proportion to their floor areas.
(1) For eating establishments, or any use providing service to patrons while in autos, or any use having gas pumps the maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.35.
(2) For all other uses in these districts the maximum floor area ratio shall be 0.7.
Notwithstanding the foregoing to the contrary and subject to all other requirements of the district, the Planning Board acting as a special permit granting authority may issue a special permit in the Avery Square Business District and Hillside Avenue Business District that exempts the floor area of an underground parking garage and the floor area of the underground portion of a building devoted in whole or in part to the parking of automobiles from being counted as floor area for purposes of determining maximum floor area ratio.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 152
4.4.3 Height Limitation
In a Business District, the limit of height of a building or structure shall be three (3) stories not to exceed forty (40) feet, provided that in no event shall any building contain more than three floors used for occupancy; in the Center Business District, the limit of height of a building or structure shall be two and one-half (2 ½) stories not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet, provided that in no event shall any building contain more than two floors used for non-residential occupancy other than storage, residential occupancy being permitted on the second floor and in the half-story directly above the second floor consistent with the use and density requirements of Section 3.2.2. Notwithstanding the foregoing story, height and occupancy limitations, and subject to all other requirements of the district, the Planning Board acting as a special permit granting authority may issue a special permit in the Center Business District to permit a municipal building of 3 stories, to permit an increase in the height of a municipal building to a height not to exceed fifty (50) feet and to permit four (4) floors of a municipal building to be used for non-residential occupancy. Such a special permit may be granted only after it is demonstrated by the applicant that: (i) the proposed increased building height and number of stories will not create a significant detrimental impact on existing buildings and uses in the vicinity; and (ii) the proposed building and its occupancy contributes to, and does not detract from, a pedestrian-friendly streetscape.
Notwithstanding the above, no building or structure which is located on property in the Avery Square Business, Hillside Avenue Business, or Neighborhood Business districts shall exceed two and one-half (2 ½) stories, including ground level covered or enclosed parking, no more than two (2) stories of which shall be occupied except for storage, nor shall the building or structure exceed a total height of thirty-five (35) feet.
Notwithstanding the above, in the Chestnut Street Business District, the limit of height of a building or structure shall be two and one-half (2 ½) stories not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet, including ground level covered or enclosed parking, provided that in no event shall any building contain more than two floors used for non-residential occupancy other than storage, residential occupancy being permitted on the second floor and in the half-story directly above the second floor consistent with the use and density requirements of Section 3.2.2.
4.4.4 Front Setback
In a Business District, there shall be a minimum front setback of ten (10) feet for all lots zoned in a business district prior to April 14, 1952 and of twenty (20) feet for all lots changed to a business district thereafter. The setback area shall be kept open and landscaped with grass or other plant materials; such area shall be unpaved except for walks and driveways, as defined in Section 4.4.5. Regulations relative to parking setbacks are governed by Section 5.1.
On both sides of Chestnut Street in the Chestnut Street Business District, there shall be a front setback of twenty (20) feet for all buildings. The landscaping treatment for the setback area shall be consistent with the Chestnut Street Landscape Design Recommendations (April 1988) on file in the office of the Planning Board. No parking shall be allowed in this setback area. Parking shall be on the side or in the back of the building.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 153
In the Center Business District, there shall be a front setback of three (3) feet or a setback consistent with the average of the setbacks of the two adjacent buildings, whichever is smaller.
In the Avery Square Business District, there shall be a front setback of not less than ten (10) feet, or a setback consistent with the setbacks for principal buildings existing on the premises as of the effective date of this provision, or the average of the setbacks of buildings on adjoining lots, whichever is less restrictive. Principal buildings in the Avery Square Business District shall have a front setback of not more than fifteen (15) feet on Highland Avenue, if having frontage upon it. In the Avery Square Business District, the setback, if any, shall be kept open and landscaped with grass or other plant materials and unpaved except for walks and driveways, as defined in Section 4.4.5.
In the Hillside Avenue Business District, there shall be a minimum front setback of twenty (20) feet. The setback shall be kept open and landscaped with grass or other plant materials and unpaved except for walks and driveways, as defined in Section 4.4.5.
In the Neighborhood Business District, there shall be a front setback of not less than twenty (20) feet, or a setback consistent with the setbacks for principal buildings existing on the premises as of the effective date of this provision, or the average of the setbacks of buildings on adjoining lots, whichever is less restrictive. The setback, if any, shall be kept open and landscaped with grass or other plant materials and unpaved except for walks and driveways, as defined in Section 4.4.5.
4.4.5 Driveway Openings
In the Business, Chestnut Street Business, Avery Square Business, Hillside Avenue Business, and Neighborhood Business districts, the following regulations shall apply. In that portion of a lot contained within the required front setback, there may be constructed not more than two (2) driveways for every one hundred fifty (150) feet or less of frontage on each way. Driveways shall be located so as to minimize conflict with traffic on streets and where good visibility and sight distances are available to observe approaching pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The width of a driveway for one-way traffic shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and a maximum of eighteen (18) feet, as measured at its narrowest point. The width of a driveway for two-way traffic shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet and a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet, as measured at its narrowest point.
In the Center Business District, where access to the rear of a parcel is available from a public way, private way, common driveway, alley way or parking area, no driveway requiring the crossing of a public sidewalk or that requires a new curb cut on Chestnut Street, Highland Avenue, Great Plain Avenue or Chapel Street shall be allowed. This restriction shall not apply where the new curb cut provides a single driveway opening for two or more properties and constitutes merely the widening of an existing curb cut that already services one of the properties.
In the Center Business District, where access to the rear of a parcel is not available as described above, vehicular access for parking and loading areas shall be from shared or common access driveways, rather than from individual driveways at each parcel. In the Center Business District, the Planning Board acting as a special permit granting authority may issue a Special Permit that increases
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 154
the maximum floor area ratio of a specified parcel to 1.2, where the use of a shared access or driveway eliminates the need for providing an individual driveway on that parcel.
In that portion of a lot contained within the required front setback, there may be constructed not more than one (1) driveway for every one hundred (100) feet or less of frontage on each way in the Center Business District. Driveways shall be located so as to minimize conflict with traffic on streets and where good visibility and sight distances are available to observe approaching pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Driveways shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from the property line at the nearest street intersection in the Center Business District. The width of a driveway for one-way traffic shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and a maximum of eighteen (18) feet, except if the driveway opening services two or more properties in which case said driveway opening shall be a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet, all as measured at its narrowest point. A Special Permit granted by the Planning Board shall be required for one-way driveways over twelve (12) feet in width in the Center Business District. The width of a driveway for two-way traffic shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet and a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet, as measured at its narrowest point.
4.4.6 Enclosed Parking
Whenever off-street parking is provided underground and/or within a building itself, the maximum area coverage of the building may be increased up to the limits of the required setbacks as provided herein. The lot coverage of the building may be increased up to 2½% points above the maximum allowed percentage by one square foot of parking space (excluding driveways and aisles) that is underground and/or within the building itself.
Parking which is under a building or partially underground shall, except for driveways, be separated from the street line by building space occupied by the principal use, not by parking.
In the Center Business District, enclosed parking shall be entirely below the grade of adjoining streets measured at their respective center lines. Access to enclosed parking shall be from the rear of the building. If provided, enclosed parking shall not be visible from the street. The placement of parking underground shall not raise the first non-parking floor of a structure above grade. Municipal parking facilities in the Center Business District shall be exempt from this provision.
4.4.7 Business Use in Other Districts
Whenever a business use as listed in Section 3.2. Schedule of Use Regulations is to be located or expanded in other than a business district (with the exception of the Industrial-1 District), whether permitted by a Board of Appeals Special Permit or variance or otherwise, the percentage area requirements specified in Table 1 in Section 4.4.2 shall be applicable, unless a variance has also been granted from the provisions of this Section.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 155
4.4.8 Side and Rear Setbacks Adjoining Residential Districts
4.4.8.1 Business District
When an area changed to a Business District after April 15, 1952 adjoins a residential district, no building or structure for business use shall be placed or constructed within fifty (50) feet of the residential district boundary, and within said strip, which shall be suitably landscaped, there shall be no accessory parking or storage, except that the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for fences, off-street parking or loading, or service drives.
4.4.8.2 Chestnut Street Business District
Where a lot in a Chestnut Street Business District adjoins a residential district, no building or structure for business use shall be placed or constructed within fifty (50) feet of the residential district boundary, and within said strip, the twenty-five (25) feet closest to the district boundary shall be suitably landscaped per specifications outlined below, and there shall be no accessory use. The remaining twenty-five (25) feet may be used for an accessory use not including a building or structure. Where a lot in the Chestnut Street Business District is adjacent to the MBTA commuter railroad right-of-way, the 50-foot buffer requirement shall not apply; however, adjacent to said right-of-way there shall be a 10-foot buffer which shall be suitably landscaped per the specifications outlined below and which shall not be used for any purpose.
4.4.8.3 Center Business District
Where a lot in a Center Business District adjoins a residential district, no building or structure for business use shall be placed or constructed within fifty (50) feet of the residential district boundary, and within said strip, the twenty-five (25) feet closest to the district boundary shall be suitably landscaped per specifications outlined below, and there shall be no accessory use. The remaining twenty-five (25) feet may be used for an accessory use not including a building or structure.
4.4.8.4 Other Business Districts
In an Avery Square Business, Hillside Avenue Business, or Neighborhood Business District no building or structure for a use not allowed in a residential district shall be placed within fifty (50) feet of a residential district boundary, and the ten feet closest to such boundary shall be suitably landscaped as specified at Section 4.4.8.5. The remainder of the setback may be used for an accessory use not including a building or structure.
4.4.8.5 Landscaping Specifications
Where “suitable landscaping” is called for in paragraphs 4.4.8.2, 4.4.8.3, or 4.4.8.4, the following shall be complied with:
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 156
(a) Materials – plant materials characterized by dense growth which will form an effective year-round screen shall be planted, or a fence or wall shall be constructed, to form the screen. Where a grill or open-work fence or wall is used it shall be suitable in appearance and materials. Screening may consist of both natural and man-made materials. To the extent practicable, existing trees shall be retained and used to satisfy the provisions of this section.
(b) Height – screening shall be at least ten (10) feet in height when planted. Height shall be measured from the finished grade.
(c) Maintenance – all required plant materials shall be maintained by the owner in a healthy condition and whenever necessary replaced with new plant materials to insure continued compliance with screening requirements. All required fences and walls shall be permanently maintained by the owner in good repair and presentable appearance and whenever necessary they shall be repaired or replaced.
(d) Lighting -- all artificial lighting used to illuminate a parking or storage area, maneuvering space or driveway shall be arranged and shielded so as to prevent direct glare from the light source into any public street or private way or onto adjacent property
4.4.9 Building Entrances in the Chestnut Street Business, Avery Square Business, Hillside Avenue Business, and Neighborhood Business Districts
First-floor businesses shall have individual entrances accessed from the exterior of the building, except by Special Permit to be granted by the Planning Board in cases where such requirements would restrict redevelopment of an existing building.
Building entrances providing access to first and second-floor space shall be available from one or more streets on which the building fronts. The primary building entrance must be from Chestnut Street, Highland Avenue, Hillside Avenue, Broadmeadow Road, Great Plain Avenue, Central Avenue, Reservoir Street, or South Street unless the premises do not have frontage on one of those streets, or unless lot configuration makes it impractical to place all individual entrances on those streets.
4.4.10 Building Entrances in the Center Business District
First-floor businesses shall have individual entrances accessed from the exterior of the building, except by Special Permit to be granted by the Planning Board in cases where such requirements would restrict redevelopment of an existing building.
Building entrances providing access to first and second-floor space shall be available from one or more streets on which the building fronts and, if the building fronts on Chestnut Street, Highland Avenue, Great Plain Avenue or Chapel Street, the primary building entrances must be located on those streets.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 157
4.4.11
Driveways for the purpose of providing drive-through customer service shall not be allowed in the Center Business District.
4.5 Dimensional Regulations for Highland Commercial-128
Minimum Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Minimum
Lot Frontage
(Ft.)
Front Setback (Ft.)
Side Setbacks
(Ft.)
(1) (6)
Rear Setback
(Ft.)
(1)(6)
Maximum
Height
(Ft.)
(3)
Maximum
Lot Coverage
(2) (7)
Floor
Area Ratio
(4) (5)
15,000
100
5
10
10
54
80%
0.30
(1) No side or rear setback required for shared parking structures between properties, but only on one side of each lot, leaving the other side- or rear yards open to provide access to the interior of the lot.
(2) A minimum of 10% of total lot area must be open space. The open space area shall be landscaped and may not be covered with buildings or structures of any kind, access streets, ways, parking areas, driveways, aisles, walkways, or other constructed approaches or service areas.
(3) No buildings shall exceed a height of 54 feet, with one exception. Buildings within 350 feet of Route 128 may reach a height of 68 feet. Provided, however, that no building shall exceed 41 feet in height unless it is more than 150 feet from a General Residence zoning district boundary. Structures erected on a building and not used for human occupancy, such as chimneys, heating-ventilating or air-conditioning equipment, solar or photovoltaic panels, elevator housings, skylights, cupolas, spires and the like may exceed the maximum building height provided that no part of such structure shall project more than 15 feet above the maximum allowable building height, the total horizontal coverage of all of such structures on the building does not exceed 25 percent, and all of such structures are set back from the roof edge by a distance no less than their height. The Planning Board may require screening for such structures as it deems necessary. Notwithstanding the above height limitations, cornices and parapets may exceed the maximum building height provided they do not extend more than 5 feet above the highest point of the roof.
(4) A floor area ratio up to 1.5 may be permitted subject to a special permit from the Planning Board. See Section 6.8.
(5) The calculation of floor area in determining floor area ratio shall not include parking areas or structures.
(6) A 50-foot setback shall be required from a General Residence zoning district line. However, the Planning Board may grant a special permit to reduce said setback, but not to less than 20 feet.
(7) The provisions of Section 4.4.7 of this bylaw shall not be applicable to the Highland Commercial-128 district.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 158
4.5.1 Supplemental Dimensional Regulations
(1) Parking structures must have an active ground floor use, such as retail, office, institutional, or display, on sides facing a public way. This requirement may be waived by the Planning Board if the developer can provide a suitable alternative that enhances pedestrian or open space use of the site. Parking structures must be located at least 20 feet from adjacent buildings, but may be attached to the building they are serving if all fire and safety regulations can be met.
(2) All surface parking shall be located to the side or rear of the building.
(3) First-floor businesses shall have individual entrances accessed from the exterior of the building, except by special permit to be granted by the Planning Board in cases where such requirements would restrict redevelopment of an existing building.
Building entrances providing access to first and upper level floor space shall be available from one or more of the streets on which the building fronts. The primary building entrance must be from Highland Avenue, unless the premises do not have frontage on Highland Avenue, or unless lot configuration makes it impractical to place all individual entrances on that street.
(4) Maximum uninterrupted facade length shall be 300 feet; if within 350 feet of a General Residence zoning district or river the uninterrupted facade length may not exceed 200 feet.
4.5.2 Floor Area Ratio, Incentives
In the Highland Commercial-128 District the maximum floor to area ratio (FAR) permitted by right shall be 0.3. However, for projects providing new roadways that are deemed by the Planning Board to be consistent with the Goals of the District Plan, a developer shall be allowed two additional square feet of gross floor area by right for every square foot of land used for roadway right of way purposes, up to a maximum of 15,000 additional square feet. Any additional roadway areas provided by the developer shall be deemed as part of total lot area for FAR calculation purposes. Said areas shall also be considered as impervious surfaces for the purpose of calculating maximum lot coverage.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 159
4.6 Dimensional Regulations for Industrial Districts
4.6.1 Basic Requirements
District Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Frontage Height Limitation
Industrial 10,000 SF 80 ft 3 stories
(40 ft.)
4.6.2 Front and Side Setbacks
There shall be a minimum front setback of ten (10) feet for all lots zoned to a manufacturing district prior to April 15, 1952 and of twenty (20) feet for all other lots. (See Section 4.6.3 for further restrictions.)
4.6.3 Maximum Lot Coverage
Buildings or structures on any lot in an Industrial District devoted to a manufacturing use as listed in Section 3.2. Schedule of Use Regulations shall not cover more than sixty (60) percent of the lot area, if it is a corner lot, nor fifty (50) percent of the lot area if it is any other lot. No lot area on which there exists any building or structure shall be so reduced in size as to increase the covered portions thereof in the aggregate above the percentages respectively required.
4.6.4 Height Limitation
The limit of height of a building or structure shall be three (3) stories not to exceed forty (40) feet, provided that in no event shall any building contain more than three (3) floors used for occupancy.
4.6.5 Side and Rear Setbacks Adjoining Residential Districts
Where an area changed to a manufacturing or industrial district after April 15, 1955 adjoins a residential district, no building or structure for a nonresidential use shall be placed or constructed within fifty (50) feet of the residential district boundary, and within said strip, which shall be suitably landscaped, there shall be no accessory use including parking or storage, except that the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for fences, off-street parking or loading, or service drives.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 160
4.6.6 Driveway Openings
In that portion of a lot contained within the required front setback, there may be constructed not more than two (2) driveways for every one hundred fifty (150) feet or less of frontage on each way. Driveways shall be located so as to minimize conflict with traffic on streets and where good visibility and sight distances are available to observe approaching pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The width of a driveway for one-way traffic shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and a maximum of eighteen (18) feet, as measured at its narrowest point. The width of a driveway for two-way traffic shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet, and a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet, as measured at its narrowest point. These maximum widths may be increased in situations where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of both the Building Inspector and Town Engineer that vehicles greater than 30 feet in length will be used to access or egress the premises.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 161
4.7 Special Conditions
4.7.1 Specific Front Setbacks
Notwithstanding the front setback provisions herein, in the following locations the front setbacks indicated below shall apply:
(a) On the northwesterly side of Highland Avenue between Cross Street and Arbor Street, there shall be a twenty (20) foot building setback line;
(b) On the easterly side of Gould Street from Highland Avenue northerly to land of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad Company, there shall be a fifty (50) foot building setback line;
(c) On the northerly side of Highland Avenue from Gould Street northeasterly to the property of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, there shall be a fifty (50) foot building setback line.
4.7.2 Height Limitation Exceptions in Business, Apartment, Industrial, and Industrial-1 Districts.
In Business, Industrial, and Industrial-1 Districts the limitation of height in feet in Section 4.4.3 and 4.6.4 shall not apply to towers, steeples, spires or domes, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, tanks, bulkheads, water tanks or scenery lofts which shall be at every point fifty (50) feet from the center line of any street and shall not cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the building upon which each is erected. No radio or television antenna or antennae tower shall exceed eighty (80) feet in height except that the Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit in each instance for a height greater than eighty (80) feet.
In Apartment districts the limitation of height in feet in Section 4.3.1 shall not apply to the structures enumerated herein except that the height shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet.
4.7.3 Minimum Side Line Setbacks for a Dwelling or Institutional Building in Certain Districts.
No part of any single or two-family dwelling or institutional building hereafter erected in an Apartment, Business, or Industrial District on a lot having a frontage of one hundred (100) feet or more shall be placed or constructed within fifteen (15) feet of the side lines of said lot. No part of any such dwelling or institutional building hereafter erected in an Apartment, Business, or Industrial District on a lot having a frontage of less than one hundred (100) feet shall be placed or constructed within ten (10) feet of the side lines of said lot.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 162
4.7.4 Change in Dimensional Regulations by Special Permit
In Single Residence A, Single Residence B, General Residence Districts, the minimum front setback and the minimum side and rear line setback requirements may be reduced by not more than 10 percent, or the maximum lot coverage allowed may be increased by not more than 10 percent over the square footage allowed, provided that the increase in the area of lot covered may not exceed 150 square feet, by special permit granted by the Board of Appeals where the Board finds that the special permit may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent and purpose of this By-Law and subject to the provisions of Section 7.5.2.
This Section 4.7.4 shall apply only to buildings and structures that have been constructed pursuant to a building permit issued by the Building Inspector. The purpose of this Section is to allow relief only in those unusual cases where excusable neglect or inadvertence have resulted in the construction of portions of buildings or structures in required setback areas, or in excess of maximum lot coverage requirements.
4.7.5 Historic Preservation Dimensional Special Permit
4.7.5.1 Purpose
The purpose of this by-law is to encourage the preservation and restoration of historic architectural features on existing historic buildings and structures in the community, by modifying certain dimensional standards that might be an impediment to such preservation and restoration efforts.
4.7.5.2 Applicability
Modification of dimension standards per a Historic Preservation Dimensional Special Permit shall be allowable in all zoning districts.
4.7.5.3 Historic Eligibility
For purposes of a Historic Preservation Dimensional Special Permit, the building or structure must be listed on one of the following:
(a) The National Register of Historic Places;
(b) The State (Commonwealth of Massachusetts) Register of Historic Places;
(c) Inventory of Historic Assets of the Commonwealth for the Town of Needham, or designated for inclusion in such inventory, including those buildings listed for which complete surveys may be pending; and
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 163
(d) Pending nominations in good standing to the National or State Register.
4.7.5.4 Special Permit
After making the findings required by Section 4.7.5.5 below, the Board of Appeals may, by special permit waive the front, side, and rear setbacks for the zoning district, by relaxing each by up to a maximum of 40%, as necessary.
4.7.5.5 Findings Required
In order to grant a special permit, the Board of Appeals shall find:
(a) That the purpose of the permit is for the preservation and/or restoration of a historic architectural feature on an existing building and/or structure that is eligible under Section 4.7.5.3 above;
(b) That the proposed renovation, repair, or addition, to the maximum extent feasible, preserves and/or restores the historical architectural features of the building, or structure;
(c) That such modification of a dimensional requirement is required to enable the preservation and/or restoration of the historical architectural features of the building or structure and that failure to grant the special permit is likely to result in construction or continuation of an inappropriate physical modification, or the destruction or deterioration of the existing historical architectural features;
(d) That the proposed renovation, repair, or addition has been determined by vote of the Needham Historical Commission to be a historically accurate architectural restoration;
(e) That the building or structure will remain on the site on which it was originally constructed; and
(f) That the proposed use will not generate negative impacts to the surrounding area or zoning district or that any negative impacts generated may be feasibly mitigated.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 164
4.8 Dimensional Regulations for NEBC
Minimum Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Minimum
Lot Frontage
(Ft.)
Front Setback (Ft.)
(4) (5)
Side Setbacks
(Ft.)
(3) (5)
Rear Setback
(Ft.)
(3)(5)
Maximum
Height
(Ft.)
(1)
Maximum
Lot Coverage
(2) (8)
Floor
Area Ratio
(6) (7)
40,000
100
15
20
20
72
65%
1.00
(1) If the Planning Board determines that the proposed structure is properly accessible to fire fighting equipment, it may allow by special permit a maximum height of up to 84 feet. Further, all buildings within 350 feet of a river or a lake shall be limited to a height of 54 feet. In no instance shall any building exceed 41 feet in height unless it is more than 350 feet from a General Residence or Single Residence B zoning district boundary. Structures erected on a building and not used for human occupancy, such as chimneys, heating-ventilating or air-conditioning equipment, solar or photovoltaic panels, elevator housings, skylights, cupolas, spires and the like may exceed the maximum building height provided that no part of such structure shall project more than 15 feet above the maximum allowable building height, the total horizontal coverage of all of such structures on the building does not exceed 25 percent, and all of such structures are set back from the roof edge by a distance no less than their height, provided that the Planning Board may by Special Permit increase the height limit by not more than 5 additional feet. The Planning Board may require screening for such structures as it deems necessary. Notwithstanding the above height limitations, cornices and parapets may exceed the maximum building height provided they do not extend more than 5 feet above the highest point of the roof.
(2) Maximum lot coverage shall be 65% for all projects. However, if a project is designed such that at least 65% of the required landscaped area immediately abuts at least 65% of the required landscaped area of an adjoining project for a distance of at least 50 feet the maximum lot coverage may be increased to 75%.
(3) No side or rear setback is required for shared parking structures between adjoining properties, but only on one side of each lot, leaving the other side- or rear yards open to provide access to the interior of the lot.
(4) A 25-foot front yard setback must be maintained for structured parking.
(5) A 50-foot setback must be maintained from any General Residence zoning district line. However, the Planning Board may grant a special permit to reduce said setback, but not to less than 20 feet.
(6) A floor area ratio of up to 1.75 may be allowed by a special permit from the Planning Board. See Section 6.8. Further, the Planning Board may allow a floor area ratio of up to 2.0, by special permit, where the applicant demonstrates, to the Board’s satisfaction, that the proposed use will not generate peak hour trips in excess of 0.6 trips per 1,000 square feet of total development area.
(7) The calculation of floor area in determining floor area ratio shall not include parking areas or parking structures.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 165
(8) The provisions of Section 4.4.7 of this bylaw shall not be applicable to the NEBC district.
4.8.1 Supplemental Dimensional Regulations for New England Business Center
(1) Parking structures and surface lots may not be located within 50 feet of the intersection of the exterior street lines of a corner lot or fronting on public parks.
(2) All surface parking shall be located to the side or rear of the principal building(s). A landscaped buffer area, except for approved access ways and walkways, at least 20 feet in width as measured from the layout of the roadway providing frontage, shall be established along the street frontage. The buffer area shall be planted with grass, medium height shrubs, and trees. Where appropriate, street trees shall be planted at least every 40 feet along the frontage. Not withstanding the provisions of this subsection, the Planning Board may permit a limited number of parking spaces (not more than 2% of total off-street parking required or not more than six spaces, whichever is less) for short term drop-off parking purposes at the main entrance of the building, if the Planning Board finds that the overall facade design, site plan, and operational characteristics of the facility will be improved thereby.
(3) If a separate structure, any parking structure must be located a minimum of 20 feet from adjacent buildings. However, parking structures may be attached to the primary building they are servicing if all fire and safety regulations are met.
(4) A minimum of 25% of total lot area must be open space. The open space area shall be landscaped and may not be covered with buildings or structures of any kind, access streets, ways, parking areas, driveways, aisles, walkways, or other constructed approaches or service areas. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, open space shall include pervious surfaces used for ways, access streets, parking areas, driveways, aisles, walkways, or other constructed approaches or service areas. (Pervious surfaces shall not preclude porous pavement, porous concrete, and/or other permeable pavers.)
(5) Buildings must have a public entrance facing one or more of the streets on which the building fronts.
(6) Maximum uninterrupted facade length shall be 300 feet, or 200 feet if within 350 feet of a General Residence district zoning boundary, a river, or a lake.
4.8.2 Floor Area Ratio, Incentives
In the New England Business Center District the maximum floor to area ratio (FAR) permitted by right shall be 1.0. However, for projects providing open space and/or new roadways that are deemed by the Planning Board to be consistent with the Goals of the District Plan, a developer shall be allowed one and one-half (1.5) additional square feet of gross floor area by right for every square foot of land used for the aforementioned purposes, up to a maximum of 15,000 additional square feet of development. Any additional roadway area provided by the developer, consistent with this section, shall be deemed as part of total lot area for FAR calculation purposes and said areas shall also be considered as impervious surfaces for the purpose of calculating maximum lot coverage. Open space areas, consistent with this
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 166
section, shall also be deemed part of total lot area for FAR calculation purposes and said areas shall be considered as landscaped areas for the purpose of calculating lot coverage.
4.8.3
The Planning Board may, by special permit, waive any or all dimensional requirements set forth above in this Section 4.8 (including sections 4.8.1 and 4.8.2), by relaxing each by up to a maximum percentage of 25% if it finds that, given the particular location and/or configuration of a project in relation to the surrounding neighborhood, such waivers are consistent with the public good, that to grant such waiver(s) does not substantially derogate from the intent and purposes of the By-Law or the Goals of the District Plan cited in Section 6.8.1(b) of these Zoning By-Laws, and that such waivers are consistent with the requirements of Section 6.8. This section does not authorize the Planning Board to waive the maximum height regulations. (By way of example, the 15’ front yard setback could be waived to 11.25’; the 65% lot coverage could be waived to 81.25%; or the 40,000 sq. ft. minimum lot area could be waived to 30,000 sq. ft.)
4.9 Dimensional Regulations for Mixed-Use 128
Minimum Lot Area
(Sq. Ft.)
Minimum
Lot Frontage
(Ft.)
Front Setback (Ft.)
(1)
Side Setbacks
(Ft.)
(1) (3)
Rear Setback
(Ft.)
(3)
Maximum
Height
(Ft.)
(1)
Maximum
Lot Coverage
(2) (4) (7)
Floor
Area Ratio
(5) (6)
10,000
100
5
10
10
70
65%
1.00
(1) All buildings shall be limited to a height of 70 feet, except that, buildings within 350 feet of a river shall be limited to a height of 54 feet. Notwithstanding the forgoing, the Planning Board may allow by special permit a maximum height of up to 84 feet except within 350 feet of a river. If the height of a building is increased above the height of 54 feet, the front setback shall be increased to 15 feet and the side setback to 20 feet. Structures erected on a building and not used for human occupancy, such as chimneys, heating-ventilating or air conditioning equipment, solar or photovoltaic panels, elevator housings, skylights, cupolas, spires and the like may exceed the maximum building height provided that no part of such structure shall project more than 15 feet above the maximum allowable building height, the total horizontal coverage of all of such structures on the building does not exceed 25 percent, and all of such structures are set back from the roof edge by a distance no less than their height. The Planning Board may require screening for such structures as it deems necessary. Notwithstanding the above height limitations, cornices and parapets may exceed the maximum building height provided they do not extend more than 5 feet above the highest point of the roof.
(2) Maximum lot coverage shall be 65% for all projects. However, if a project is designed such that at least 65% of the required landscaped area immediately abuts at least 65% of the required landscaped area of an adjoining project for a distance of at least 50 feet the maximum lot coverage may be increased to 75%.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 167
(3) No side or rear yard is required for shared parking structures between adjoining properties, but only on one side of each lot, leaving the other side- or rear yards open to provide access to the interior of the lot.
(4) A minimum of 20% of total lot area must be open space. The open space area shall be landscaped and may not be covered with buildings or structures of any kind, access streets, ways, parking areas, driveways, aisles, walkways, or other constructed approaches or service areas. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, open space shall include pervious surfaces used for ways, access streets, parking areas, driveways, aisles, walkways, or other constructed approaches or service areas. (Pervious surfaces shall not preclude porous pavement, porous concrete, and/or other permeable pavers.)
(5) A floor area ratio of up to 1.75 may be allowed by a special permit from the Planning Board. See Section 6.8. Further, the Planning Board may allow a floor area ratio of up to 2.0, by special permit, where the applicant demonstrates, to the Board’s satisfaction, that the proposed use will not generate peak hour trips in excess of 0.6 trips per 1,000 square feet of total development area.
(6) The calculation of floor area in determining floor area ratio shall not include parking areas or structures.
(7) The provisions of Section 4.4.7 of this bylaw shall not be applicable to the Mixed-Use 128 district.
4.9.1 Supplemental Dimensional Regulations
(1) Parking structures and surface parking lots may not be located such that they front on public parks.
(2) Parking structures must have an active ground floor use, such as retail, office, institutional, or display, on sides facing a public way. This requirement may be waived by the Planning Board if the developer can provide a suitable alternative that enhances pedestrian or open space use of the site. Structured parking must be located at least 20 feet from adjacent buildings, but may be attached to the building it is servicing if all fire and safety requirements can be met.
(3) Buildings must have a public entrance facing one or more of the streets on which the building fronts.
(4) Maximum uninterrupted facade length shall be 300 feet. However, for buildings within 350 feet of a General Residence district zoning line or river, the uninterrupted facade length shall not exceed 200 feet.
4.9.2 Floor Area Ratio, Incentives
In the Mixed Use-128 District the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) permitted by right shall be 1.00. However, for projects providing open space and/or new roadways that are deemed by the Planning Board to be consistent with the Goals of the District Plan, a developer shall be allowed one and one half (1.5) additional square feet of gross floor area by right for every square foot of land used for the aforementioned purposes, up to a maximum of 15,000 additional square feet. Any additional roadway
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 168
area provided by the developer, consistent with this section, shall be deemed as part of total lot area for FAR calculation purposes, and shall be considered as impervious surfaces for the purpose of calculating maximum lot coverage. Open space areas, consistent with this section, shall be deemed part of total lot area for FAR calculation purposes and said areas shall be considered as landscaped areas for purposes of calculating lot coverage.
4.9.3
The Planning Board may, by special permit, waive any or all dimensional requirements set forth above in this Section 4.9 (including sections 4.9.1 and 4.9.2), by relaxing each by up to a maximum percentage of 25% if it finds that, given the particular location and/or configuration of a project in relation to the surrounding neighborhood, such waivers are consistent with the public good, that to grant such waiver(s) does not substantially derogate from the intent and purposes of the By-Law or the Goals of the District Plan cited in Section 6.8.1(b) of these Zoning By-Laws, and that such waivers are consistent with the requirements of Section 6.8. This section does not authorize the Planning Board to waive the maximum height regulations. (By way of example, the 15’ front yard setback could be waived to 11.25’; the 65% lot coverage could be waived to 81.25%; or the 40,000 sq. ft. minimum lot area could be waived to 30,000 sq. ft.)
4.10 Dimensional Regulations for Industrial-1 District
4.10.1 Basic Requirements
Min. Lot Area Min. Lot Frontage Minimum Setbacks Maximum Height
20,000 SF 100 ft. Front - 20 ft. 2 stories – 30 ft.
Side – 20 ft.
Rear – 10 ft.
4.10.2 Floor Area Ratio
In Industrial-1 Districts, the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) shall be 0.5, except that a FAR of 0.625 or 0.75 is permissible under the conditions described as follows:
FAR of 0.625, if at least twice the minimum front setback is provided, and if at least one-half of the required parking is provided in or under a building or structure, and if 15 percent of the parking area is maintained as landscaped area;*
FAR of 0.75, if at least twice the minimum front setback is provided, and if all of the required parking is provided in or under a building or structure, and if 20 percent of the parking area is maintained as landscaped area.*
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 169
*For purposes of calculating the required landscaped area, assume all parking spaces are located at grade in exterior parking areas.
4.10.3 Driveway Openings
In that portion of a lot contained within the required front setback, there may be constructed not more than two (2) driveways for every one hundred fifty (150) feet or less of frontage on each way. Driveways shall be located so as to minimize conflict with traffic on streets and where good visibility and sight distances are available to observe approaching pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The width of a driveway for one-way traffic shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet, and a maximum of eighteen (18) feet, as measured at its narrowest point. The width of a driveway for two-way traffic shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet, and a maximum of twenty-five (25) feet, as measured at its narrowest point. These maximum widths may be increase in situations where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of both the Building Inspector and Town Engineer that vehicles greater than 30 feet in length will be used to access or egress the premises.
4.10.4 Gould Street – Highland Avenue Buffer
The special front building setback lines of 50 feet, as provided for in Subsections 4.7.1 (b) and (c), shall be landscaped, vegetative buffer area in the Industrial-1 District.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 170
5. GENERAL REGULATIONS
5.1 Off-Street Parking Requirements
5.1.1 Applicability
5.1.1.1 General Provisions
Paved off-street parking spaces shall be provided for all uses and structures (excluding single and two family structures) as described in Section 5.1.2 in accordance with the provisions of this Section. No change of a structure or use from a use or uses as described in the categories of Section 5.1.2 to another such category that requires additional off-street parking shall be made unless in accordance with Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 for the entire use of structure. Notwithstanding the above, a change of an existing structure or use from a use or uses as described in the categories of Section 5.1.2 to another such category that requires additional off-street parking of 9 or fewer spaces in the Center Business, Chestnut Street Business or Avery Square Business Districts or 3 or fewer spaces in all other Commercial and Industrial Districts may proceed without requiring special permit relief or waivers from Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3, unless the parking is not compliant with Section 5.1.3 (c) Handicapped Parking, the first sentence of (d) Driveway Openings, (m) Location, and/or (n) Bicycle Racks in which case special permit relief or waivers is required. The special permit or waiver requirements of this Section 5.1 shall not apply to any project which does not trigger the thresholds set forth in the preceding sentence. This Section shall apply to the cumulative total of all additions and changes in use from May 15, 1985 as to which special permit relief or waiver from Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 was not granted prior to the addition or change in use that requires additional off-street parking.
5.1.1.2 Alterations and Additions
In the event a structure (other than a structure used for parking) is altered with or without a change in use to increase the floor area by 100 square feet or more, off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 for the total building floor area. This Section shall apply to the cumulative total of all additions from May 15, 1985.
5.1.1.3 Mixed Uses
No change or conversion of a use in a mixed use structure to a use which requires additional off-street parking shall be permitted unless off-street parking is provided in accordance with Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 for the entire structure or said change or conversion does not exceed 1,000 square feet or 5 percent of the total building floor area, whichever is greater. Furthermore, a change or conversion of a use in a mixed use structure to a use or uses which require off-street parking of 9 or fewer spaces may proceed in the Center Business, Chestnut Street Business or Avery Square Business Districts without requiring special permit relief or waivers from Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3, unless the parking is not compliant with Section 5.1.3 (c) Handicapped Parking, the first sentence of
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 171
(d) Driveway Openings, (m) Location, and/or (n) Bicycle Racks in which case special permit relief or waivers is required; and a change or conversion of a use in a mixed use structure to a use or uses which require off-street parking of 3 or fewer spaces may proceed in all other Commercial and Industrial Districts without requiring special permit relief or waivers from Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3, unless the parking is not compliant with Section 5.1.3 (c) Handicapped Parking, the first sentence of (d) Driveway Openings, (m) Location, and/or (n) Bicycle Racks in which case special permit relief or waivers is required. The special permit or waiver requirements of this Section 5.1 shall not apply to any project which does not trigger the thresholds set forth in the two preceding sentences. This Section shall apply to the cumulative total of all changes or conversions in use from May 15, 1985 as to which special permit relief or waiver from Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 was not granted prior to the change or conversion in use that requires additional off-street parking.
5.1.1.4 Exception
If a structure is destroyed or damaged by fire or other accidental cause, its replacement or reconstruction, provided the use is the same category of use or a category of use requiring the same or fewer spaces as described in Section 5.1.2, shall not be required to provide any additional off-street parking which might be required under this Section if said reconstruction or replacement does not exceed the floor area of the original building.
If a parking lot is required to be brought into compliance with federal and/or state law mandating creation, restriping, regrading or reconstruction of a handicapped accessible parking space or spaces, then no relief or waivers from this Section 5.1 need be sought to implement state or federal law.
5.1.1.5 Special Permit
The Board of Appeals may grant in all zoning districts excepting the Center Business District a special permit to waive strict adherence to the requirements of Section 5.1.2 and/or 5.1.3 where it can be demonstrated by an applicant with a parking plan prepared and reviewed in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.1.3 that a particular use, structure or lot, owing to special circumstances, does not warrant the number of parking spaces required by Section 5.1.2 and/or the application of certain design requirements contained in Section 5.1.3.
Such a special permit waiving strict adherence to the minimum number of required parking spaces may be granted only after it is demonstrated by an applicant that either:
(i) special circumstances in a particular use of structure does not warrant the minimum number of spaces required under Section 5.1.2; or
(ii) the extent of existing building coverage on a particular lot is such that in laying out parking spaces in accordance with the design requirements of Subsection 5.1.3, the requirement for minimum number of spaces under Section 5.1.2 can not be met.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 172
Except in unique circumstances, special permits waiving strict adherence to the application of parking design requirements shall not be granted for Subsections 5.1.3 (c) Handicapped Parking, (e) Compact Cars, (f) Parking Space Size, (I) Width of Maneuvering Aisle.
In reviewing a request for a special permit under this Section 5.1.1.5, the Board of Appeals shall consider the following:
(a) The issuance of a special permit will not be detrimental to the Town or to the general character and visual appearance of the surrounding neighborhood and abutting uses, and is consistent with the intent of this Zoning By-Law;
(b) In the case of waiving strict adherence to the requirements of Section 5.1.2 under subparagraph (i) above, the special permit shall define the conditions of the use of structure so as to preclude changes that would alter the special circumstances contributing to the reduced parking need or demand;
(c) In the Avery Square Business, Hillside Avenue Business, and Neighborhood Business districts, shared parking for uses having peak demands at different times, unusual age or other characteristics of site users, or user-sponsored demand reduction devices, such as car-pooling;
(d) Provisions to demonstrate the ability to provide for additional parking consistent with Section 5.1.2 and/or parking designed in accordance with the particular requirements of Section 5.1.3; and
(e) The granting of a special permit under this Section shall not exempt a structure, use or lot from future compliance with the provisions of Section 5.1.2 and/or 5.1.3.
5.1.1.6 Special Permit in the Center Business District
The Planning Board may grant in the Center Business District a special permit to waive strict adherence to the requirements of Section 5.1.2 and/or 5.1.3, if a proposed project satisfies the following conditions:
- Replaces or substantially improves an existing building or site;
- Promotes the goal of preserving and enhancing the CBD as a pedestrian-oriented local shopping and business district;
- Incorporates the recommendations of the Design Review Board; and
- Demonstrates that it is providing the maximum number of off-street parking spaces practicable.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 173
5.1.1.7 Applicability for Parking Area
Except as provided or excepted by Sections 5.1.1.1, 5.1.1.3 and 5.1.1.4, the construction, enlargement, or alteration of a parking area containing 5 or more spaces shall adhere to all of the requirements of Section 5.1.3 Parking Plan and Design Requirements, unless strict adherence to the requirements of Section 5.1.3 is waived by a special permit granted by the Board of Appeals under the provisions of Subsection 5.1.1.5. Constructing, enlarging, or altering a parking area which results in a reduction of an existing non-conformance on the premises is not subject to the requirements of Section 5.1.2, providing that there are no changes to building(s) or use(s) as described in Subsections 5.1.1.1, 5.1.1.2, and 5.1.1.3. In the Avery Square Business District, legal on-street parking may be credited towards meeting these requirements if located between the premises‘ side lot lines on the same side of the street.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 174
5.1.2 Required Parking
Use Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces
1) Theater, gymnasium, One space per three seats of total seating
auditorium or similar capacity
place of public assembly
indoor or out-door with
seating facilities
2) Medical, dental and One space per 200 square feet of floor area
related health service
structures or clinics
3) Hospital One space for each two beds plus one space
for each two employees on the largest shift,
plus one space for each three seats in a place
of public assembly (if available)
4) Nursing home or a One space for every two beds plus one space
residential care for each two employees on the largest shift
institution or facility
5) Boarding house, One space per rental or sleeping unit. Any
dormitory, bedroom or group of two beds in a
fraternity single room constitutes a sleeping unit
6) Retail or wholesale One space per 300 square feet of floor area
stores or services
7) Offices, office One space per 300 square feet of floor area
buildings, and banks
8) Hotel or motel One space for each sleeping unit plus one
space for each 200 square feet of function or
conference area, plus one space for each three
employees on the largest shift
9) Restaurant One space per 3 seats plus ten spaces per
take-out service station
10) Laundry or One space per 300 square feet of floor area
Laudromat
11) Bowling alley, tennis Four spaces per alley or court
or racquet ball court
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 175
12) Colleges, vocational One half of the design or expected enrollment
and high schools excluding
boarding and office facilities
which shall be computed
separately in accordance with
this section
13) Research facilities, One space per 300 square feet of floor area.
laboratories and Occupancy by a single tenant of more than
company offices not 50,000 square feet of floor area shall
open to the public provide one space per 300 square feet floor
area for the first 50,000 square feet and one
space per 400 square feet of floor area in
excess of 50,000 square feet
14) Warehouses, excluding One space per 850 square feet floor area or
retail and/or wholesale, one space per every two warehouse employees
on site sales and office on the largest shift, whichever is greater
space which shall be computed
separately
15) Automotive and truck One space for employees and guests per 250
service, and related square feet of floor area
repair, including
body repair
16) Automobile and truck One space for employees and guests per 250
sales and lease square feet of floor area
17) Manufacturing or One space per 400 square feet of floor area or
industrial one per two employees on the largest shift,
establishment whichever is greater
18) Indoor Athletic or Exercise One space for each 150 square feet or fraction
Facility or Personal Fitness Service thereof of gross floor area and one space for
Establishment each three employees to be employed or anticipated to be employed on the largest shift. Not withstanding the above, in circumstances where facility size is known and occupancy and parking demand will be controlled by the method of operation, the Planning Board may reduce the number of parking spaces required for a personal fitness service establishment to one parking space per employee and visitor
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 176
present on the site at any one time during the peak usage period
19) Mixed uses Sum of various uses computed separately
20) Any use permitted Closest similar use as shall be determined by
by this Zoning By-Law the Building Inspector
In the event that the Building Inspector is unable to determine if a particular use relates to any use within the table of =Required Parking‘ (Section 5.1.2), the Planning Board shall recommend to the Building Inspector a reasonable number of spaces to be provided based on the expected parking needs of occupants, users, guests, or employees of the proposed business, with said recommendations based on the ITE Parking Generation Manual, 2nd Edition, or an alternative technical source determined by the Planning Board to be equally or more applicable.
For purposes of this Section, ?floor area? shall mean the sum, in square feet, of all horizontal areas of all floors of a building or several buildings on the same lot measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or for office buildings from the center line of the glass exterior windows or party wall separating two buildings.
5.1.3 Parking Plan and Design Requirements
All parking areas shall be shown on a plan prepared by a Massachusetts Registered Architect, Landscape Architect, Professional Civil Engineer and/or Land Surveyor indicating the layout of the parking area including access, setbacks, dimensions of typical spaces, location of the trees and other landscaped areas, any proposed lighting, and provisions for surface drainage. Such plan shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector prior to the issuance of a special permit or building permit and shall conform to the following design requirements.
(a) Parking Lot Illumination – All parking areas which are proposed to be illuminated shall provide an illumination level of an average of one foot candle. All illumination shall be shielded so as not to shine directly onto a public or private way or onto any property in a residential district.
(b) Loading Requirements – Adequate off-street loading facilities and space with unimpeded access shall be provided for all new construction and for all building additions greater than 100 square feet of floor area. Facilities shall be so sized and arranged that no trucks shall be parked on a public way while loading, unloading, or waiting to do so.
(c) Handicapped Parking – Parking spaces for the exclusive use of handicapped individuals shall be provided in accordance with the most recent rules and regulations of the Architectural Access Barriers Board, specifically Section 23 thereof.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 177
(d) Driveway Openings—Ingress and egress shall be located so as to minimize conflict with traffic on streets and where good visibility and sight distances are available to observe approaching pedestrian and vehicular traffic. See Sections 4.4.5, 4.6.6 and 4.10.3 for Driveway Openings Regulations in Business, Industrial, and Industrial-1 Districts.
(e) Compact Cars – Off-street parking areas may be designated to allow up to a maximum of 50% of the total number of parking spaces to be used by compact cars. Compact car spaces shall not be less than 8 feet by 16 feet.
(f) Parking Space Size – Each parking space, except for the allowable percentage for compact cars, shall measure at least 9 feet in width and 18.5 feet in length; however, parallel parking spaces shall be at least 22 feet in length. The required parking space dimensions, including those for compact car spaces, shall not be reduced by obstructions, including, but not limited to, light poles and columns.
(g) Bumper Overhang – The minimum length requirements stated in the above two paragraphs may include no more than one foot of area beyond the curb at the front or rear of a space, used for bumper over-hang.
(h) Parking Space Layout – Required parking areas shall be designed so that each motor vehicle may proceed to and from its parking space without requiring the movement of any other vehicle. In no case shall spaces be so located as to require the backing or maneuvering onto the sidewalk or into a public or private way upon entering or leaving the space.
(i) Width of Maneuvering Aisle – The minimum width of aisles within parking areas providing access to parking spaces for one-way traffic shall be as follows:
Angle of Parking Space Minimum Width of Aisle
90 degree 24 feet/25 feet*
60 degree 18 feet/19 feet*
45 degree 14 feet
30 degree 12 feet
parallel 12 feet
* The greater width shall be used where one foot of bumper overhang occurs.
The minimum width of maneuvering aisles within parking areas providing access to spaces for two-way traffic shall be twenty (20) feet or the width required above, whichever is greater. The required width of all maneuvering aisles shall not be reduced by obstructions, including, but not limited to, light poles and columns.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 178
(j) Parking Setbacks – Parking spaces and maneuvering aisles shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from a front lot line or street right-of-way line; except, however, that such setback shall be twenty (20) feet in a Business or Industrial District, if the conditions set forth in Subsection 4.4.4 or 4.5.2 of this By-Law apply. Such parking setback shall also be twenty (20) feet in an Industrial-1 District. Parking spaces, maneuvering aisles and driveways shall be set back a minimum of four (4) feet from the rear and side lot lines. Except in an enclosed structure or in an unenclosed parking facility beneath a structure, no parking space, maneuvering aisle or driveway shall be located within five (5) feet of a building line at the first floor.
(k) Landscaped Areas – Setback areas required under the above paragraph (j) shall be maintained as landscaped areas, except where driveway openings or sidewalks occur. Landscaped areas shall include trees, shrubs, flowers and grass. Planting beds shall be at least 4 feet wide. In any parking area requiring 10 or more spaces, ten (10) percent or more of such area shall be maintained as landscaped area. In parking areas requiring 20 or more spaces, a minimum of one-quarter of this amount shall be located in the interior of the parking area. Required landscape setback areas shall count towards the minimum ten percent requirement; provided, however, that the interior landscaped area requirement shall be met.
(l) Trees – For all parking areas requiring 10 or more spaces, trees shall be required. One tree shall be provided for every 10 spaces or a fraction thereof. Such trees shall be located within or around the parking area so as to screen and soften the visual impact of parked vehicles as much as possible. They shall be at least 2? trunk diameter, with not less than 40 square feet of unpaved soil or other permeable surface area per tree. Planting beds shall be at least 4 feet wide.
(m) Location – Off-street parking required by this Section shall be located on either the same lot as the principal use or uses or on a lot within 300 feet which is under the same ownership. In the Avery Square Business District, required parking for non-residential uses shall be either on the same premises as the activity it serves, or on a separate parcel, which may be shared with other uses, if the parcel is located within five hundred (500) feet (800 feet for employees) walking distance of the building entrance to be served, is located in a zoning district permitting or allowing on special permit the activity it serves, and is permanently committed to serving the use involved. In the Avery Square Business District, no parking shall be located within 10 feet of a street line.
(n) Bicycle Racks – For parking areas of forty or more spaces, bicycle racks facilitating locking shall be provided to accommodate one bicycle per twenty parking spaces required, or fraction thereof.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 179
5.1.4 Off-Street Parking Requirements for Multi-Family Structures
On any lot upon which a multi-family structure (three or more dwelling units) is placed, built, or reconstructed, there shall be provided for each dwelling unit in all buildings on the lot not less than one and one-half (1-1/2), paved and readily accessible, off-street automobile parking spaces, covered or open, if the lot is in an Apartment District. In the event a multi-family structure is reserved for special occupancies such as the handicapped or elderly, the Board of Appeals may authorize a smaller number of spaces by special permit.
5.1.5 Applicability for Parking Structures
Parking facilities provided in an enclosed structure shall be subject to the provisions of this Section 5.1, except for the Subsections 5.1.3.k) and l). Unenclosed parking facilities beneath a structure shall be subject to the provisions of this Section, except for Subsection 5.1.3.l), and such parking level shall be deemed to be a story when its ceiling is four feet six inches or more above finished grade. Nothing contained herein shall exempt any parking structure from the requirements of the State Building Code or the applicable C.M.R.
5.1.6 Maintenance
Parking areas shall be kept clean, plowed and free from rubbish, debris and snow. All plant materials shall be maintained in a healthy condition and, whenever necessary, shall be replaced with new plant materials to insure continued compliance with landscaping requirements. All fences, barriers and walls shall be maintained in good repair and whenever necessary, shall be replaced. Whenever necessary, the surfacing, lighting and markings shall be repaired or replaced.
5.2 Earth Removal
The removal or relocation of any earth materials, including but not limited to sod, loam, sand, gravel, and stone, is hereby prohibited except in the following instances:
(a) For the construction of building foundations or other allowable structures for which building permits have been issued.
(b) For the construction of streets and the installation of utilities in a subdivision as approved by the Planning Board under General Laws, Chapter 41 and the Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules of the Planning Board.
(c) For regrading a lot, tract, or parcel within the limits of that lot, tract, or parcel under one common ownership located totally within the Town of Needham.
(d) For engineering works by a government agency.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 180
(e) For sale on the premises of humus or loam in conjunction with a farm, greenhouse, nursery, truck garden, or other permitted agricultural use.
(f) In conjunction with a quarry or other extractive use subject to the grant of a special permit by the Board of Appeals.
(g) For the regrading of a lot, tract, or parcel, requiring removal across a property line or across a Needham Town line subject to the issuance of a permit by the Building Inspector for quantities less than 25 cubic yards in the aggregate in any one year, except as otherwise permitted herein, and subject to the grant of a special permit by the Board of Appeals for quantities of twenty-five (25) cubic yards or more in the aggregate in any one year, except as otherwise permitted herein.
Special permits under paragraphs (f) and (g) of this Section may regulate, among other items, the amount of earth materials to be removed, the hours and periods of operation, the final grading and restoration after removal, the posting of a bond or other security and other related conditions.
5.3 General Design Requirements
The following shall apply to any development, other than single-family or two family dwellings, which creates either five or more off-street parking spaces, or 1500 square feet or more of gross floor area.
5.3.1 Access
Site arrangement and driveway layout shall provide sufficient access for emergency and service vehicles, including fire, police, and rubbish removal.
5.3.2 Drainage
Storm-water and snow melt drainage shall be provided for without causing surface flows across any public sidewalk and without creating more than a 10% increase in peak flows in any off-site drainage structures or water courses in a 25-year storm unless provisions have been made to accommodate that increase without public expense.
5.3.3 Water quality and erosion
Control measures shall be employed to mitigate any substantial threat to water quality or soil stability, both during and after construction.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 181
5.3.4 Light
Off-site glare from headlights shall be controlled through arrangement, grading, fences, and planting. Off-site light over-spill from exterior lighting shall be controlled through luminaries selection, positioning, and mounting height so as to not add more than one foot candle to illumination levels at any point off-site.
5.3.5 Safety
Pedestrian and vehicular movement shall be protected, both within the site and egressing from it, through selection of egress points and provisions for adequate sight distances. Where apt, the design requirements of the then-current Subdivision Regulations of the Planning Board and the Needham Zoning By-Law shall be complied with for driveways.
5.3.6 Environment
Site arrangements and grading shall minimize the number of removed trees 8? trunk diameter or larger, the volume of earth cut and fill, and the area of wetlands vegetation affected.
5.4 Disposal of Low-Level Radioactive Waste
No land within any district in the Town shall be used for the collection, treatment, storage, burial, incineration, or disposal of radioactive waste, including but not limited to wastes classified as low-level radioactive waste, except that on-site produced waste may be temporarily stored pending disposal. For purposes of this By-Law, low-level radioactive waste shall be defined as radioactive waste not classified as high-level radioactive waste, transuranic waste, spent nuclear fuel, or by product material as defined in Section 11 e(2) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
5.5 Signs
Signs within the Town are regulated and controlled by Article 5 of the Town‘s General By-Laws.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 182
6. SPECIAL REGULATIONS
6.1 Accessory Uses
6.1.1
Accessory uses shall be on the same lot with the building of the owner or occupant and shall not alter the character of the premises on which they are located nor impair the neighborhood.
6.1.2
There shall be permitted as an accessory use on residential property in the Single Residence A, Rural Residence – Conservation, and Institutional districts garage space for not more than three (3) cars and in the Single Residence B, General Residence, Business and Industrial districts garage space for not more than two (2) cars.
Upon application the Board of Appeals may issue a Special Permit for one additional garage space per lot, provided that the premises in questions are reasonably adaptable to such use and will allow proper layout thereof (including adequate separation of buildings or structures and open areas from adjacent premises), and provided further that the proposed use;
(a) will not alter the character of the premises in which it is located,
(b) will not have a material adverse effect on the value of the land and buildings or structures in the neighborhood, or on the amenities thereof, and
(c) will not produce noise, odors or glare observable at the lot lines in amounts clearly detrimental to the normal use of adjacent property.
In acting upon applications for such Special Permits, the Board of Appeals shall be governed by the provisions of Section 7.2.
6.1.3
Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter of right, which activities are necessary in connection with the scientific research or scientific development or related production, may be permitted upon issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals, provided the Board of Appeals finds that the proposed accessory use does not substantially derogate from the public good.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 183
6.2 Boats, Motor Homes and Trailers
6.2.1 Occupancy
No boat, motor home or trailer, with or without motive power, hereafter put in place upon any land within the Town, shall be occupied for living purposes or business purposes within the Town for a period exceeding thirty (30) days in the aggregate in any one (1) year; provided, however, that the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for such use on a temporary basis for no more than two (2) additional thirty (30) day periods.
In the event that a residence is destroyed by fire or other natural disaster, the owner or occupier of the residence may place a mobile home, motor home, or trailer on the site of such residence and reside in such mobile home, motor home, or trailer for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months while the residence is being rebuilt. Any such mobile home, motor home, or trailer shall be subject to the provisions of the State Sanitary Code.
6.2.2 Storage
No boat, motor home or trailer shall be placed on a lot closer than five (5) feet to any lot line in any district except that the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for distances less than five (5) feet, where unfavorable physical conditions, such as topography or the width and the size of the lot, warrant special consideration and where the granting of a special permit would not be detrimental to the public safety.
6.3 Filling Stations and Commercial Garages
6.3.1
Every filling station pump hereafter installed shall be located at least fifteen (15) feet inside the building setback line and no filling shall be done except on the property of the filling station.
6.3.2
No permit shall be issued for a commercial garage or for a filling station, if any portion of the premises to be devoted directly or incidentally to such garage or filling station use would be located within 300 feet of any portion of premises devoted directly or indirectly to church or school use.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 184
6.4 Outdoor Parking of Vehicles
Outdoor parking in conjunction with the sale or leasing of new or used vehicles on applications filed after September 28, 1978 is subject to the requirements as contained within this Section and such further requirements as the Board of Appeals may deem necessary.
6.4.1 Basic Requirements
(a) The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet.
(b) The minimum frontage on one street shall conform to the minimum frontage as noted in Sections 4.2.1, 4.2.2, 4.2.3 and 4.2.4 for the zone in which the lot is located.
(c) The width of a driveway for one-way traffic shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet and a maximum of eighteen (18) feet; for two-way traffic the width shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) feet and a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet.
(d) The minimum distance of driveways, measured at the lot line shall be as follows:
(1) from corner lot line, 20 feet;
(2) from interior side lot line, 10 feet;
(3) from other driveway on same lot, 20 feet.
(e) Properties which are used for residential purposes and which abut an outdoor vehicle sale lot shall be protected from headlight glare by either:
(1) a strip at least four feet wide, densely planted with shrubs or trees which are at least four feet high at the time of planting and which are of a type that may be expected to form a year-round dense screen at least six feet high within three years, or
(2) a wall, barrier, or fence of uniform appearance at least four (4) feet high either opaque or perforated if not more than fifty (50) percent of the face is open.
(3) Such screening shall be maintained in good condition at all times. Such screening or barrier may be interrupted by normal entrances or exits and shall have no signs hung or attached thereto other than those permitted in the district.
(f) All illumination on outdoor vehicle sales lots shall be shielded so as not to shine directly upon any property in a residential district.
(g) No repair work of any kind shall be performed.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 185
6.4.2 Review Criteria
In reviewing an application for a special permit under this section, the Board of Appeals shall also consider the following factors:
(a) Ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control and access in case of fire or catastrophe;
(b) Off-street parking and loading areas where required with particular attention to the items in paragraph (a) and noise, glare, or odor effects of the use on adjoining properties and properties generally in the district;
(c) Refuse collection or disposal and service areas, with particular reference to items in paragraphs (a) and (b) above;
(d) Screening and buffering with reference to type, dimensions, and character;
(e) Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, compatibility and harmony with properties in the district;
(f) Required yards and other open space;
(g) General compatibility with adjacent properties and other property in the district;
(h) Reasonable hours of operation.
6.5 Limited Heliports
6.5.1
Unless otherwise prohibited under this Zoning By-Law, Special Permits for Limited Heliports may be granted in accordance with Section 7.5.2 of the By-Law in the Industrial Districts which shall be consistent and in conformance with the standards and criteria enumerated herein and any other conditions that may be required by the Board of Appeals.
6.5.2 Basic Requirements
(a) The proposed limited heliport is found to be desirable for public convenience and welfare.
(b) No part of the limited heliport shall be less than 1,000 feet from a residentially zoned district (excluding Commonwealth of Massachusetts land currently devoted to the Route 128 circumferential highway as shown on the Needham Zoning Map), nor less than 800 feet from any part of a television or radio tower that is more than 150 feet in height, nor less than 1,200
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 186
feet from the base of a television or radio tower that is more than 150 feet in height, nor less than 4,500 feet from any other limited heliport, nor less than 100 feet from a public way (excluding Commonwealth of Massachusetts land devoted to Route 128 and related ramp areas).
(c) The limited heliport shall not be utilized by a helicopter craft with a seating capacity of more than five.
(d) The applicant shall submit a noise assessment consistent with Federal Aviation Administration guidelines contained in Advisory Circular Number 150/5020-2 or any subsequent amendments, to evaluate the acoustic impacts on the environment in the area of the proposed limited heliport.
(e) The applicant shall submit a site plan certified by an individual possessing qualifications satisfactory to the Board of Appeals showing the direction of prevailing winds, the approach/departure pattern (including the horizontal plan and elevation profile of the flight paths to be used) and the location and height of any structures within the glide path.
(f) Heliport landing areas at ground level shall have a minimum area of 100 feet by 100 feet which shall be paved and kept free of loose material.
The landing area shall be enclosed by a fence at least four feet in height. Heliport landing areas constructed on buildings and other elevated places shall be of a size and construction consistent with federal and state standards. In no event shall a heliport be constructed on a building or other elevated place if it is determined by the Needham Fire Department to be at a height beyond the fire fighting capabilities of its equipment.
(g) Heliport landing areas shall be provided with means for safe collection and disposition of fuel spilled in an emergency. Adequate fire protection and firefighting equipment shall be provided in accordance with federal, state, and local requirements and shall be regularly inspected and tested.
(h) Heliport landing areas shall be provided with lighting and wind direction indications in conformity with Federal Aviation Agency and Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission regulations and recommendations.
(i) Unless otherwise specified in this section or within the decision of the Board of Appeals, Limited Heliport land areas shall be of a design and construction consistent with the appropriate state and federal standards.
(j) The Board of Appeals may require evidence of application, certification and/or approval by the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, Civil Aeronautics Board, or other appropriate agency prior to the granting of a special permit for a limited heliport.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 187
(k) The Board of Appeals shall specify the hours of operation of limited heliports and the frequency of use.
(l) A special permit granted under this section shall be subject to review by the Board of Appeals on an annual basis. The Building Inspector shall report on an annual basis to the Board of Appeals whether or not all conditions of the original special permit for the heliport have been met and if any complaints have been filed concerning the operation of the heliport with the Building Inspector or the Board. The Building Inspector shall respond to any complaints consistent with Chapter 40A.
6.6 Complex Developments
6.6.1 Intent
The intent of Complex Development provisions is to assure that in the Avery Square Business and Hillside Avenue Business districts large-scale developments are carefully tested against the Town’s decision criteria relating to locations and uses, and to assure that adequate provisions are made for impacts of development.
6.6.2 Applicability
Uses made subject to Section 6.6 by designation (“SPC”) in Section 3.2 Use Regulation Schedule are defined as “Complex Developments”, and shall comply with the following.
Complex Developments require authorization through a special permit granted by the Planning Board under this Section, which shall serve in lieu of any special permit otherwise required under Section 3.2 Use Regulations. Application for any other special permits which might be required by the project, such as those under Section 3.4 Aquifer Protection District, regardless of agency designations elsewhere in the By-Law, may be consolidated with the Complex Development application, and acted upon by the Planning Board as Special Permit Granting Authority, proceeding as provided at Sections 7.5.2 and 7.6.1.
6.6.3 Submittal Requirements
The applicant shall submit the following materials, in report format, to allow the Planning Board to determine potential compliance with the decision criteria of Section 6.6.4 and other provisions of this By-Law without need for extensive further analysis by the Planning Board. This will entail:
(a) Site plans with contents as required for Site Plan Review under Section 7.4, except that only schematic-level detail is required; and schematic building plans.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 188
(b) Impact analyses on topics which are germane to the case, including identification of public facility improvements anticipated to be made by others and those being committed by the applicant.
(c) Description of the project timing and phasing.
6.6.4 Decision Criteria
The following shall be the basis for decisions on special permits for Complex Developments. Special permits for Complex Developments shall be granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority only upon its written determination that the proposed use will be in general harmony with the purpose and intent of the Zoning By-Law, and will not have adverse effects which over-balance its beneficial effects for either the neighborhood or the Town, in view of the particular characteristics of the site and of the proposal in relation to that site. The determination shall indicate consideration of each of the following considerations which are applicable, among others. At the time of application, the applicant shall submit complete documentation regarding each of these considerations which are applicable, including description of any discussion efforts made with neighborhood groups or other affected parties.
6.6.4.1 Circulation
(a) Increases in either average daily or peak hour vehicular traffic are adverse effects, even if coupled with capacity increases maintaining the level of service.
(b) Causing the diversion of traffic onto residential streets is an adverse effect.
(c) To avoid adversity, pedestrian and vehicular movement to, from, and within the site should be safe and convenient, and arranged so as not to disturb abutting properties.
6.6.4.2 Utilities and Other Public Services
Any unusual public problem in providing adequate water, sewerage, drainage, public safety, or other public services for a use would be an adverse effect.
6.6.4.3 Environmental Impacts
(a) Environmental damage due to wetland loss, habitat disturbance, erosion, or damage to valuable trees or other natural assets are adverse effects.
(b) Damage or risk to air, land, or water resources because of planned processes or unplanned contingencies are adverse effects.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 189
6.6.4.4 Land Use Compatibility
(a) Preempting land having special qualities suiting it for other uses, such as land having rail access being preempted from use by a non-rail using activity, is an adverse effect.
(b) Damaging the utility and enjoyment of nearby land uses through off-site impacts is an adverse effect.
6.6.4.5 Visual Compatibility
(a) Visibility of parking and service areas from nearby public streets is an adverse effect which can be minimized through site arrangement, use of tree cover, and other means.
(b) Increases above the architectural scale of buildings on abutting and nearby premises is an adverse effect, except where the departure would serve some community design purpose.
6.6.5 Conditions
The Planning Board shall impose appropriate conditions to its approval as necessary to assure implementation of the intent of these provisions.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 190
6.7 Wireless Communications Facilities
6.7.1 Intent
The purpose of this section is to accommodate the communication needs of the general public while promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the community. These purposes are to be achieved by minimizing the adverse visual effect of wireless communication equipment towers, facilities and devices, by providing safeguards for the general public, by avoiding potential damage to adjacent properties, by maximizing the use of existing towers and buildings, by concealing new equipment within or on existing towers or buildings, and by encouraging co-location of equipment to accommodate the needs of wireless communication in order to reduce the number of towers needed to service the community.
6.7.2 Definitions
For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
Antenna – a device, usually a metal rod, dish or panel, for receiving and transmitting electromagnetic signals, including, but not limited to radio, video, telephone or data transmissions.
Building-mounted wireless communication equipment – both roof-mounted and façade-mounted wireless communication equipment.
Carrier – a company that provides wireless service.
Co-location – the use of a single mount on the ground by more than one carrier (vertical co-location) and/or several mounts on an existing building or structure by more than one carrier.
Environmental Assessment (EA) – the document required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) when a personal wireless service facility is placed in certain designated areas.
Equipment Shelter – an enclosed structure, cabinet, shed or box at the base of the mount within which are housed batteries and electrical equipment.
Façade-mounted wireless communication equipment – wireless communications equipment attached to a vertical wall, exterior surface or ornamental feature other than the roof of a building or structure.
Free Standing Devise – a monopole wireless service facility not requiring guy wires for support; and any other device mounted on the ground and not mounted on any existing building or structure.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 191
Guyed Tower – a monopole or lattice tower that is tied to the ground or other surface by diagonal cables.
Height – a distance measured from the average grade of the land surrounding the device to its highest point, surface or projection, in the case of free-standing devices, or a distance measured from the average grade of the land surrounding the exterior walls of a building to the highest point, surface or projection of the device, in the case of devices mounted on existing buildings.
Interior-mounted wireless communication equipment – wireless communications equipment that is wholly within a building or structure, including such equipment within a mechanical penthouse, steeples, bell towers, cupolas or other architectural features which are not completely enclosed.
Lattice-Tower – a type of mount that is self-supporting with multiple legs and cross-bracing of structural steel.
Monopole – the type of mount that is self-supporting with a single shaft of steel or concrete and a platform for antennas arrayed at the top.
Personal Wireless Services – Wireless telecommunications services regulated by the Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”) and defined as “personal wireless services” in Section 704, or other sections, of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 as amended; by way of example but not limitation, personal wireless services include cellular telephone services, so-called personal communications services (“PCS”) and paging services.
Radio Frequency (RF) Engineer – an engineer specializing in electrical or microwave engineering, especially the study of radio frequencies.
Roof-mounted wireless communication equipment – wireless communications equipment attached to the primary roof of a building.
Security Barrier – A locked, impenetrable wall, fence or berm that completely seals an area from unauthorized entry or trespass.
Wireless Communication Equipment – any device or other apparatus, fixed at a location, for transmission and reception of telecommunication that performs the function of antennas, together with any supporting structures, equipment and facilities ancillary and/or accessory thereto, including, but not limited to panel antennas, whip antennas, free-standing monopoles (not lattice shaped towers except as allowed in sections 6.7.3.1 (b), 6.7.3.1 (c) and 6.7.3.3 (h) below), dish and cone shaped antennas, satellite earth station antennas, personal wireless communication systems facilities, paging service facilities, cellular telephone service facilities, commercial mobile radio service facilities and related equipment boxes serving personal wireless services exclusively.
It is recognized that technology is rapidly changing and the definitions herein are intended to encompass such wireless communication equipment as it evolves over time.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 192
6.7.3 Use Regulations
6.7.3.1 Permitted As of Right
The following wireless communication equipment is allowed as-of-right, subject to the criteria of section 6.7.5 and the review process of section 6.7.6, if applicable:
(a) Equipment used solely for receiving or transmitting wireless communication customary for private residential use, even if such equipment is used in conjunction with non-residential structures, including but not limited to, a conventional television or radio antenna, fixed wireless personal communication system, direct broadcast satellite antenna one (1) meter or less in diameter, and multipoint distribution service antenna or home satellite dish of not more than two (2) meters in diameter or measured diagonally; provided that in the case of a home satellite dish that is free-standing, such satellite dish shall be installed in the rear yard only.
(b) Equipment owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC, which device shall be installed at the minimum height necessary for the functioning of amateur radio communication in accordance with the licensing requirements for that location. Such equipment, which may include a ground-mounted lattice style tower, shall be allowed in accordance with the setback requirements for primary structures in the district in which it is located. No commercial use of equipment or supporting structures which were installed for amateur radio operation is permitted.
(c) Towers used for the purposes set forth in M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3.
(d) Antennas attached to an existing utility pole or utility structure, such as the support for an electrical transmission tower or electrical distribution pole, but no higher than ten (10) feet above the existing structure, provided that the total height from the ground to the top of the antenna does not exceed fifty-five (55) feet and provided that all control and operating equipment associated with the antenna shall be camouflaged or completely screened from view in some other manner. Antennas shall be placed on any structure so as to minimize the visual impacts off-site. This provision shall not apply within 150 feet of the right-of-way of any scenic roadway where such use shall not be permitted.
(e) Roof-mounted wireless communication equipment in the commercial, industrial, and institutional districts (a) which does not extend more than ten (10) feet above the height of an existing building, (b) which is set back from the edge of the roof the distance it is high, and (c) whose equipment will be housed within the existing building or on the rooftop in such a way as to be not visible from the street level or to be constructed in such a way and of such material as to appear as part of the existing structure.
(f) Façade-mounted equipment located in the commercial, industrial, and institutional districts (a) which does not extend above the face of any wall or exterior surface in the case of structures that do not have walls, (b) which is concealed within or behind existing architectural features or within material consistent with the design features and materials of
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 193
the building, (c) which does not obscure any window or other architectural feature, and (d) which has been finished in a color and style to blend with the surface on which it is mounted.
(g) All interior-mounted wireless communications equipment is allowed in commercial, industrial and institutional districts. In residential districts interior-mounted wireless communication equipment shall be permitted in existing steeples, bell towers, cupolas, and spires of non-residential buildings or structures existing on January 1, 2000.
(h) 1) An antenna used solely to receive direct broadcast satellite services, including direct-to-home satellite service, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals via satellite, or used to receive video programming services via multi-point distribution services, including multichannel multipoint distribution services, instructional television fixed services and local multi-point distribution services, or to receive or transmit fixed wireless signals other than via satellite. The antenna must be one meter or less in diameter or diagonal measurement, not customary for private residential use and to be located on property within the exclusive control of the antenna user where the user has ownership or a leasehold interest in the property, provided that the antenna is not being placed on a site, building, structure or object included in, or eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, 16 U.S. Code 470 and provided that application is made to the building inspector for a building permit which includes sufficient information and documentation to determine that the antenna meets the requirements of this subsection and payment of a permit fee of $100 is made.
2) In the case of an antenna that is used to transmit fixed wireless signals, a label must be affixed to the antenna that provides adequate notice of radio frequency safety hazards and references the applicable FCC adopted limits for radio frequency exposure specified in 47 CFR 1.1310.
6.7.3.2 Prohibited
Lattice style towers, guyed towers, and facilities requiring three or more legs and/or guy wires for support shall not be allowed except as permitted under 6.7.3.1 (b), 6.7.3.1 (c), and 6.7.3.3 (h). Lattice style towers, guyed towers, and facilities requiring three or more legs and/or guy wires existing or approved on the effective date of this by-law may be used for wireless communications equipment, subject to section 6.7.3.3 (f).
6.7.3.3 Special Permit
The Board of Appeals may issue a special permit under the provisions of section 7.5.2 and subject to the criteria of section 6.7.5 for:
(a) Antennas attached to an existing utility pole or utility structure not otherwise allowed in section 6.7.3.1 (d) hereof.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 194
(b) Roof-mounted wireless communication equipment in the commercial, industrial and institutional districts not otherwise allowed in section 6.7.3.1 (e) hereof.
(c) Façade-mounted equipment located in the commercial, industrial and institutional districts not otherwise allowed in section 6.7.3.1 (f) hereof.
(d) Any interior-mounted wireless communication equipment in non-residential buildings or structures not otherwise allowed in section 6.7.3.1 (g) hereof.
(e) Satellite earth station antennas not otherwise allowed as-of-right.
(f) Modification or addition of wireless communication equipment on or to existing free-standing monopoles or towers, except those monopoles and towers constructed for the purposes allowed in section 6.7.3.1 above.
(g) Any equipment ancillary to antennas otherwise allowed under sections 6.7.3.1 or 6.7.3.3 hereof, which cannot be located in the rear yard and/or does not meet the setback requirements for the district in which it is located. An applicant may apply for a special permit allowing an alternate location by showing that such equipment (i) is required for successful transmission or reception or is otherwise required by the FCC, (ii) cannot due to its size or other health or safety reasons be located within the building, and (iii) cannot be located in the rear yard and/or within applicable setbacks for one or more of the following reasons: the size of the equipment; the size of the rear, front and/or side yards; the location within the rear yard or applicable setbacks would result in the removal of required parking; and the aesthetic purposes of the By-Law would be better served by such alternate location.
(h) Free-standing monopoles and free-standing lattice towers located in the Wireless Communications Facilities Tower Overlay District which meet the criteria outlined in section 3.7.3.2 (b).
6.7.4 Submittal Requirements
Ten copies of the following information must be submitted for an application to be considered complete:
(a) Name, address and telephone number of applicant and any co-applicants as well as any agents for the applicant or co-applicant with original signatures.
(b) A locus plan at a scale of 1” = 200’ which shall show all property lines, the exact location of the proposed structure(s), street landscape features, dwellings and other structures within one-hundred (100) feet of the property line.
(c) Equipment brochures for the proposed wireless communication facility such as manufacturer’s specifications or trade journal reprints shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 195
(d) Materials of the proposed wireless communication facility specified by generic type and specific treatment (e.g., anodized aluminum, stained wood, painted fiberglass, etc.). These shall be provided for antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any.
(e) Colors of the proposed personal wireless facility showing actual color proposed on a color board. Colors shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables, as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any.
(f) Dimensions of the proposed wireless service facility specified for all three directions: height, width and breadth. These shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters and security barrier, if any.
(g) Appearance shown by at least two photographic superimpositions of the wireless communication facility with its antennas and/or panels presented to scale. For satellite dishes or antennas, a color photographic imposition illustrating the dish or antenna at the proposed location is required. A color photographic imposition shall also be prepared illustrating a view of the tower, dish or antenna from the nearest street or streets.
(h) The following information must be prepared and signed by a registered professional engineer:
(i) a description of the facility and the technical, economic and other reasons for the proposed location, height and design.
(ii) confirmation that the facility complies with all applicable Federal and State standards.
(iii) a description of the capacity of the facility including the number and type of panels, antennas and/or transmitter receivers that it can accommodate and the basis for these calculations.
(iv) if applicable, a written statement that the proposed facility complies with, or is exempt from, applicable regulations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
(v) a schedule for periodic (at least annually) maintenance.
(i) In the case of a special permit application, an application for Site Plan Review as outlined in section 7.4.4.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 196
6.7.5 Decision Criteria
All wireless communication equipment, except that described in section 6.7.3.1 (a) must satisfy the following criteria:
(a) Wireless communication equipment shall be installed, erected, maintained and used in compliance with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, radio frequency emissions regulations issued pursuant to the Telecommunications Act of 1996 including all successors to such laws and regulations. An applicant seeking to construct or install wireless communication equipment shall submit a report from a qualified engineer or other appropriate professional certifying that the proposed equipment meets the requirements of these regulations. This report shall be submitted prior to any site plan approval or special permit application or at the time of a building permit application if there is no review.
(b) Wireless communication equipment must at all times be maintained in good and safe condition and comply with all applicable FCC standards and shall be removed within 90 days of the date when all use of such equipment ceases. This provision shall apply to all wireless communication equipment and structures in support of that equipment, including such equipment and structures existing on the effective date of this section. Continued compliance with these conditions shall be maintained by the operator of the equipment and the owner of the structure. Failure to comply with these conditions shall constitute a zoning violation.
(c) All wireless communication equipment except equipment described in section 6.7.3.1, subsection (h), shall be sited, screened, and/or painted or otherwise colored or finished to blend in with the building or structure on which it is mounted or in a manner which aesthetically minimizes the visibility of the devices in the surrounding landscape or on the building or structure to which they are attached. In certain circumstances, additional architectural features or changes to the façade may be necessary to maintain the balance and integrity of the design of the building or structure with building-mounted wireless communication equipment.
(d) Wireless communication facilities shall be designed and installed at the minimum height necessary for the proper functioning of the telecommunications services to be provided at that location.
(e) There shall be no advertising or signs on or in the vicinity of the wireless communication facility, except for no trespassing signs and a required sign, not exceeding four square feet, which shall display a phone number where a person responsible for maintenance can be reached on a twenty-four hour basis, or other signs as may be required by law.
(f) Any fencing used to control access to wireless communication equipment shall be compatible with the visual character of the structures in the surrounding neighborhood, to the extent possible.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 197
(g) Equipment boxes for building-mounted wireless communication equipment must be either interior to the building on which it is located, camouflaged, and/or screened from view from the public way to the maximum extent practical.
(h) All network connections from the communications site shall be via underground land lines except as allowed by special permit.
(i) All free-standing wireless communication equipment must meet any setback requirements of the district in which it is located and, to the greatest extent possible, shall be screened from the public way by fencing and/or landscaping. Such equipment shall be located in the rear yard of the lot on which it is located.
(j) No part of any building-mounted wireless communication equipment shall be located over a public way.
(k) The construction of wireless communication equipment shall avoid major topographic changes and shall minimize the removal of trees and soil in order for any topographic changes to be in keeping with the appearance of neighboring properties.
(l) Wireless communication facilities shall not be located in wetland.
(m) No hazardous waste shall be discharged on the site of any wireless communication facilities. If any hazardous materials are to be used on site, there shall be provisions for full containment of such materials.
(n) The installation of wireless communication equipment shall avoid the removal or disruption of historic resources on and off-site. Historic resources shall include designated historic structures or sites, historical architectural elements or archaeological sites.
(o) There shall be no illumination of the wireless communication equipment except as required by state and federal law. Lighting of equipment structures and any other facilities on site shall be shielded from abutting properties. There shall be total cutoff of all light at the property lines of the parcel to be developed, and foot candle measurements at the property line shall be 0.0 initial foot candles when measured at grade.
(p) An applicant seeking to construct or install any external noise producing equipment ancillary to antennas shall use best efforts to minimize noise emanating from such equipment by the use of air-tight seals and noise absorbing materials on the walls and ducts of such equipment. The use of batteries as the back up power source is preferred over generators.
6.7.6 Design Review for Wireless Communication Equipment
Except for wireless communication equipment described in section 6.7.3.1 (a) and 6.7.3.1 (h) hereof, no wireless communication equipment shall be constructed or installed pursuant to section 6.7.3.1 until an application has been submitted to the Building Inspector as described in section 6.7.4.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 198
The applicant shall simultaneously file a copy of said application with the Design Review Board. The Design Review Board shall submit an advisory report to the Building Inspector within three weeks of the application filing date. In making their report, the Design Review Board shall evaluate the application based on the requirements of section 6.7.5 and may seek input from relevant Town departments. The Building Inspector shall not approve wireless communication equipment until the advisory report of the Design Review Board has been received or three weeks have elapsed without receipt of such report, and until all required departmental approvals have been issued. The Building Inspector has the authority to deny any building permit application which the Inspector determines does not comply with the requirements of section 6.7.5.
6.7.7 Modifications
A modification to a wireless communication facility shall be considered equivalent to an application for a new wireless communication facility and will require a special permit when the following events apply:
(a) The applicant and/or co-applicant wants to alter the terms of the special permit by changing the wireless communication facility in one or more of the following ways:
(i) Change in the number of facilities permitted on the site;
(ii) Change in the technology used for the wireless communication facility;
(iii) Change in the original permitted use of wireless communication.
(b) The applicant wants to add any equipment or additional height not specified in the original design filing.
6.7.8 Monitoring and Maintenance
Once a year if requested by the Building Inspector, the owner and/or operator of a wireless communication facility shall file with the Building Inspector an updated maintenance schedule as well as evidence that the wireless communication facility complies with the applicable standards of the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration and the American National Standards Institute, and that the wireless communication facility remains in use.
The applicant and co-applicant shall maintain the wireless communication facility in good condition. Such maintenance shall include, but shall not be limited to, painting, structural integrity of the mount and security barrier, and maintenance of the buffer areas and landscaping.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 199
6.7.9 Abandonment or Discontinuation of Use
At such time that a carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a wireless communication facility, such carrier shall notify the Town by certified mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be given no less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations. In the event that a carrier fails to give such notice, the wireless communication facility shall be considered abandoned upon such discontinuation of operations.
Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the carrier shall physically remove the wireless communication equipment within 90 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Removal of antennas, equipment shelters and security barriers from the subject property.
(b) Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance with local and state solid waste disposal regulations.
(c) Restoring the location of the wireless communication facility to its natural condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain in the after condition.
6.7.10 Reconstruction or Replacement of Existing Towers and Monopoles
Guyed towers, lattice towers and monopoles in existence at the time of the adoption of this By-Law may be reconstructed, altered, extended or replaced on the same site by special permit, provided that the Board of Appeals finds that such reconstruction, alteration, extension or replacement will not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood and/or the Town than the existing structure. In making such a determination, the Board of Appeals shall consider whether the proposed reconstruction, alteration, extension or replacement will create public benefits such as opportunities for co-location, improvements in public safety, and/or reduction in visual and environmental impacts. No reconstruction, alteration, extension or replacement shall exceed the height of the existing facility by more than twenty (20) feet.
6.7.11 Severability
A determination that any section or portion of this By-Law is invalid shall not invalidate any other portion or provision thereof, nor shall it invalidate any special permit previously issued thereunder.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 200
6.8 Intensity of Use Special Permit Criteria for the NEBC, HC-128, and MU-128 Districts.
6.8.1 Applicability
Development in the NEBC, HC-128, and MU-128 districts that seeks a special permit for an increase in the floor area ratio over what is permitted by right shall be subject to the following additional special permit provisions. Provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall impair the rights conferred by Section 1.4 of this By-Law.
(a) In granting a special permit the Planning Board (Board) shall consider all the factors noted in item b. below, and any proposed mitigation measures proposed by the applicant. The Board shall make findings as to whether the benefits, if any, of the proposed project outweigh the costs and adverse impacts, if any, to the Town. If the Board, after considering all factors noted below, finds that the proposal would benefit the Town, the Board may grant a special permit with or without specific conditions.
(b) The Board, at a minimum, shall examine the following factors:
? The ability of existing public infrastructure to adequately service the proposed facility without negatively impacting existing uses, including but not limited to, water supply, drainage, sewage, natural gas, and electric services.
? Impact on traffic conditions at the site, on adjacent streets and in nearby neighborhoods, including the adequacy of roads and major intersections to safely and effectively provide access to and from the areas included in the New England Business Center, Highland Avenue Corridor, and Wexford/Charles Street Industrial District Plan, dated June 2001 (District Plan), and the areas immediately adjacent to said areas.
? The environmental implications of the proposal and the relationship of the proposal to open space and conservation plans adopted by the Town.
? The short and long term fiscal implications of the proposal to the Town of Needham.
? The consistency of the project with the goals of the New England Business Center, Highland Avenue Corridor, and Wexford/Charles Street Industrial District Plan, dated June 2001, as set forth in the document titled “Goals of the June 2001 New England Business Center, Highland Avenue Corridor, and Wexford/Charles Street Industrial District Plan”, as adopted by the Planning Board on December 11, 2001(Goals of the District Plan).
(c) Consistent with Massachusetts Law, the Board, pursuant to regulations duly promulgated by the Board, may require the applicant to provide financial assistance so that the Board may hire professionals to assist it in the review of any factors noted in items b. and c. above.
(d) Traffic Improvement Fee. The Board shall determine how many additional square feet of development, above those allowed by right, will be created by the grant of the special permit under this Section 6.8. Applying the Needham Zoning Bylaw Section 5.1.2. Required Parking, the Board shall determine the appropriate number of off-street parking spaces required to service that portion of the development which exceeds that permitted by right. The Board shall then require payment of a one time Traffic Improvement Fee (Fee) of $1,500
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 201
for each such parking space. Said fee shall be paid by the applicant or the applicant’s designee to the Town and shall be placed in a special revenue account entitled “Traffic Mitigation Fund” to be used for the purpose of addressing long term traffic improvements clearly related to and directly benefitting the uses within the area covered by the District Plan. The area covered by the District Plan is defined as follows: the districts themselves, the intersections of Kendrick Street and Hunting Road, all portions of the existing intersection of Interstate Route 95 and Highland Avenue, the intersection of Highland Avenue and Needham Street, Highland Avenue between Interstate Route 95 and the city of Newton line, Kendrick Street from the intersection with Hunting Road to the city of Newton line, and any planned or proposed intersection on Interstate Route 95 directly servicing the business zoning districts included in the District Plan.
(e) Payment of Traffic Improvement Fee (Fee). The applicant may pay the entire Traffic Improvement Fee prior to receipt of the building permit for the project. In the alternative, the applicant may pay in two installments: half prior to receipt of the building permit for the project, and the other half prior to receipt of the occupancy permit for the project, provided, however, that interest on the second installment will accrue at 12% per annum from the date of payment of the first installment and must be paid with the second installment.
(f) Site mitigation. The payment of the Fee shall not exempt developers from any on-site or access-related traffic improvements required by the special permit, or the site plan review process, and any conditions resulting from said process. Further, payment of the Fee shall not exempt any developer from any costs associated with providing other forms of infrastructure improvements, such as water, sewer, or drainage improvements, in order to provide safe and efficient use of the site.
(g) The Planning Board shall have the discretion to require at least one or more Transportation Demand Management (TDM) programs to reduce AM peak hour volumes, as listed below:
? Provide staggered work hours (one hour increments) for at least 10% of the non-management work force.
? Provide preferential parking locations for all employees arriving in a car pool comprised of at least two licensed drivers.
? Provide a cash incentive for all car pools of two or more licensed drivers. Said incentive shall be at least 40 dollars per month per car pool.
? Provide a shuttle or van service to and from public transportation terminals. Said service must have the capacity to accommodate at least 10% of the employees on the largest shift.
? Provide a work at home option for at least one day per week for at least 10% of the total work force.
? Provide subsidized public transportation passes of at least 20% of the monthly pass cost.
? Other programs designed by the applicant and approved by the Planning Board in lieu of or in addition to those listed above.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 202
All TDM plans shall be submitted to the Planning Board as part of the special permit review process relative to this section, i.e., section 6.8. All TDM plans shall be subject to review by the Planning Department every two (2) years for compliance with previously approved TDM program terms and measures. At said time, if a particular TDM program is not being properly implemented, the applicant may revise said TDM program, and the Planning Board may make revisions to maintain or improve its effectiveness. However, to meet the requirements of the special permit all projects must maintain the minimum number of TDM programs required by the Board as long as the development in question is operating under a special permit.
6.9 Outdoor Seating
6.9.1 Applicability
Section 6.9.2 shall apply in any business district in which restaurants serving meals for consumption on the premises and at tables with service provided by waitress or waiter is permitted under Section 3.2.2 of this By-Law.
6.9.2 Basic Requirements Seasonal Outdoor Seating
Seasonal temporary (i.e. April through October) outdoor seating, including but not limited to tables, chairs, serving equipment, planters, and umbrellas, for restaurants serving meals for consumption on the premises and at tables with service provided by waitress or waiter is permitted during normal hours of operation, subject to minor project site plan review with waiver of all requirements of Section 7.4.4 and 7.4.6 except as are necessary to demonstrate compliance with Section 6.9 by the Planning Board in the case of (a) below and the Board of Selectmen in the case of (b) below, provided that:
(a) It is within the front yard, rear yard, or side yard of the restaurant’s owned, licensed, or leased property, but only if said yard abuts a public right-of-way, public property, or other public uses, provided that:
(i) Such use is clearly related to the restaurant conducted inside the principal building;
(ii) A minimum width of forty-eight inches (48”), or as otherwise provided by law, shall be continuously maintained and unobstructed for the sidewalk or entrance into the principal building, or any other designated sidewalks or pedestrian paths, as shown on the plan provided to the Planning Board;
(iii) Outdoor seating is prohibited in designated or required landscaped areas, parking lots, or drive aisles;
(iv) Such use does not obstruct or otherwise interfere with visibility at intersections;
(v) Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), the outdoor seating must be on the same lot as the establishment; and;
(vi) During all operating hours and thereafter, the area of outdoor seating must be kept clean, including clearing of all tables and removal of all trash.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 203
(b) It is within the public sidewalk abutting the front, rear, or side yard of the restaurant’s owned or leased property so long as there remains no less than forty-eight inches (48”), or as otherwise permitted by law, of unencumbered sidewalk width remaining, or, alternatively, on a public way or other public property abutting the front, rear, or side yard of the restaurant’s owned or leased property, provided that:
(i) No temporary outdoor restaurant seating shall be permitted, unless the Board of Selectman authorizes the placement of temporary outdoor seating within the public right-of-way, public sidewalks and/or on public property;
(ii) Such use is clearly related to the restaurant conducted inside the principal building;
(iii) A minimum width of forty-eight inches (48”), or as otherwise permitted by law, shall be continuously maintained and unobstructed for the sidewalk or entrance into the principal building, or any other designated sidewalks or pedestrian paths, as shown on the plan provided to the Board of Selectmen;
(iv) Outdoor seating is prohibited in designated or required landscaped areas, parking lots, or drive aisles;
(v) Such use does not obstruct or otherwise interfere with visibility at intersections;
(vi) The outdoor seating must be adjacent to the restaurant establishment and in front, to the rear, or to the side of, as the case may be, the front face of the restaurant’s owned or leased property; and;
(vii) During all operating hours and thereafter, the area of outdoor seating must be kept clean, including clearing of all tables and removal of all trash.
Items (a)(i), (a)(iii), (a)(v) and (b)(ii), (b)(iv), and (b)(vi) shall not apply during special town-wide festivals or events during the year as designated by the Board of Selectmen.
Where there is authorization for the placement of seasonal temporary outdoor restaurant seating and where such seating could be interpreted to be an increase in the number of seats serving a restaurant, such seating shall not be counted toward the off-street parking or loading requirements, so long as they remain seasonal and temporary and do not increase capacity by more than thirty percent (30%).
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 204
6.10 Special Permit Criteria for a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensary
In granting a special permit for a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensary, in addition to the general criteria for issuance of a special permit as set forth in Section 7.5.2 of this By-Law, the Planning Board shall find that the following criteria are met:
(a) The site on which the Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensary is located is at least one thousand (1,000) feet distant from a public or private elementary school, middle school, or secondary school, or a municipal park or playground, or if not located at such a distance, but located at least five hundred (500) feet distant from such protected use, it is determined by the Planning Board to be sufficiently buffered from such protected use such that its users will not be adversely impacted by the operation of the Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensary. The distance under this section is measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the protected use identified in this section to the nearest point of the proposed Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensary.
(c) The Medical Marijuana Treatment Center or Off-Site Medical Marijuana Dispensary is not located in a building that contains a licensed daycare center, or any facility providing educational, recreational or social programs or activities attended primarily by children enrolled in such facility.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 205
6.11 Retaining Walls
6.11.1 Purpose and Intent
The Town of Needham adopts this section to accomplish and ensure the following:
(a) To allow for the review of retaining walls of a size that may impact surrounding buildings, land, and uses;
(b) To require the construction of retaining walls in a manner consistent with engineering and construction best practices; and
(c) To lessen the impact of large retaining walls on abutting properties and the public by encouraging the use of landscaping and aesthetically pleasing design elements.
6.11.2 Applicability
The regulations and requirements contained herein shall apply to all retaining walls erected in the Town of Needham.
6.11.3 General Provisions
(a) Determining Retaining Wall Height - The height of a retaining wall shall be the distance from the grade at the base of the face of the wall to the top of the finished wall. Terraced walls shall be measured in the same manner.
(b) Walls Within Yard Setbacks – No retaining wall shall be built within the required yard setback except a retaining wall (i) with a face not greater than four (4) feet in height at any point and a length that does not exceed forty (40) percent of the lot’s perimeter, or (ii) as allowed by a Special Permit issued in accordance with Subsection 6.11.5 of this Section. Notwithstanding the above, retaining walls may graduate in height from four (4) to seven (7) feet in height when providing access to a garage or egress entry doors at the basement level, measured from the basement or garage floor to the top of the wall. The wall is limited to seven (7) feet in height for not more than 25% of the length of the wall.
(c) Walls Outside Yard Setbacks. No retaining wall with a face greater than twelve (12) feet in height shall be built except as allowed by Special Permit issued in accordance with Subsection 6.11.5 of this Section.
(d) Fall Protection - All retaining walls over four (4) feet in height shall be required to provide fall protection if so determined by the Building Inspector. Fall protection systems may include, but shall not be limited to, permanent landscaping or fencing as approved by the Building Inspector.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018 206
(e) Terracing - Terracing of retaining walls is allowed and encouraged. In a terraced retaining wall system, if two (2) retaining walls are separated by a distance at least one times (1x) the height of the higher of the two (2) walls, the walls shall be considered as separate walls; if two (2) retaining walls are separated by a distance less than one times (1x) the height of the higher of the two (2) walls, the walls shall be considered as a single wall.
(f) Nonconforming Retaining Walls - Retaining walls legally constructed prior to the adoption of these regulations shall be allowed to remain in their existing state; however, significant changes or alterations to such walls shall be made in conformity with these regulations. The repair and routine maintenance, as determined by the Building Inspector, of nonconforming retaining walls shall be allowed without requiring conformity with these regulations.
6.11.4 Design Review and Permitting
(a) Design Review - Design Review shall be required for all retaining walls requiring a special permit. The Design Review Board shall review retaining walls in accordance with Section 7.7, Design Review, and shall consider such requests under those criteria contained in Subsection 7.7.4, Design Criteria, of Section 7.7. The Design Review Board shall submit an advisory recommendation to the applicant and the permit granting authority prior to the issuance of a special permit.
(b) Permitting - A building permit shall be required, consistent with the requirements of the Town of Needham Building Department, for all retaining walls that retain four (4) or more feet of unbalanced fill.
6.11.5 Special Permit Provisions
The Board of Appeals shall consider requests for special permits in accordance with this Section and Section 7.5 of the Zoning Bylaw and a Special Permit for a retaining wall may be issued provided the Board of Appeals finds:
(a) That the retaining wall will not cause an increase of water flow off the property;
(b) That the requested retaining wall will not adversely impact adjacent property or the public;
(c) That the report of the Design Review Board has been received and considered.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
207
7. ADMINISTRATION
7.1 Enforcement
This By-Law shall be enforced by the Board of Selectmen or by a Building Inspector appointed by the Board. Any request for enforcement of this By-Law shall be in writing.
7.2 Building or Use Permit
7.2.1
No building or structure shall be constructed, relocated, added to or demolished without a permit having been issued by the Building Inspector. No such permit shall be issued until such construction, alteration or use, as proposed, shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this By-Law or with a decision rendered by the Board of Appeals. Any application for such a permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan in triplicate, drawn to a scale of one (1) inch = forty (40) feet, showing the actual shape, area and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact location and size of all buildings or structures already on the lot, the location of new buildings or structures to be constructed, together with the distance from said areas to the nearest point of the proposed structure, the existing and intended use of each building or structure and all streets and ways on, and adjacent to, the lot.
7.2.2
Simultaneous Issuance of a Demolition Permit and a Building Permit - The building inspector is authorized to issue a building permit either simultaneously with or prior to a permit to demolish a structure on the same lot of land prior to the demolition of the existing structure. No construction of the new structure shall start, including excavation, until the demolition of the existing structure and proper disposal of the resulting debris has been completed and the building inspector has closed out the demolition permit.
7.2.3
Plot plans shall show existing and approved abutting street grades, driveway locations and grades for any new construction, the proposed elevation of the top of the foundation and of existing and proposed buildings or structures and existing sewers, gas, water and other public utilities in the abutting street. Plot plans shall also show such other information as may be necessary to provide for the verification of compliance with the applicable provisions and the enforcement of this By-Law, including, but not limited to, off-street parking, screening and fencing. The building inspector may waive any of the above requirements when they are not applicable. Plot plans shall be certified by a Massachusetts registered land surveyor. A record of all applications, plans and permits shall be kept on file by the Building Inspector.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
208
7.2.4
Construction or operations under a building or special permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this By-Law unless the use or construction authorized by this permit is commenced within a period of six (6) months after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
7.2.5
Permit applications for all new structures and outdoor uses, exterior additions, exterior alterations and exterior changes in all areas zoned as a Business District, Industrial District, Industrial-1 District, or Institutional District (excluding single and two-family uses), which require a building permit under the Massachusetts State Building Code – but which are not related to construction projects previously reviewed by the Design Review Board as “Major” or “Minor Projects” under Section 7.4 Site Plan Review – shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board. (See Section 7.7 Design Review of this By-Law.) Prior to application to the Building Inspector for such permits, an application to the Design Review Board for design review shall be made in accordance with the procedures described in Subsection 7.7.3. No application for such a building or use permit shall be made by the applicant nor accepted by the Building Inspector, and no such permit shall be issued, until an advisory report has been received from the Design Review Board.
7.3 Occupancy Permit
7.3.1
No premises and no building erected, altered or in any way changed as to construction or use, under a permit or otherwise, shall be occupied or used without an occupancy permit signed by the Building Inspector. Such permit shall not be issued until the premises, building or structure, and its uses and accessory uses comply in all respects with this By-Law. A record of all applications and occupancy permits shall be kept on file by the Building Inspector.
7.3.2
An occupancy permit shall be conditional on the maintenance of full compliance with the provisions of this By-Law in effect at the time of issuance or with restrictions imposed in a decision of the Board of Appeals or Planning Board and shall lapse if such compliance fails.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
209
7.4 Site Plan Review
7.4.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to provide a comprehensive review procedure for construction projects, herein defined, to insure compliance with the goals and objectives of the Master Plan, and the provisions of the Zoning By-Law, to minimize adverse impacts of such development, and to promote development which is harmonious with surrounding areas.
7.4.2 Definitions
For the purposes of this Section the following definition of terms should apply to any construction project excluding single and two family homes.
MAJOR PROJECT – Any construction project which involves: the construction of 10,000 or more square feet gross floor area; or an increase in gross floor area by 5,000 or more square feet; or any project which results in the creation of 25 or more new off-street parking spaces.
In a Chestnut Street Business District, a MAJOR PROJECT is any construction project which involves: the new construction or reconstruction of any amount of gross floor area; or an increase in gross floor area of 1,000 or more square feet; or any project which results in the creation of 10 or more new off-street parking spaces; or any project which results in any new curb- or driveway-cut.
In a Business, Avery Square Business, or Hillside Avenue Business District, a MAJOR PROJECT is any construction project which involves a new building; or an addition which increases gross floor area of an existing building by 1,000 or more square feet; or any project which results in the creation of 10 or more new off-street parking spaces; or any project which results in any new curb- or driveway-cut.
In the Center Business District, a MAJOR PROJECT is any construction project which creates or adds gross floor area; or any project which involves a change in part or all of an existing building or lot from one use category to another as defined under Subsection 3.2.2 of this By-Law and which results in an increase in the number of required parking spaces by 10 or more new off-street parking spaces or which results in an increase in the required number of loading spaces; or any project which results in the construction of any additional off-street parking spaces; or any project which results in any new curb- or driveway-cut. Notwithstanding the aforementioned, if a special permit is otherwise required under Subsection 1.4 or Subsection 3.2.2 of this By-Law, the Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority as to the use.
In the Neighborhood Business District, a MAJOR PROJECT, is any construction project which creates or adds gross floor area; or any project which involves a change in part or all of an existing building or lot from one use category to another as defined under Subsection 3.2.3 of this By-Law and which results in an increase in the number of required parking spaces by 4 or more
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
210
new off-street parking spaces or which results in an increase in the required number of loading spaces; or any project which results in the construction of any additional off-street parking space; or any project which results in any new curb- or driveway-cut.
In the Needham Center Overlay District, Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District, or Garden Street Overlay District, a MAJOR PROJECT shall be as defined above in the Center Business District.
In the Elder Services Zoning District a MAJOR PROJECT shall be defined as any construction project which involves the construction of 10,000 or more square feet gross floor area; or increase in gross floor area by 5,000 or more square feet; or any project which results in the creation of 25 or more off-street parking spaces; or any project that results in any new curb or driveway cut.
MINOR PROJECT – Any construction project which involves: the construction of more than 5,000 but less than 10,000 square feet gross floor area; or an increase in gross floor area such that the total gross floor area, after the increase, is 5,000 or more square feet – and the project cannot be defined as a Major Project.
In a Chestnut Street Business District, a MINOR PROJECT is any construction project which involves an increase in gross floor area of less than 1,000 square feet – and the project cannot be defined as a Major Project.
In a Business, Avery Square Business, or Hillside Avenue Business District, a MINOR PROJECT is any project which results in the construction of a new parking lot or expansion of an existing lot and the addition of from 1 to 9 new off-street parking spaces – and the project cannot be defined as a Major Project.
In the Center Business District, a MINOR PROJECT is any construction project which involves a change in the exterior façade of a building and the project is not a Major Project as defined by this By-Law. Notwithstanding any provision of this Section 7.4 requiring site plan approval by the Planning Board, any construction project which only involves a change in the exterior façade of a building shall be subject to review by and approval of the Design Review Board. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Design Review Board may seek de novo review of the façade change from the Planning Board, which may approve or disapprove the façade change, by filing an application with the Planning Board within ten (10) days of the Design Review Board’s filing of its decision with the Building Inspector. At least seven days prior to the Planning Board’s meeting scheduled to review the application (see next sentence), if the aggrieved party is the original applicant, said original applicant shall post a Planning Board approved form of notice of the meeting in a publicly visible location upon the subject building and place a copy of said approved form of notice in a local paper. Within twenty (20) days of receipt of the application, the Planning Board shall hold a meeting, to which the original applicant shall be invited, for the purpose of conducting a review of the proposed façade changes. Within fifteen (15) days of the meeting, the Planning Board shall issue its decision and deliver copies of same to the applicant, the Design Review Board and the Building Inspector.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
211
In the Medical Overlay District, a MAJOR PROJECT is any construction project that involves the creation of twenty (20) or more new off-street parking spaces, any project that results in any new curb or driveway cut, or an increase in gross floor area of 5,000 or more square feet. A MINOR PROJECT is any construction project that involves an increase in gross floor area of more than 2,500 square feet but less than 5,000 square feet, and the project cannot be defined as a Major Project.
In the Needham Center Overlay District, Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District, or Garden Street Overlay District, a MINOR PROJECT shall be as defined above in the Center Business District.
In the Elder Services District a MINOR PROJECT shall be defined as any construction project which involves the construction of more than 5,000 but less than 10,000 square feet gross floor area; or an increase in gross floor area such that the total gross floor area after the increase is 5,000 or more square feet - and the project cannot be defined as a Major Project.
In the New England Business Center, Highland Commercial-128, and Mixed Use-128 Districts a MAJOR PROJECT is any construction project that involves: the construction of 10,000 or more square feet gross floor area, an increase in gross floor area of 5,000 or more square feet, or any project that results in the creation of 25 or more new off-street parking spaces. A MINOR PROJECT is any construction project that involves the construction of more than 2,500 but less than 10,000 square feet gross floor area, an increase in gross floor area such that the total gross floor area after the increase is 5,000 or more square feet, and the project cannot be defined as a Major Project. Further, projects that require a building permit under the Massachusetts State Building Code, but which are not related to construction projects previously reviewed by the Design Review Board as “Major” or “Minor Projects” under Section 7.4 site plan review, shall be reviewed by the Design Review Board.
7.4.3 Requirements
A Site Plan Review shall be performed by the Planning Board for each major and minor project prior to the filing of an application for a building permit.
MINOR PROJECT WHICH REQUIRES A SPECIAL PERMIT FROM THE BOARD OF APPEALS UNDER SECTION 3.2 – In the case of a minor project which requires a special permit from the Board of Appeals, as identified in Section 3.2. Schedule of Use Regulations, the Planning Board shall perform a Site Plan Review and submit its recommendations to the Board of Appeals within thirty-five (35) days of the date of filing with the Planning Board; otherwise failure to make such recommendations shall be deemed a lack of opposition thereto. In the event the public hearing by the Board of Appeals is held prior to the expiration of the thirty-five (35) day period, the Board of Appeals shall continue the hearing to permit the submission of recommendations within that period. The decision of the Board of Appeals shall contain
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
212
explanatory reasons for its action if it is contrary to the recommendations of the Planning Board. The Planning Board may schedule a meeting(s) with the applicant during the review period.
MINOR PROJECTS – In the case of a minor project not requiring a special permit from the Board of Appeals and except as provided otherwise in Section 7.4.2 for a minor project that only involves a change in the exterior façade of a building in the Center Business District, the Planning Board shall conduct the Site Plan Review and issue a report to the applicant with a copy of said report to the Building Inspector within thirty-five (35) days from the date of filing of the Site Plan. Failure of the Board to issue said report within the 35 days shall be construed as satisfying this section.
MAJOR PROJECTS – No building, use or occupancy permit for any improvement to real property which constitutes a Major Project under this By-Law shall be issued, except in accordance with the terms of a special permit for such project, after site plan review as further set forth herein. A special permit shall be required for every Major Project, regardless of whether the contemplated use thereof is designated as permissible, as of right or by special permit, under the table of uses set forth in Section 3.2 of this By-Law. The special permit granting authority for all permits the issuance of which is necessary for the construction or use of a Major Project shall be the Planning Board, which, for such purposes, shall have all the powers conferred upon such special permit granting authorities by General Laws Chapter 40A, and shall conduct its business in accordance with the notice, hearing and decisional requirements there set forth, and in accordance with the requirements of this By-Law.
Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Building Department, the Building Inspector or his designee shall transmit an approval of the completed project as conforming to the approved site plan special permit to the Planning Board.
7.4.4 Procedure
An application for Site Plan Review and ten (10) copies shall be submitted to the Planning Board concurrent with the submission of a copy to the Town Clerk. At the same time application materials shall be submitted to the Design Review Board, along with an application for design review, in accordance with the procedures described in Subsection 7.7.3 of Section 7.7. Design Review.
The applicant shall include in the application an itemized list of sections of the By-Law under which relief by special permit is or may be required for the construction or use of the project. The applicant shall certify either: (i) that the project can be constructed and/or the proposed use thereof commenced, without need for the issuance of any variance from any provision of this By-Law by the Zoning Board of Appeals, or (ii) that any and all variances necessary for the construction and/or use of the proposed project have been secured, and the period established by law for appeal from the granting thereof has expired without notice of any such appeal having been filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
213
Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Board shall transmit a set of application materials to the Department of Public Works, Town Engineer, Fire Department, Design Review Board and to any other Town agency as deemed appropriate. Within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of said application materials for Major Projects, each of the Town agencies named above shall review and recommend in writing to the Planning Board regarding the proposed Site Plan(s).
In addition to a preliminary design review report from the Design Review Board, as described in Section 7.7, the Design Review Board shall also submit a final design review report within seventy-five (75) days of the date of its having received an application for design review related to a Major Project.
In the case of Minor Projects, each of the Town agencies named above except the Design Review Board shall review and recommend in writing to the Planning Board within fifteen (15) days of receipt of said application materials regarding the proposed Site Plan. The advisory report of the Design Review Board shall be transmitted directly to the applicant and Building Inspector within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the application for Site Plan Review.
The application for Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by a site plan with supporting documentation which shall show, among other data, the following:
(a) locus plan;
(b) location of structures within 100 feet of property line;
(c) existing and proposed building showing setback from property lines;
(d) building elevation, to include penthouses, parapet walls and roof structures; floor plans of each floor; cross and longitudinal views of the proposed structure(s) in relation to proposed site layout, together with an elevation line to show the relationship to the center of the street;
(e) existing and proposed contour elevations in one foot increments;
(f) parking areas, including type of space, dimensions of typical spaces, and width of maneuvering aisles and landscaped setbacks;
(g) driveways and access to site, including width of driveways and driveways openings;
(h) facilities for vehicular and pedestrian movement;
(i) drainage;
(j) utilities;
(k) landscaping including trees to be retained and removed;
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
214
(l) lighting;
(m) loading and unloading facilities;
(n) provisions for refuse removal;
(o) projected traffic volume in relations to existing and reasonably anticipated conditions; and
(p) other information as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of the Zoning By-Law.
Upon request the Planning Board may, at its discretion, waive the submission by the applicant of any of the required information.
7.4.6 Review Criteria
In conducting the Site Plan Review, the Planning Board shall consider the following matters:
(a) Protection of adjoining premises against seriously detrimental uses by provision for surface water drainage, sound and sight buffers and preservation of views, light, and air;
(b) Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and on adjacent streets, the location of driveway openings in relation to traffic or to adjacent streets and, when necessary, compliance with other regulations for the handicapped, minors and the elderly;
(c) Adequacy of the arrangement of parking and loading spaces in relation to the proposed uses of the premises;
(d) Adequacy of the methods of disposal of refuse and other wastes resulting from the uses permitted on the site;
(e) Relationship of structures and open spaces to the natural landscape, existing buildings and other community assets in the area and compliance with other requirements of this By-Law; and
(f) Mitigation of adverse impacts on the Town’s resources including the effect on the Town’s water supply and distribution system, sewer collection and treatment, fire protection, and streets; and may require when acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority or recommend in the case of minor projects, when the Board of Appeals is
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
215
acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority, such appropriate conditions, limitations, and safeguards necessary to assure the project meets the criteria of a through f.
7.5 Board of Appeals
The Board of Appeals consists of three (3) regular members and two (2) associate members as authorized and established by General Laws, Chapter 40A, the Special Home Rule Charter Act and Article VIII of the General By-Laws is the Board of Appeals intended and referred to in this By-Law. Subject to and consistent with all the authority, power and duties imposed upon the Board of Appeals by said General Laws, Special Home Rule Charter Act and the General By-Laws, said Board of Appeals shall exercise and perform the authority, powers and duties set forth therein, elsewhere in this By-Law and the following:
7.5.1 Appeals
To hear and decide an appeal taken by any person aggrieved by reason of his (her) inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from the Building Inspector under the provisions of General Laws, Chapter 40A and/or this By-Law, by the Metropolitan Area Planning Council or by any person including an officer or board of the Town of Needham or of any abutting city or town aggrieved by an order or decision of the Building Inspector in violation of any provision of the General Laws, Chapter 40A or this By-Law.
7.5.2 Special Permits
To hear and decide an application for a special permit for a use, building, structure, off-street parking or loading, modification of dimensional standards, screening or landscaping, or other activity where it would not otherwise be permitted but only in those cases where this By-Law specifically refers to a change from the provisions of this By-Law by the granting of a special permit and only in those cases where the Board of Appeals makes the finding and determination set forth in subparagraph 7.5.2.1. An applicant is not entitled to a special permit and the Board of Appeals, in its discretion, may decline to grant a special permit if it is unable to make a positive finding and determination as required in subparagraph 7.5.2.1.
A special permit shall lapse within a specified period of time, not more than two years, and including any time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 17, and if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause or in the case of a permit for construction has not begun within the period except for good cause.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
216
7.5.2.1 Finding and Determination
Prior to granting a special permit, the Board of Appeals shall make a finding and determination that the proposed use, building, structure, off-street parking or loading, modification of dimensional standards, screening or landscaping, or other activity, which is the subject of the application for the special permit:
(a) complies with such criteria or standards as may be set forth in the section of this By-Law which refers to the granting of the requested special permit;
(b) is consistent with: 1) the general purposes of this By-Law as set forth in subparagraph 1.1, and 2) the more specific objectives and purposes applicable to the requested special permit which may be set forth elsewhere in this By-Law, such as, but not limited to, those at the beginning of the various sections;
(c) is designed in a manner that is compatible with the existing natural features of the site and is compatible with the characteristics of the surrounding area.
Where the Board of Appeals determines that one or more of the following objectives are applicable to the particular application for a special permit, the Board of Appeals shall make a finding and determination that the objective will be met:
(d) the circulation patterns for motor vehicles and pedestrians which would result from the use or structure which is the subject of the special permit will not result in conditions that unnecessarily add to traffic congestion or the potential for traffic accidents on the site or in the surrounding area; and
(e) the proposed use, structure or activity will not constitute a demonstrable adverse impact on the surrounding area resulting from:
1) excessive noise, level of illumination, glare, dust, smoke, or vibration which are higher than levels now experienced from uses permitted in the surrounding area,
2) emission or discharge of noxious or hazardous materials or substances, or
3) pollution of water ways or ground water.
7.5.2.2 Conditions for Approval of a Special Permit
In addition to the conditions, standards and criteria as may be set forth in the section of this By-Law that refers to the granting of the special permit, the Board of Appeals may impose additional conditions and limitations, as it deems necessary to insure that the finding and determination that it must make under subparagraph 7.5.2.1 is complied with, including but not limited to:
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
217
(a) screening or landscaping of structures or of principal or accessory uses from view from adjoining lots or from a street, by planting, walls, fences or other devices; planting of larger planting strips, with more or larger plant materials or higher walls or fences than that required in Sections 4.2.14 and 4.4.8.5;
(b) modification of the exterior features or appearance of a building or structure to ensure compatibility with surrounding buildings and uses;
(c) limitations on the size, number of occupants or employees, method or hours of operation, extent of facilities or other operating characteristics of a use;
(d) regulation of the number, design and location of access drives or other traffic features of the proposed use;
(e) provision of a greater number of parking spaces or loading bays with estimates based on the ITE Parking Generation Manual, 2nd Edition, or an alternative technical source determined by the Board of Appeals to be equally or more applicable, but only in such cases that the Board of Appeals makes a finding that the proposed use generates parking demand in excess of that required by the By-Law;
(f) limitations on construction activities, such as but not limited to, the hours during which construction activity may take place, the movement of trucks or heavy equipment on or off the site, measures to control dirt, dust, erosion and to protect existing vegetation on the site;
(g) requirements for independent monitoring, at the expense of the applicant, and reporting to the Building Inspector, if necessary to insure continuing compliance with the conditions of a special permit or of this By-Law;
(h) limitations on the period of time the special permit shall be in effect; and
(i) such other limitation as may be reasonably related to reducing any adverse impact on, or increasing the compatibility of the proposed use, structure or activity with, the surrounding area.
7.5.2.3 Security for Special Permits
The Board of Appeals, as a condition of granting a special permit may require that the performance of the conditions and observance of the safeguards of such special permit be secured by one, or in part by one and in part by the other, of the methods described in the following clauses (a) and (b). The Board of Appeals shall administer this securing of performance.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
218
(a) Bond or Deposit: By a proper bond or a deposit of money or negotiable securities or letter of credit, sufficient in the opinion of the Board of Appeals to secure performance of the conditions and observance of the safeguards of such special permit.
(b) Covenant: By a covenant running with the land, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, whereby the conditions and safeguards included in such special permit shall be performed before any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to such covenant of the entire parcel of land, the development of which is governed by the special permit.
7.5.2.4 Reduction of Security
Until completion of the development, the penal sum of any deposit or security held under clause 7.5.2.3 (a) above may from time to time be reduced by the Board of Appeals by an amount not to exceed 85% of the value of work originally estimated.
7.5.2.5 Release of Security
Upon the completion of the development or upon performance of the conditions and safeguards imposed by such special permit, security for the performance of which was given, the applicant shall send by registered mail to the Board of Appeals an affidavit that the conditions and safeguards in connection with which such security has been given have been complied with. If the Board of Appeals determines that the conditions and safeguards of the special permit have been complied with, it shall release the interest of the Town in such security, return or release the security to the person who furnished the same, or release the covenant by appropriate instrument, duly acknowledged. If the Board of Appeals determines that the conditions or safeguards included in the special permit have not been complied with, it shall specify the conditions or safeguards with which the applicant has not complied in a notice sent by registered or certified mail, to the applicant.
7.5.2.6 Board of Appeals Failure to Act
If the Board of Appeals fails to send such a notice within sixty days after it receives the applicant affidavit, all obligations under the security shall cease and terminate, any deposit shall be returned and any such covenant become void.
7.5.2.7 Applicant Failure to Complete Work
Upon failure of the applicant to complete such work to the satisfaction of the Board of Appeals in accordance with all applicable plans, regulations and specifications, the Town shall be
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
219
entitled to enforce such bond or to realize upon such securities to the extent necessary to complete all such work without delay.
7.5.3 Variances
To hear and decide a petition with respect to particular land or structures for a variance from the terms of this By-Law, including a variance authorizing a use or activity not otherwise permitted in a particular zoning district, where the Board specifically finds that owing to circumstances relating to soil conditions, shape or topography of such land or structures and especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the By-Law would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or appellant, and that desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this By-Law. The Board of Appeals may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations both in time and use, including the continued existence of any particular structures but excluding any condition, safeguard or limitations based upon the continued ownership of the land or structure to which the variance pertains by the applicant, petitioner or any owner. If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one year of the date of the authorization, they shall lapse and may be re-established only after a new notice and hearing.
In the case of every appeal made to the Board of Appeals, every petition for a variance, and every application for a special permit to said Board under the provisions of this By-Law, the Board shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than fourteen days before the day of the hearing and by posting said notice in the Town Hall for a period of not less than fourteen days before the day of the hearing. Notice shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to parties in interest including the petitioner, abutters, owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, owners of land within three hundred (300) feet of the property line including owners of land in another municipality all as they appear on the most recent applicable tax lists, the Planning Board, and the Planning Board of every abutting municipality. The assessors shall certify to the Board the names and addresses of the parties in interest.
In the case of an appeal from a decision of the Building Inspector and of a variance, a petition shall be filed with the Town Clerk, who shall forthwith transmit it to the Board of Appeals. The Board shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days of receipt of the petition from the Town Clerk and shall render a decision within one hundred (100) days from the date of filing, unless said time limits for holding the public hearing or rendering a decision have been extended by written mutual agreement between the petitioner and the board, such agreement(s) having been filed with the Town Clerk. Failure by the Board to take final action upon a petition within the one-hundred day period, or any mutually extended time period, shall be deemed to be a grant of the appeal or the variance applied for. (See M.G.L., Ch. 40A, S.15 as amended for further procedural requirements.)
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
220
In case of a special permit, an application shall be filed with the Town Clerk who shall forthwith transmit it to the Board of Appeals. The Board shall hold a public hearing within sixty-five (65) days of the filing date and shall render a decision within ninety (90) days from the date of the public hearing, unless said time limits for holding the public hearing or rendering the decision have been extended by written mutual agreement between the petitioner and the Board, such agreement(s) having been filed with the Town Clerk. Failure to take final action upon an application within the said ninety-day period shall be deemed to be a grant of the permit applied for. (See M.G.L., Ch. 40A, S. 9 as amended for further procedural requirements.)
7.6 Planning Board
7.6.1 Special Permit Granting Authority
The Planning Board shall act as a Special Permit Granting Authority only where so designated in Sections 3.4, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.14, 4.2.10, 4.2.11, 4.2.12, 4.4.5, 4.4.9, 4.4.10, 5.1.1.6, 6.6, 6.8 and 7.4 of this By-Law. In all other cases, the Board of Appeals shall act as the Special Permit Granting Authority. Procedures and decision criteria for the Planning Board shall be the same as specified in Section 7.5.2 and Section 7.5.3 (second and fourth paragraphs) for special permits acted on by the Board of Appeals, except where alternative or supplemental criteria are specified, such as at Sections 3.4 and 6.6.
7.6.2 Recommendations to the Board of Appeals
Any application filed with the Board of Appeals under Section 7.5 hereof shall be referred upon acceptance of the application by the Board of Appeals to the Planning Board for a report and recommendation relative thereto as provided by General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 81-I, and Chapter 40A, Section 11. The Planning Board shall make its report to the Board of Appeals by the date of the public hearing. Failure to make recommendations within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of the application by the Planning Board shall be deemed lack of opposition thereto.
7.7 Design Review
7.7.1 Purpose
It is the intent of this Section to provide for a detailed design review of structures and that aspect of design related to uses having substantial impact on the Town, upon its traffic, infrastructure and property values, thereby affecting the public health, safety and general welfare; to prevent blight; to enhance the natural and aesthetic qualities of the Town; to conserve the value of land and buildings; and to protect and preserve the historic and cultural heritage of the Town.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
221
7.7.2 Design Review Board
7.7.2.1 Composition
For the purposes of this Section 7.7, there shall be a Design Review Board appointed by the Planning Board and Board of Selectmen and consisting of five regular members plus two alternate members. Three regular members of the Design Review Board shall be appointed by the Planning Board and two regular members plus the two alternate members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Each of the persons appointed shall be a resident of the Town of Needham. In part, the persons appointed as regular members shall have the following backgrounds and skills:
(a) Two members qualified by training or education and experience in the art or design professions – one to be appointed by the Planning Board and one by the Board of Selectmen;
(b) One member qualified by training or education and experience in the fine arts or landscape design to be appointed by the Planning Board;
(c) One member doing retail business in the Town to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
Upon the initial formation of the Board, the Planning Board and Board of Selectmen shall appoint two alternates and one regular member to 1-year terms, two regular members to 2-year terms, and two regular members to 3-year terms; their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years. Three members shall constitute a quorum for meetings, and all actions of the Design Review Board shall require an affirmative vote of three or more members. In the event a regular member is unable or refuses to sit, the Chairman of the Design Review Board shall designate an alternate to sit in place of that absent member.
7.7.2.2 Authority and Specific Powers
The Design Review Board shall review requests for site plan review and approval submitted in accordance with Section 7.4 Site Plan Review and requests for special permits in accordance with Section 4.2.11 Planned Residential Development, Section 4.2.10 Flexible Development and Section 6.11 Retaining Walls and, for a minor project that only involves a change in the exterior façade of a building in the Center Business District, shall review and may approve such façade change.
The Design Review Board shall review permit applications for all new structures and outdoor uses, exterior additions, exterior alterations and exterior changes in all areas zoned as a Business District, Chestnut Street Business District, Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District, Garden Street Overlay District, Center Business District, Needham Center Overlay District, Avery Square Business District, Hillside Avenue Business District, Neighborhood Business District, New England
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
222
Business Center District, Highland Commercial-128 District, Mixed Use-128 District, Industrial District, Elder Services Zoning District, Industrial-1 District, or Institutional District (excluding single and two-family uses), which require a building permit under the Massachusetts State Building Code – but which are not related to projects previously reviewed as “Major” or “Minor Projects” under Site Plan Review. The Design Review Board shall also review requests for all sign permits, as required under Article 5 of the Needham General By-Laws.
It shall evaluate such requests based on Subsection 7.7.4 Design Criteria below. Its findings and recommendations, along with any suggested restrictions and conditions, shall be transmitted to the applicant and Planning Board, acting as a special permit granting authority for “Major Projects” under Site Plan Review, Planned Residential Developments and Flexible Developments and to the applicant and Board of Appeals, acting as a special permit granting authority, under Section 6.11 Retaining Walls. Such advisory reports of the Design Review Board shall be transmitted to the Building Inspector and applicant in all other instances as described in the two paragraphs above for “Minor Projects” under Site Plan Review, building permits in all non-residential districts and sign permits. For a minor project that only involves a change in the exterior of a building in the Center Business District, the Design Review Board shall be the review and approval entity for such façade changes.
7.7.3 Procedure
An application for Design Review shall be submitted to the Design Review Board simultaneously with any application submitted to the Planning Board for Site Plan Review, Planned Residential Development or Flexible Development, or prior to any application for a building permit or any construction activity as described in the second paragraph of Subsection 7.7.2.2 (See Section 7.2 of the By-Law for application procedure for such building permits and Article 5 of the General By-Laws for application procedure for all sign permits.)
Within twenty (20) days of receipt of a Design Review application, the Design Review Board shall hold a meeting, to which the applicant shall be invited, for the purpose of conducting a review of the proposed project or activity. Within fifteen (15) days of the meeting, a preliminary design review report shall be sent both to the applicant and to the Planning Board, when a special permit is required under Sections 7.4, 4.2.11 and 4.2.10. However, if the proposed project or activity involves only a building permit or sign permit from the Building Inspector, or is a “Minor Project” under Site Plan Review (all as described in Subsection 7.7.2.2), no preliminary report is required and the written advisory report of the Design Review Board to the applicant and the Building Inspector shall be a final report.
In connection with the Design Review Board’s authority to review and approve exterior façade changes in the Center Business District pursuant to Section 7.4.2, an application shall be submitted to the Design Review Board. At least seven days prior to the Design Review Board meeting scheduled to review the application (see next sentence), the applicant shall post a Planning Board approved form of notice of the meeting in a publicly visible location upon the subject building and place a copy of said approved form of notice in a local paper. Within twenty (20) days
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
223
of receipt of the application, the Design Review Board shall hold a meeting, to which the applicant shall be invited, for the purpose of conducting a review of the proposed exterior façade changes. Within fifteen (15) days of the meeting, the Design Review Board shall issue its decision and deliver copies of same to the applicant, the Planning Board and the Building Inspector.
In the case of a Special Permit for Site Plan Review, Planned Residential Development or Flexible Development, a preliminary design review report shall be submitted to the Planning Board, with a copy to the applicant, within thirty-five (35) days of the date of receipt of the application. A final advisory report shall be issued to the applicant and to the Planning Board within seventy-five (75) days of the date of receipt of the application for Design Review.
In addition to the submission materials listed in Sections 4.2.11 Planned Residential, 7.4 Site Plan Review or 7.2 Building or Use Permit, respectively, an application for Design Review shall contain the requisite number of materials listed in the “Rules and Regulations” of the Design Review Board.
7.7.4 Design Criteria
The Design Review Board shall review requests for site plan reviews and special permits, as well as for building permits for certain construction activities, all as described in Subsection 7.7.2.2, based on the following standards:
(1) Preservation and enhancement of landscaping – The landscaping shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree and soil removal, and any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of neighboring developed areas.
(2) Relation of buildings to environment – Proposed development shall be related harmoniously to the terrain and to the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in the vicinity that have functional or visual relationship to the proposed buildings. Proposed buildings shall be related to their surroundings with respect to:
(a) height
(b) street façade
(c) spatial relationships of solids and voids
(d) spacing of buildings or signs
(e) materials, textures and colors
(f) roof slopes
(g) scale
(3) Open Space – All open space (landscaped and usable) shall be designed to add to the visual amenities of the area by maximizing its visibility for persons passing the site or overlooking it from nearby area properties.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
224
(4) Signs and advertising devices – The size, location, design, color, texture, lighting and materials of signs and advertising devices shall be in harmony with significant architectural features of existing and proposed buildings and structures and with surrounding properties.
(5) Heritage – Protection and enhancement of historic, traditional or significant uses, structures, or architectural elements shall be considered insofar as practicable.
In addition, to paragraph (4) above, the Design Review Board shall review requests for sign permits according to the design guidelines listed in Section 3.5 of Article 5 of the General By-Laws.
For requests for site plan reviews and special permits in the Needham Center Overlay District, the Lower Chestnut Street Overlay District and the Garden Street Overlay District, the Design Review Board shall consider, in addition to paragraphs (1) through (5) above, the design guidelines set forth in Sections 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10 of this By-Law.
7.8 Repetitive Petitions
7.8.1
No proposed change in this By-Law which has been unfavorably acted upon by the Town Meeting shall be considered on its merits by the Town Meeting within two (2) years after the date of such unfavorable action unless adoption of the proposed change is recommended in the final report of the Planning Board.
7.8.2
No appeal, application or petition which has been unfavorably and finally acted upon by the Board of Appeals shall be acted favorably upon within two years after the date of final unfavorable action unless (1) all but one of the members of the Planning Board consent to a repetition after notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of the proceedings to consider consent and (2) the Board of Appeals finds specific and material changes in the conditions upon which the previous unfavorable action was based, describes such changes in its records and similarly consents.
7.9 Penalties
Any person, firm or corporation violating any section or provision of this By-Law shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each subsequent offense. Each day, or part thereof, that any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
225
7.10 Amendment
This By-Law may be amended from time to time at an Annual or Special Town Meeting. An amendment may be initiated by the submission to the Board of Selectmen of a proposed change by the Board of Selectmen, the Board of Appeals, an individual owning land in the Town to be affected by the amendment, registered voters of the Town pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 39, Section 10, the Planning Board and the Metropolitan Area Planning Council. Within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of the proposed change, the Board of Selectmen shall submit it to the Planning Board. A public hearing shall be held within sixty-five (65) days after the proposed change is submitted to the Board.
7.11 Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this By-Law shall not invalidate any other section or provisions thereof.
7.12 Effective Date
The effective date of an amendment to this By-Law shall be the date on which such amendment was adopted by a favorable two-thirds vote of Town Meeting, subject to its approval by the Attorney General and its publication in a town bulletin or pamphlet and posting or publication in a newspaper pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 32.
8. Temporary Moratorium on the Sale and Distribution of Recreational Marijuana
8.1 Purpose
By vote at the State election on November 8, 2016, the voters of the Commonwealth approved Chapter 334 of the Acts of 2016, which was amended by Chapter 351 of the Acts of 2016, regulating the cultivation, distribution, possession and use of marijuana for recreational purposes. The law as amended provides that it is effective on December 15, 2016 and the Cannabis Control Commission is required to issue regulations regarding implementation by March 15, 2018.
Currently under the Zoning By-Law, Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers are not a permitted use in the Town and any regulations promulgated by the State Cannabis Control Commission are expected to provide guidance to the Town in regulating Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers. Further, Chapter 334 establishes two important provisions that relate to ballot action that the Town may wish to take prior to the adoption of Zoning By-Law amendments relating to Recreational Marijuana Establishments. First, under Section 3 of General Laws Chapter 94G inserted by Section 5 of Chapter 334 the Town may,
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
226
by ballot, determine whether it will adopt a By-Law that will limit the number of marijuana establishments in the Town or govern the time, place and manner of marijuana establishment operations in such a way as to require a vote of the voters of the Town and second, by ballot that cannot occur prior to November 6, 2018, the next biennial state election, on whether to allow on-site consumption of marijuana products.
The regulation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers raise novel and complex legal, planning, and public safety issues and the Town needs time to study and consider the regulation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers and address such novel and complex issues, as well as to address the potential impact of the State regulations on local zoning and to undertake a planning process to consider amending the Zoning By-Law regarding regulation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers and other uses related to the regulation of recreational marijuana. The Town intends to adopt a temporary moratorium on the use of land and structures in the Town for Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers so as to allow the Town sufficient time to engage in a planning process to address the effects of such structures and uses in the Town and to adopt provisions of the Zoning By-Law in a manner consistent with sound land use planning goals and objectives.
8.2 Definitions
“Manufacture”, to compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.
“Marijuana accessories”, equipment, products, devices or materials of any kind that are intended or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana into the human body.
“Marijuana cultivator”, an entity licensed to cultivate, process and package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana establishments and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers.
“Marijuana establishment”, a marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business, not including any registered or medical marijuana dispensary as authorized by Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 – An Act for the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana or as regulated by Massachusetts Department of Public Health Regulations 105 CMR 725.000.
“Marijuana product manufacturer”, an entity licensed to obtain, manufacture, process and package marijuana and marijuana products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana establishments and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers.
Town of Needham MA Zoning By-Law, printed April 2018
227
“Marijuana products”, products that have been manufactured and contain marijuana or an extract from marijuana, including concentrated forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures.
“Marijuana testing facility”, an entity licensed to test marijuana and marijuana products, including certification for potency and the presence of contaminants.
“Marijuana retailer”, an entity licensed to purchase and deliver marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana establishments and to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana establishments and to consumers, not including any registered or medical marijuana dispensary as authorized by Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 – An Act for the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana or as regulated by Massachusetts Department of Public Health Regulations 105 CMR 725.000.
8.3 Temporary Moratorium.
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning By-Law to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of land or structures for Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers and the sale of marijuana, but not including any marijuana sold for medical purposes by a registered or medical marijuana dispensary as authorized by Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 – An Act for the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana or as regulated by Massachusetts Department of Public Health Regulations 105 CMR 725.000. The moratorium shall be in effect through December 31, 2018. During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a planning process to address the potential impacts of recreational marijuana in the Town, consider the Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers and related uses, determine whether the town shall limit the number of marijuana establishments in the Town or govern the time, place and manner of marijuana establishment operations, determine whether the town will prohibit on-site consumption at Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers and shall consider adopting new provisions of the Zoning By-Law to address the impact and operation of Recreational Marijuana Establishments and Marijuana Retailers and related uses.
8.4 Severability.
The provisions of this By-Law are severable. If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this By-Law or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid.

RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE NEEDHAM PLANNING BOARD
GOVERNING ITS ADMINISTRATION OF THE
SCENIC ROAD ACT (MGL CH. 40,SEC . lSC)
1 . STATUTORY PROV ISIONS OF THE SCENIC ROAD ACT - MGL CHAPTER 40,
SECTION lSC
"Upon r e comme ndation or req uest of the planning board ,
conservation commission, or historical commission of
any city or town, such city or town may designate any
road in said city or town other than a numbered route
or state highway, as a scenic road .
After a road has been designated as a scenic road any
repair, maintenance, reconstruction, or paving work done
with respect thereto shall not involve or include the
cutting or removal of trees, or the tearing down or
destruction of stone walls, or portions thereof, except
with the prio r written consent of the planning b oard,
or if there is no planning board, the selectmen of a
town, or the city council of a city, after a public
hearing duly advertised twice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the area, as to time, date, place and
purpose, the last publication to occur at least seven
days prior t o such hearing.
Designation of a road as a scenic road shall not affect
the eligibility of a city or town to receive construction
or reconstruction aid for such road pursuant to the
provisions of chapter ninety."
2 . NEEDHAM STREETS SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE SCENIC
ROAD ACT
3. DEFINITIONS
Charles River Street - 1982 ATM
South Street - 1982 ATM
Central Avenue (between Nehoiden St & Marked Tr ee Road)
- 1989 STM
In the absence of contrary meaning established through
legislation or judicial action pursuant to Section lSC,
Chapter 40, MGL, these terms contained in that statute
shall be construed as follows:
"Cutting or removal of trees" shall not be construed
to include routine or emergency tree maintenance which
removes only permanently diseased or damaged limbs,
trunks, roots, or whole trees as determined by the Tre e
Warden, or s ound limbs, trunks, or roots of a tree with
a diameter of one and one half inch diameter or smaller,
DBH (diameter at br~ast height) or four feet from the ground.
"Repair, Maintenance, Reconstruction, or Paving Work"
shall mean any work done within the right-of- way by
any person or agency, public or private. Within this
definition is any work on any portion o f the right- ofway
which was not physically commenced a t the time t he
road was designated as a scenic road. Construction of
new driveways or alterations of existing ones is also
included , insofar as it takes place within the rightof-
way.
"Road" shall mean the entire right- of-way including ,
but not limited to a vehicular travelled way plus its
necessary appurtenances within the right- of- way includ ing
bridge structures, drainage s y stems, retaining
walls, traffic control devices, pedestrian facilities,
and the air space above them , but not intersecting
streets or driveways. When the boundary of the rightof-
way is in issue so that a dispute arises as to whether
or not certain trees or stone walls are within the rightof-
way, it shall be presumed to be within the way until
the contrary is shown.
"Stone Walls" shall not be construed to include assemblages
of stone involving less than one cubic foot of
wall material per linear foot , or totalling less than
five feet in length.
"Tearing down or destruction of stone walls" shall not
be construed to include temporary removal and replacement
within 30 days at the same location with the same
materials.
"Trees" shall mean any woody p lants having trunk
diameter of one and one- half inches or more , one foot
from the ground.
4. CONSTRUCTION AND APPLICABILITY OF THE RULES AND REGULATIONS
CONTAINED HEREIN
The Planning Board authority and jurisdiction shall be consistent
with MGL Ch. 40S, 15C. These rule s and regulations
shall be controlling and may be amended from time to time .
5 . PROCEDURES
5.1 Filing
Any person or organization seeking the consent of the
Planning Board under Sec. 15C, Ch. 40, MGL (The Scenic
Roads Act) regarding the cutting or removal of trees or
the tearing down or destruction of stone walls , or portions
thereof, in conne ction with the repair , maintenance,
reconstruction or paving work on Scenic Roads, shall submit
a request with the Planning Board together with the
following :
-2-
a. An identification of the location and the
nature of the proposed action and a description
of the proposed changes to trees and
stone walls;
b . a statement o f the purpose(s) for the changes
proposed;
c . a list of owners of property located in whole
or in part within 100 feet of the proposed
action;
d . except in the case of town agencies, a filing
fee of $50 . 00 plus a prior deposit sufficient
to cover advertising, notification, and other
necessary costs for the public hearing, and
e. any further explanatory material useful to
adequately inform the planning board prior to
the public hearing.
Notice of submittal shall be filed with the Town Clerk
after it is accepted and signed for by the Planning
Board or its staff .
5.2 Notice
The Planning Board shall, as required by statute, give
notice of its public hearing by advertising twice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the area. This
notice shall contain a statement as to the time, date,
place, and purpose of the hearing with a reasonable
description of the action proposed by the applicant .
Copies of this notice shall be sent to the Selectmen,
the Conservation Corrunission, the Historic Corrunission,
the Public Works Department, the Town Engineer, the
Tree Warden, and the owners of property within 100 feet
of the proposed action.
5.3 Timing
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within
45 days from the date on which notice of submittal is
received by the Town Clerk, and shall make a decision
within 60 days of that receipt; unless a longer time is
agreed to by the applicant.
5.4 Tree Warden
Whenever feasible, Planning Board hearings shall be
held in conjunction with those to be held by the Tree
Warden acting under Ch . 87, MGL. Consent to an action
by the Planning Board shall not be construed as inferring
consent by the Tree Warden, or the reverse .
6. CONSIDERATIONS
In acting on Scenic Road, the Planning Board shall take
into consideration the following:
-3-
, .
1 . Preservation of natural resources;
2. Environmental and his t orical values;
3. Scenic and aesthetic characteristics;
4 . Public safety;
5 . Traffic volume and congestion;
6. Relationship of road design to the standards of
the Planning Board's Subdivision Regulations and
the Massachusetts D.P.W. :
7. Compensatory actions proposed, such as replacement
of trees or walls;
8. Functional urgency of the repair, maintenance,
reconstruction, or paving;
9. Financial and other consequences of design revision
to avoid or reduce damage to trees or stone walls;
10. Evidence contributed by abutters, town agencies,
and other interested parties;
11. Other sound planning principles.
- 4-

SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
AND PROCEDURAL RULES
OF THE PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF NEEDHAM
MASSACHUSETTS
1993
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
PROCEDURAL ROLES OF THE
PLANNING BOARD
OF THE TOWN OF NEEDHAK, MASSACHUSETTS
Adopted after a duly advertised public hearing in accordance
with Section 81Q, Chapter 41, Massachusetts General Laws, as
amended, on June 26, 1962:
amended September 29, 1964;
amended September 20, 1966;
amended October 21, 1969;
amended September 12, 1978;
amended January 27, 1981;
amended October 27, 1981;
amended June 8, 1982;
amended February 8, 1983;
amended October 25, 1983;
amended January 10, 1989;
amended March 28, 1989;
amended June 26, 1990;
amended December 3, 1991;
NEEDHAK PLANNING BOARD
Paul Killeen, Chairman
Joanne H. Roth, Vice Chairman
Frank s. Gallello
David c. Gerber
David w. Kunhardt
Lee Newman, Planning Director
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sub-Section 1.1
Sub-Section 1.2
Sub-Section 1.3
Sub-Section 1.4
Sub-Section 1. 5
Sub-Section 1.6
Sub-Section 1.7
Adoption Authority •...•••....•.•••••.•••
Definitions ....•................••••••..
Scheduling of Appointments .......•.•....
Conduct of Meetings .........•••...•..••.
Records and Expenses ........•......•....
Subdivision Control .•.•....••••.......••
Applicability and Amendments ..•.........
1
1
2
2
2
3
3
Section 2. PLANS WHICH DO NOT REQUIRE APPROVAL UNDER
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW
Sub-Section 2.1
Sub-Section 2.2
Sub-Section 2.3
Sub-Section 2.4
Sub-Section 2.5
Submission Procedures ••••••...••••••..••
Information to be Shown ..•••............
Action by the Board .......••••.•.•••••..
Explanatory Notes .•......••......••....•
Disposition of Plans •.....••••.•.••••.••
3
4
4
5
5
Section 3. SUBDIVISIONS
Sub-Section 3.1 Preliminary Subdivision Plans .•...•..... 5
Sub-Section 3.2 Submission of Definitive Plans .......... 7
Sub-Section 3.3 Requirements for Streets and
Construction Details ...........••.•••••. 11
Sub-Section 3.4 Processing and Approval of
Subdivision Plans . ...................... 16
Sub-Section 3.5 Performance Guarantees ••.•..•••.••.••••• 19
Sub-Section 3.6 Compliance with standard
Specifications and Inspection ••..••••... 21
Sub-Section 3.7 Revision of Subdivision and
Discontinuance of Streets .••••••••.•••.• 22
Section 4. PLANNING BOARD RULES FOR
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SPECIAL PERMITS,
RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND SPECIAL PERMITS,
FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT SPECIAL PERMITS,
SITE PLAN REVIEW SPECIAL PERMITS
Article I
Article II
Article III
Article IV
Article V
Article VI
Article VII
Article VIII
Article IX
General. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
The Application •••.......••••.••....••.. 24
The Hearing. . . • . . . . . . . • . • . . . • • . . . . . . . . . . 2 6
Flexible Development (Planned Residential
Development) is a Subdivision ... 28
Actions by the Board ....•••••........••• 28
Policies and Advice ...••••.•••.......•.. 29
Amendments. . . . . . . . . . . . • • . . . • . . . . • . . . . . . . 3 0
Effective Date ........••.•........•..... 30
Related Variances ....•.•........•.•..... 30
TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued)
APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT FOR
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT,
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT,
FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT. . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW .•..•.•••..............•. 32
Section 5. RECOKKENDED DESIGN CRITERIA
FOR PRIVATE STREETS IN PLANNED
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS AND
RESIDENTIAL COMPOUNDS. . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 3
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.
APPENDIX c.
APPENDIX D.
APPENDIX E.
APPENDIX F.
APPENDIX G.
APPENDIX H.
APPENDIX I.
Application for Endorsement, Approval
Not Required ............................ 35
Application, Preliminary Subdivision
Plan .................................... 36
Application, Definitive Subdivision
Plan .................................... 37
Notes on Definitive Subdivision Plans ••• 38
Subdivision Inspection Form ..........•.. 39
Typical Title Block Layout •............. 40
Typical Permanent Turnaround and
Typical Temporary Turnaround .........••. 41
Typical Temporary Back-up Strip and
Typical Fence Detail ••••••....•.....••.• 42
Typical Street Cross-Section ........••.. 43
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURAL ROLES
OF THE PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF NEEDHAM
Section 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sub-Section 1.1 ADOPTION AUTHORITY
1.1 These Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules
are adopted by the Planning Board under the authority contained
in the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Chapter
41, Section 81Q and all other applicable Sections, for the
purpose of clarifying the administration of the Subdivision
Control Law and the Zoning By-Laws of the Town of Needham.
Sub-Section 1.2 DEFINITIONS
1.2 In construing these Rules and Regulations, the
following words shall have the following meanings, unless a
contrary intention clearly appears:
Applicant
assigns.
An owner or his agent, representative or
Developer - Owner of the land being subdivided, acting
directly or through an authorized agent, or attorney.
Engineer - Professional engineer (civil) or land surveyor
registered to practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Exclusive Use Area - An exclusive use area means a building
lot in a "cluster development" as defined by General Laws,
Chapter 40A for which fee simple title may be conveyed, or an
area located adjacent to a dwelling unit and reserved for its
exclusive use in a condominium or similar scheme.
Planninq Director - The professional planner employed by the
Planning Board who shall: review all applications submitted under
these Rules and Regulations for completeness; schedule, after
consultation with the Planning Board, appointments; distribute
copies of ·plans to the appropriate local officials; and perform
the necessary tasks, as directed by the Planning Board, to
administer the provisions of these Rules and Regulations and
those of M.G.L. Chapter 41, Sections 81K through 81-GG.
Planning Board - Planning Board of the Town of Needham.
Rules and Regulations - These subdivision regulations and
procedural rules adopted and amended by the Planning Board of the
\.___,, Town of Needham pursuant to Section 81Q of Chapter 41 of the
General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as amended.
1
Subdivision Control Law Sections 81 K through 81GG,
inclusive, of Chapter 41 of the General Laws of Massachusetts, as
amended.
1.2.1 Other definitions shall be as used in the
Subdivision Control Law and in the Needham Zoning By-Laws and the
references to officials and boards shall mean such officials,
boards, and other municipal bodies of the Town of Needham, unless
otherwise indicated in the text.
Sub-Section 1.3 SCHEDULING OF APPOINTMENTS
1.3 Except for executive sessions as provided for in
Section 23B of Chapter 39 of the General Laws as amended,
meetings of the Planning Board shall be open for the public to
attend. Anyone desiring to meet with the Board shall do so by
appointment. To secure an appointment, all applicants shall
notify the Chairman, the Secretary of the Board, or the Planning
Director at least seven (7) days prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting. In such notice, the applicant shall give his name,
address and a brief outline of the nature of the business which
he wishes to discuss with the Board. No appointment with the
Planning Board shall be required of applicants desiring to submit
a plan in accordance with the provisions of Section 2 of these
Rules and Regulations. Any person attending an advertised public
hearing may address the Board at the pleasure of the Chairman
without prior notice, and in so doing shall state his name,
address and person represented, if any.
Sub-Section 1.4 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS
1. 4 All meetings of the Planning Board shall be
conducted formally under the direction of the Chairman of the
Board. In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall
act as Chairman. In the absence of both the Chairman and the
Vice-Chairman, the Clerk, if the Chairman or Vice-Chairman is not
serving as Clerk, shall act as Chairman. In the absence of the
Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Clerk, the remaining members may
elect a Chairman pro-tem. No meeting of the Planning Board shall
be held unless a quorum is present. A majority of the members of
the Board shall constitute a quorum, but less than a majority may
vote to adjourn, subject to the meeting being rescheduled as
hereinafter provided. In the event of there being less than a
quorum present at any scheduled meeting, the Chairman shall
reschedule a meeting as soon as practicable thereafter. Meetings
of the Planning Board shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of Section 23B of Chapter 39 of the General Laws, as
amended.
Sub-Section 1.5 RECORDS AND EXPENSES
1. 5 The records of the Planning Board shall be
maintained in the manner set forth in Section 23B of Chapter 39
of the General Laws as amended and may contain such other matters
as the Board at its discretion may deem appropriate.
2
1.5.1 The Planning Board may require any applicant to
produce evidence of ownership, or authority of an agent,
representative or assign.
1.5.2 The initiator or the spokesman for the group of
persons initiating an action requiring a public hearing by the
Board shall be responsible for the expenses of such hearing,
including advertising, legal notices and secretarial services.
The initiator or spokesman may also be required to furnish a list
of abutters which must be notified and, where applicable, a legal
description and/or a plan of the land involved. All payments
shall be made prior to any hearing before the Planning Board.
1.5.3 Private petitions for amendments to the Zoning
Map shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $300. 00. The
petitioner(s) shall also be responsible for the cost of expenses
borne by the Planning Board relative to the petition including,
but not limited to: public hearing advertisements, postage,
printing, and map reproduction.
Sub-Section 1.6 SUBDIVISION CONTROL
1.6 No person shall make a subdivision within the
meaning of the Subdivision Control Law of any land in the Town of
Needham, nor proceed with the sale of lots in a subdivision, nor
the construction of ways or the installation of municipal
services or utilities therein, except after a definitive plan of
such subdivision has been submitted to the Planning Board and
approved as hereinafter provided.
Sub-Section 1.7 APPLICABILITY AND AMENDMENTS
1.7 The invalidity of any Section, Sub-Section, or
provision of these Rules and Regulations shall not invalidate any
other Section, Sub-Section, or provision thereof.
1. 7 .1 In procedural matters not covered by these
Procedural Rules, the Board shall be guided by "Roberts' Rules of
Parliamentary Practice" and by the customary usage in the Town of
Needham.
1.7.2 These Procedural Rules of the Needham Planning
Board are adopted and may be amended from time to time by a
majority vote of the Needham Planning Board. In the event of any
present or future conflict between the provisions of these Rules
and any legally binding action of the Town Meeting or any act of
the Massachusetts General Court, the action of the Town Meeting
or the act of the General Court shall prevail.
Section 2. PLANS WHICH DO NOT REQUIRE APPROVAL UNDER
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW
Sub-Section 2.1 SUBMISSION PROCEDURE
3
2.1 Plans believed not to require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, Section 81-P as amended, when submitted
for Planning Board endorsement to that effect, shall include the -~
original ink tracing, acceptable for recording in the Norfolk
Registry of Deeds, and three full size copies, and shall be
accompanied by an application in duplicate on forms provided by
the Planning Board, filled out and signed by the applicant. Such
plans shall be submitted to the Planning Board at least four days
prior to the date of the next regular Planning Board Meeting. A
copy of the application form, on which the receipt of a plan has
been acknowledged, may be used by the applicant as a notice to
the Town Clerk of the submission of such plan, as required by
Section 81-T of the Subdivision Control Law. Applications to the
Planning Board for approval not requiring endorsement shall be
accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00 per plan plus $25.00 for
each new building lot created.
Sub-Section 2.2 INFORMATION TO BE SHOWN
2.2 A plan believed not to require approval under
the Subdivision Control Law must show all information required to
satisfy the Planning Board that such plan does not constitute a
subdivision as defined in Section 81-L of the Subdivision Control
Law. such information shall include, but shall not necessarily
be limited to, the delineation and description in their entirety
of any lots, the boundaries of which are to be changed or are to
be shown without change; any zone or district boundaries
established by the Town of Needham Zoning By-Law which may pass
through or affect lots; any land areas subject to the Wetlands
Protection Act and the Inland Wetlands Act, M.G.L., Ch. 131, s.
40 and 40A (including any area defined as buffer area under said
statutes); any land area located in a Flood Plain District; any
water bodies; the location of any structures on the lots or
abutting their boundaries; and the status of any .way shown on
such plan.
2. 2 .1 Plans submitted under this section of these
Rules and Regulations shall measure not less than eight and
one-half inches (8-1/2") by eleven inches (11") and not more than
twenty-four inches (24") by thirty-six (36") and shall contain
the following information:
A title, including the names and addresses of owners,
developers, and engineers; scale; north point; date; dates of
revisions or additions, if any; the imprint of the seal of a
registered-land surveyor; and the statement, "Approval under the
Subdivision Control Law not required", followed by provisions for
the signatures of five members of the Planning Board and the date
of endorsement.
Sub-Section 2.3 ACTION BY THE BOARD
2. 3 Within twenty-one (21) days of the date of
submission of a plan believed not to require approval under the '-..../.
Subdivision Control Law, the Planning Board may endorse such a
plan as not requiring approval or may notify the applicant and
4
the Town Clerk that in the Planning Board's opinion the plan
shows a subdivision and that said plan cannot be endorsed as
requested. The failure of the Planning Board to take either of
the above actions within twenty-one days after the submission of
the plan believed not to require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law shall be deemed a determination that such approval is
not required and an endorsement on such plan shall be made by the
Planning Board or a certificate issued by the Town Clerk to that
effect and the plan returned to the applicant. The endorsement
of a plan as not requiring approval under the Subdivision Control
Law does not imply that the lots of land shown on such plan are
correctly represented, are building lots or comply with the area
requirements of the Zoning By-Laws of the Town of Needham.
Sub-Section 2.4 EXPLANATORY NOTES
2.4 The Planning Board may include in its
endorsement of a plan a statement that such endorsement applies
only to certain lots shown on such plan or may state the reasons
approval is not required, where in the opinion of the Planning
Board a plan without such explanatory statement would not qualify
for the endorsement "Approval Under the Subdivision Control Law
Not Required".
Sub-Section 2.5 DISPOSITION OF PLANS
2.5 One copy of the signed plan shall be retained by
the Planning Board for its files, one copy shall be transmitted
to the Town Engineer and one copy shall be transmitted to the
Building Inspector. The original ink tracing shall be returned
to the applicant for recording in the Norfolk Registry of Deeds
or for registration with the Land Court.
Section 3. SUBDIVISIONS
Sub-Section 3.1 PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLANS
3.1.1 Preliminary plans may be submitted when desired
by the applicant. When submitted, preliminary subdivision plans
shall be in triplicate and shall be accompanied by a completed
application form of the type provided by the Planning Board for
this purpose. Applications for Preliminary Plan approval shall
be accompanied by a filing fee of $50.00 plus $25.00 per lot,
such fee to be credited towards the filing fee for a Definitive
Plan if the Preliminary Plan is approved. The plans submitted
shall show the following information:
Subdivision boundaries, north point, date, scale, legend and
title, "Preliminary Plan", the names of owners, applicant and
engineer.
The names of all abutters as determined from the most recent
Assessors' list; the names, approximate locations and widths of
adjacent streets.
5
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements,
and of any public areas within the subdivision, in a general
manner.
The approximate boundary lines of existing and proposed lots
with approximate areas and dimensions.
The proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing
natural waterways, showing the approximate locations of all
inlets, outlets, pipes and drains and other appurtenances to the
proposed drainage system; the proposed locations and depths of
other municipal service and utility installations where possible;
the topography of the land in its present state and as proposed
by contour lines drawn at a sufficiently small interval to
indicate clearly the natural and proposed drainage areas; and any
zone or district boundary established by the Town of Needham
Zoning By-Law which divides or bounds the area to be subdivided.
If a connection is proposed to public water or sewerage,
then a general description of the connection from the point of
the existing water or sewerage system to the property line of the
proposed subdivision, including water and sewer lines, pump and
booster stations, force mains, etc., shall be provided.
Major features of the land such as existing walls, fences,
trails, monuments, buildings, large trees or wooded areas, rock
ridges and outcropping, ditches, water bodies, water courses and
any land areas subject to the Wetlands Protection Act and the
Inland Wetlands Act, M.G.L., Ch. 131, S. 40 and 40A (including
any area defined as buffer area under said statutes) . Where
available, aerial photographs may be required. Proposals for all
site features to be retained, demolished or removed should be so
noted.
Soil types based on the latest applicable report of the
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service.
3.1.2 The scale of a preliminary plan shall be
1 inch = 40 feet and the elevation shall be on Needham Sewer Base
or on USC&GS Datum of 1929 (Mean Sea Level) , unless prior
approval is granted by the Planning Board to deviate from the
foregoing standards.
Plans submitted under these provisions shall measure not
less than eighteen inches by twenty-four inches and not more than
twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches, provided that the Board
may vote to accept any plan of greater dimensions if such
dimensions are warranted by the size or shape of the area to be
subdivided. Each plan submitted under this section shall have a
title block of the size, style and contents set out in these
Rules and Regulations. Such title block shall be located in the
lower right hand corner of each sheet in the set of plans
submitted.
6
3.1.3 The Planning Board may invite the developer to
discuss proposed modifications or corrections of the preliminary
plan and may then approve, disapprove or approve with
modifications such preliminary plan. The Planning Board shall
within forty-five days after submission of the preliminary
notify the applicant and the Town Clerk, either that the plan has
been approved, or that the plan has been approved with
modifications suggested by the Planning Board or agreed upon by
the person submitting the plan, or that the plan has been
disapproved. In case of disapproval, the Planning Board shall
advise the developer of the specific reasons for which the plan
is disapproved, thus enabling the developer to resubmit the plan,
provided the plan is corrected to comply with the requirements of
the Planning Board and with the Zoning By-Law in effect at the
time of the resubmission. If the preliminary plan is not
disapproved, the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board in
effect at the time of the submission of such preliminary plan
shall govern the definitive subdivision plan evolved from such
preliminary plan, provided such definitive plan is submitted
within seven months of the submission of the preliminary plan.
3.1.4 Any person submitting a preliminary plan to the
Planning Board shall, at the same time, submit a copy of that
plan to the Board of Health and shall give written notice to the
Town Clerk, by deli very or by registered mail, that he has
submitted such a plan. Both the Board of Health and the Planning
Board shall comply with the requirements of Section 81-S of
Chapter 41 of the General Laws, as amended, in notifying the
applicant and the Town Clerk of their decisions.
Sub-Section 3.2 SUBMISSION OF DEFINITIVE PLANS
3.2.1 Applications for approval of a subdivision, or
for approval of a street profile, or for a revision of a
subdivision previously approved, where such revision requires a
public hearing, shall be made in duplicate on forms provided by
the Planning Board and shall be accompanied by a filing fee, by
the original tracings and three full size copies of each
definitive subdivision plan, including all profiles, municipal
service and utility plan, area locus plan, an existing contour
plan, a proposed contour plan, and any details required. A legal
description of the boundaries of the entire land to be subdivided
showing the names and addresses of all abutters as they appear in
the most recent Needham Assessors' records shal 1 also be
submitted.
The definitive plan shall not be deemed to have been
submitted unless the above items have been delivered to the
Planning Board office and a dated receipt as to such delivery
obtained by the developer from the Planning Board Clerk or have
been sent by registered mail to the Planning Board, care of the
Town Clerk. If so mailed, the date of mailing shall be the date
of submission of the plan. Simultaneously, a complete set of
copies of such definitive plans must be submitted to the Board of
Health and the Department of Public Works. The developer shall
7
notify the Town Clerk in writing of the date of submission of
such definitive plan to the Planning Board, as provided for in
Section 81-T of the Subdivision Control Law, as amended. -'
3. 2. 2 There shall be a filing fee of $500. oo plus
$100.00 per lot for each lot in the subdivision. In addition to
the filing fee, the cost incurred for legal advertising and
mailing of notices to abutters shall be borne by the applicant
and shall be payable prior to the public hearing.
3.2.3 The plans submitted to the Planning Board under
the Subdivision Control Law shall be drawn so as to comply with
the Planning Board's requirements listed below with respect to
size, style, form and contents, and failure to so comply may
constitute a reason for rejection or disapproval of such plans.
(a) Size: to comply with Norfolk Registry of Deeds
requirements, but no plan shall be larger than twenty-four inches
by thirty-six inches or smaller than eighteen inches by
twenty-four inches, unless specifically authorized by the
Planning Board.
(b) Style: originals to be drawn in India ink on blue
tracing cloth or mylar film to a scale of 1 inch = 40 feet. The
vertical scale or profiles shall be 1 inch = 4 feet and detail
drawings shall be made to such larger scale as may be practical.
The Planning Board may grant prior permission to deviate from the
above scales, where in the Planning Board's opinion such
deviation is justified by the size of the subdivision involved or
by other considerations. Each sheet of any set of plans
submitted under this section shall have a title block of the
size, style and contents set out in these Rules and Regulations.
Such title block shall be located in the lower right hand corner
of the sheet.
(c) Form: subdivision plans shall include a key map
showing the location of the proposed subdivision in relation to
the existing streets in that part of Town, including at least one
intersection of major streets, and plans showing boundaries of
the proposed subdivision, lot and street dimensions and areas,
street and municipal services and utilities, the existing and the
proposed contours of land being subdivided and details of any
structural features not covered by Town specifications. The
above components of a definitive plan may be combined or shown
separately on as many drawings as may be necessary for easy
readability and review of the definitive subdivision plans. Any
plan submitted for approval by the Planning Board shall show in
its entirety any lots the boundaries of which are to be changed.
Whenever any part of a subdivision is divided or bounded by a
zone or a district boundary established under the Zoning By-Law
of the Town of Needham, such boundary or boundaries shall be
shown and identified.
(d) Contents: all plans in a set submitted for Planning
Board's approval shall be serially numbered as "Sheet of
Sheets". Each plan or sheet shall have a title including the
8
names and addresses of owners, developers and engineers, scale,
date, dates of revisions and additions if any. Each plan or
sheet shall have an imprint of the seal of a registered
professional civil engineer or a registered land surveyor as may
be hereinafter specified; provisions for signatures of five
members of the Planning Board; provision for showing the approval
dates; north point designated as to system used on all land
plans; benchmarks and designation of datum plane used on all
profiles; topographic plans and sectional views. Each type of
drawing shall further have the following specific information:
( e) Lot plan: accurate dimensions, bearings, length of
arc, tangent (or chord) distances, central angles of curves for
all lot boundaries and sidelines of streets or portions thereof,
also for all centerlines of easements, rights-of-way and Town
boundaries; the widths of all easements, streets, rights-of-way;
areas and number designations of all lots and parcels of land;
any zone or district boundaries established by the Town of
Needham Zoning By-Law which may pass through or affect lots; any
land areas subject to the Wetlands Protection Act and the Inland
Wetlands Act, M.G.L., Ch. 131, s. 40 and 40A (including any area
defined as buffer area under said statutes); any land located in
a Flood Plain District; all water bodies, stone walls, permanent
monuments, existing structures, railroads, lot boundaries and
sidelines of all streets; angle and points of curvature, marked
"non-tangent" where applicable; existing street names, whether
public or private; names of abutters as shown on the most recent
tax lists and such other designations and descriptive notes as
may be necessary to identify the items shown and evaluate their
effect on the proposed subdivision. One hundred foot stations
and stations at intersections shall be shown on centerlines of
all streets, unless such stations are shown on a separate
municipal service and utility plan. The lot plan shall bear the
imprint of the seal of a registered land surveyor. The lot plan
shall bear the following endorsement located above the provision
for signatures of five members of the Planning Board: "Approved
in accordance with Section 81-U of Chapter 41 of the General
Laws, as amended. Approved 19 Needham
Planning Board." in the case of registered land, the notation as
indicated in Appendix D shall apply. For the purposes of this
section, dimensions shall be shown to the nearest one-hundredth
of one foot and bearings to the nearest five seconds of arc.
(f) Profile: there shall be shown a profile of each
proposed street and also of each existing street not having an
approved profile and of each street within the subdivision which
will require the construction of a sanitary sewer or storm water
drain. Each profile shall show the proposed or approved
centerline as well as the existing centerline and sidelines of
streets to be constructed. The bench marks used shall be
described and their elevations given using Needham Sewer Base or
the Mean Sea Level Datum of 1929 (USC&GS). Stations given every
50 feet (every 25 feet where grade is greater than 7%), at all
street intersections, whenever an existing or a proposed sewer,
drain or other municipal service or utility crosses the street,
at the ends of a layout or at the proposed limit of construction
9
and at high and low points in the street. Size, grade, and
material shall be given for all subsurface storm water drains and
sanitary sewers. Such sewers and drains shall be shown on the
profile plan and designated as existing or proposed. All
manholes, catch basins, siphons and other design features shall
be indicated and the stations and invert elevations thereof
given. Ledge or other conditions affecting the design shall be
located and designated on profiles, where known. The profile
plan shall bear the imprint of the seal of a registered
professional civil engineer.
(g) Municipal service and utility plans: municipal
services and utilities, including sanitary sewers, storm water
drains, water mains and other underground mains and conduits,
where known, shall be shown on the street plan directly above or
below the related profile, or on a separate municipal services
and utilities plan, and shall include both the municipal services
and utilities in existing and proposed streets and in easements.
The location of all changes in direction, manholes, catch basins,
cleanouts, siphons, hydrants, gates and other appurtenances shall
be shown and designated with reference to the street centerline
station or by other means. Information shall be given regarding
the depth of invert elevations of sanitary sewers, storm water
drains, culverts, brooks, or ditches, both proposed and existing,
which are not shown on profiles, except where such information is
given on a topographic or detail construction plan. Municipal
service and utility plans shall show street lines and show
approximate lot lines sufficient to identify the location of the
municipal services and utilities within the subdivision and next
to it.
Street line traverse closures shall be submitted for all
roads within the subdivision. curbing of a type required by the
"Standard Specifications" of the Town of Needham shall be shown
where required by these Rules and Regulations (Sub-Section 3.3.6)
and where otherwise proposed by the developer. The municipal
service and utility plan shall bear the imprint of the seal of a
registered civil engineer.
(h) Topographic or contour plans: unless otherwise
authorized by the Planning Board, topographic plans shall show
and designate contour lines at one (1) foot elevation intervals,
both existing and proposed. The bottom elevation of all water
bodies within the subdivision shall be given and ground surface
shall be identified as to type, such as woodland, swamp, ledge
outcrops, flows, etc. Land areas subject to the Wetlands
Protection Act and the Inland Wetlands Act, M.G.L., Ch. 131, s.
40 and 40A (including any area defined as buffer area under said
statutes) shall be shown and clearly designated. Street and lot
lines shall be shown in a general manner to facilitate
orientation. Bench marks shall be shown and designated. Brooks,
ditches, walls, trails, fences and structures and spot elevations
of high and low points shall be shown and identified. Flood
plain limits shall be clearly indicated. Soil types based on the '-.,r·
latest applicable report of the United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service shall be shown and
10
identified. Where available, aerial photographs may be required.
Proposals for all site features to be retained, demolished or
removed should be so noted. The topographic plan shall bear the
imprint of either a registered professional civil engineer or a
registered land surveyor.
(i) Detail drawings: any special construction features,
deviation from or not covered by Town standards and
specifications, shall be shown on detail drawings. Such detail
drawings may be incorporated as part of a municipal service and
utility plan or profile plan or may be executed on a separate
sheet, or sheets, and shall provide information as to dimensions,
location, elevations, materials, etc., or the construction
details involved. The requirements for detail drawing shall be
applicable, but not limited, to bridges, culverts, structurally
stabilized slopes, municipal service or utility piping encased in
concrete, ditches, and brooks shaped or constructed to a definite
cross-section, dams, and spillways, steps within the exterior
lines of a street and similar construction features. If any
detail drawings are shown on a separate plan, that plan shall
bear the imprint of the seal of a registered professional civil
engineer. Cross-section(s) of the proposed way(s) shall show
proposed construction materials and other specifications and
shall reflect actual, not typical, site conditions.
(j) Other information: the Planning Board may require the
developer to furnish such additional information, as may, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, be necessary to evaluate the
feasibility of the proposed design of the subdivision. Such
information may include the results of any tests or copies of
calculations used in design and copies of agreements granting the
developer rights essential to development of the land and
construction work involved, including the right to access over
existing ways. The approval of a preliminary plan shall not
preclude the Planning Board from exercising the rights reserved
to it and set forth herein.
3.2.4 All plans shall bear the following endorsement:
"I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, this
plan is true and correct to the accuracy required by the
Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules of the Planning
Board of the Town of Needham", followed by the signature and
professional registration number of the registered professional
civil engineer and/or registered land surveyor responsible for
the preparation of the plan.
Sub-Section 3.3 REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND
CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
3.3.1 All streets shall be laid out to a width of 50
feet and shall be paved to a width of 24 feet. In the case of
one- and two-lot subdivisions, the Planning Board may, by waiver,
require a street width of 40 feet. Streets of width greater than
50 feet may be laid out where traffic or other considerations
warrant. The grade (slope) of a street shall be not less than
0.7% nor more than 8%, except that for a distance of not more
11
than one hundred feet there may be permitted a grade (slope) of
not less than 0.5% nor more than 10%. All streets shall be built
to the end of the layout or to the limit of a subdivision. The
grade of a street within 50 feet of a street intersection shall
not exceed 1%, to provide a level area for traffic safety.
3.3.2 So far as practicable, streets shall be laid out
so as to connect to existing ways and shall show future
extensions to existing ways over lands not yet developed. No
subdivision shall be approved, unless the streets therein connect
to and are accessible from a public way or private road open and
dedicated to public use, having in the opinion of the Planning
Board adequate construction, width and grades.
If the subdivision is within 500' of a highway or road which
has been laid out by the Town of Needham, Massachusetts D.P.W.,
or the Norfolk County Commissioners, the subdivision must be tied
into two or more permanent points of the layout by bearing and
distance.
Provisions satisfactory to the Planning Board shall be made
for the proper projection of streets or for access to adjoining
property which is not yet subdivided.
The proposed streets shall be located so as to conform to
the Master Plan, if any, as adopted in whole or in part by the
Planning Board.
3.3.3 The minimum street centerline radius for turns
shall be one hundred feet and all changes in direction of the
streets of more than 30 degrees shall be by means of curves in
the exterior lines, all corners of streets shall be rounded and
the minimum radius for such roundings at street intersections and
junctions shall be twenty feet.
3. 3. 4 Streets shall be laid out so as to join or
intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and no street
shall join or intersect any other street at less than a 60 degree
angle. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one
hundred and twenty-five feet, streets of varying width and
reverse curves shall be avoided.
3.3.5 Streets which are designed as permanent dead-end
streets shall not exceed 600 feet in length in SRB Districts nor
1200 feet in length in SRA and RRC Districts and shall have a
turnaround· or back-up area, paved as required for streets, at the
closed end. The minimum radius for a circular turnaround shall
be sixty feet for the exterior line of a street and fifty feet
for temporary turnaround easement. "Hammerhead" or "T-Shape"
back-up strips and alternative layouts may be permitted, under
unusual circumstances, if designed to accommodate a vehicle of
thirty feet length, eight feet width and having an outside
turning radius of forty-seven feet. The typical permanent and
temporary strip shall conform to the drawings, as shown in these
Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board, as amended.
12
3. 3. 6 Granite or reinforced concrete curbing in
accordance with the Town specifications shall be installed at the
edge of the pavement on all streets in Business, Industrial,
Industrial Park or Apartment Districts; on all streets where the
street sideline is laid out on a curve of sixty feet or less
radius and at all catch basin inlets.
Within all subdivisions the Planning Board, at its
discretion, shall require that one of the following conditions be
met:
(1) Granite or reinforced concrete curbing be installed at
all corners and street intersections, or
(2) Bituminous concrete berms be installed at the edge of
pavement in a continuous manner on all streets.
3. 3. 7 Bituminous concrete berms, as shown on the
Standard Cross-Section, may be required on slopes of more than
5%.
3.3.8 Granite or concrete bounds, at least four feet
long, shall be set at all points of curvature, points of tangency
and angle points in every street or other permanent marks
acceptable to and approved by the Town Engineer shall be set
within the subdivision. After installation of such bounds, the
developer shall submit to the Town Engineer a written
certification by a registered land surveyor stating that said
bounds are located as shown on the subdivision plans recorded in
the Norfolk Registry of Deeds or in the Land Court.
3.3.9 Street name signs shall be erected at all street
entrances, such signs to conform as to size and quality with
signs now generally in use in Needham. Temporary street name
signs with block letters four inches high on light background
shall be erected at the time the work is started in that portion
of the subdivision at all points where permanent signs will be
required. Complete visibility of street name signs shall be
maintained by the developer until the subdivision is released by
the Planning Board as completed.
3. 3 .10 Wherever the approved street grade differs
substantially from the grade of adjacent land, or where otherwise
necessary for public safety, the developer shall be required to
erect retaining walls and guard rail fences or provide slopes no
steeper than two feet horizontal to one foot vertical to ensure
proper protection and lateral support. The Planning Board shall
approve the type and dimensions of such walls, fences or slopes
and all work shall conform to the "Standard Specifications" of
the Town of Needham.
3. 3 .11 All subdivisions shall be designed so as to
provide for connection to the Town of Needham sewerage system of
as many lots as possible and for the extension of sewer mains in
strict compliance with the approved definitive plans and with
Town of Needham specifications. Connection to the Needham
13
sewerage system shall only be permitted after the sewer in the
subdivision has been inspected and tested by the Sewer Division
and found acceptable to the Town. The developer shall install _,_
connections for Town sewerage to a point two feet or more inside
each building lot regardless of whether construction on that lot
will take place during the period of the developer's agreement
with the Town for the construction of the subdivision. If
connections to buildings are not made during this period, the
service line shall be capped until such time as building
construction takes place and service is required.
3. 3. 12 All subdivisions shall be designed so as to
provide for the installation of water mains, including
appurtenances, and fire hydrants to meet the requirements of fire
safety and of anticipated water consumption. Design shall be
based on the applicable portions of the latest Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, Department of Environmental Engineering, Division
of Water Supply, Guidelines for Public Water Systems. Such water
mains shall be installed in strict compliance with the approved
definitive plans and with Town of Needham specifications and
shall be connected to the Town of Needham water supply system.
Such connection shall be permitted only if the developer's
contractor and the size and location of pipes, valves and
fittings are approved by the Water Division. The developer shall
install connections for Town water to a point two feet or more
inside each building lot regardless of whether construction on
that lot will take place during the period of the developer's
agreement with the Town for the construction of the subdivisions.
If connections to buildings are not made during this period, the
service line shall be capped until such time as building
construction takes place and service is required.
3. 3 .13 Surface storm water drains shall be installed
wherever necessary to insure drainage of surface water from
springs, rain, melting snow or other origin without flooding of
properties or streets. The slope and size of drains shall be
computed on the basis of a 20 year storm and shall be adequate to
accommodate all run-off over the area within the subdivision, but
not smaller than 12" inside diameter and o. 004 slope. Catch
basins shall be spaced at intervals of not more than 350 feet or
as called for by street gradients, and manholes, curb inlets,
culverts, surface channels and other appurtenances shall be
installed in accordance with the Town of Needham specifications
and with good engineering practice, taking into consideration the
effect of grading and paving of this land. Natural watercourses
shall be preserved where possible; the uniform cross-section and
profile of such watercourses must be shown on subdivision plans,
approved by the Planning Board and installed by the developer.
Headwalls of reinforced concrete or masonry set in concrete shall
be provided at all drain outlets in accordance with Town of
Needham specifications. Drain pipes shall be of reinforced
concrete, but the Planning Board may permit the use of alternate
materials of equal strength and durability. All drainage basins
in new subdivisions shall contain oil, gasoline, and grease ___ ,.,
14
separators. The design of said separators shall be integrated
with the drainage basin and shall be approved by the Town
Engineer and Sewer Superintendent.
Developers will be required to meet the provisions of
Chapter 131, Section 40 of the General Laws (commonly known as
the Wetlands Protection Act) and other provisions of state law
relative to drainage, streams, and wetlands.
Within Aquifer Protection District as established in the
Zoning By-Law, provisions for contaminant removal shall be made
employing detention basins with sub-surface drains or perforated
raisers, oil and grit separator catch basins, or similar devices
where appropriate.
3.3.14 In any subdivision, the developer shall arrange
for the installation of all municipal services and utilities
including, but not 1 imi ted to, domestic electric power and
telephone cables, public fire alarm system and street lighting
system.
All or any part of the wiring, cables or other appurtenances
of any of the above systems normally placed above ground, may be
placed underground within the limits of the streets within any
subdivision or may be placed above ground within easements
granted by the developer and his successors in title to the
appropriate bodies. Where use is made of such easements, they
shall be generally located along rear lot lines in such a manner
as to minimize the amount of overhead wiring on or close to the
streets of the subdivision. All such installations shall be made
at no cost to the Town of Needham at the location, in the manner
and to specifications approved by the Planning Board of the Town
of Needham and any other authority that may be involved. The
Planning Board shall determine whether or not any or all of the
above mentioned municipal services and utilities shall be placed
underground or in easements in any subdivision. In reaching its
decision, the Board shall first determine that such decision will
not cause undue hardship upon the developer by reason of the
topography, soil and rock conditions and other factors of the
site and the subdivision layout which might affect the
feasibility of underground or easement installations. The
developer shall install or cause to be installed, connections for
wiring, cables or other appurtenances when underground to a point
at least two feet or more inside each building lot regardless of
whether construction on that lot will take place during the
developer's agreement with the Town for construction of the
subdivision. If connections to buildings are not made during this
period, the service line shall be capped until such time as
building construction takes place and service is required.
3. 3 .15 In any subdivision, every endeavor should be
made to preserve existing trees. It is recommended that
developers seek the advice of the Park Superintendent or other
qualified person when preparing to undertake works which may
result in a change in the level of the ground surface or of the
water table around any tree in the subdivision.
15
3.3.16 Sidewalks 4-1/2 feet wide shall be constructed
in accordance with the "Standard Specifications" of the Town of
Needham along both sidelines of all streets in SRA and SRB
Districts, unless a street ends in a permanent dead-end, in which
case such a sidewalk shall be constructed along only one sideline
as determined by the Planning Board. Where a sidewalk has been
waived around all or any part of a permanent dead-end, the
required minimum 3-1/2 foot wide grass plot or strip beginning at
the curb line shall be extended to a minimum width of 8 feet.
(See diagrams in the Appendices.)
3.3.17 Whenever a connection to a Town-owned fire alarm
circuit is feasible in the opinion of the Board, the developer
shall install a fire alarm circuit within the subdivision and
include fire alarm boxes at locations recommended by the Fire
Chief. Materials and installation of fire alarm systems shall be
approved by the Board as meeting the requirements of the Fire
Chief.
3.3.18 All subdivision proposals shall be reviewed to
determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from
flooding. If any part of a subdivision proposal is located
within the Flood Plain District, established under the Zoning
By-Law, it shall be reviewed to assure compliance with the
following:
(1) the proposal is designed consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
(2) all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer,
gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage;
(3) adequate drainage systems are provided to reduce
exposure to flood hazards; and
(4) base flood elevation (the level of the 100 year flood)
data is provided for proposals greater than 50 lots or
5 acres, whichever is lesser, for that portion within the Flood
Plain District.
3.3.19 In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 83
of the General Laws, the developer will be required to install at
all pedestrian crosswalks a slanted ramp which must meet the
requirements of the Architectural Barriers Board.
Sub-Section 3.4 PROCESSING AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLANS
3.4.1 On receipt of definitive subdivision plans, the
Planning Board shall transmit one complete set thereof to the
Public Works Department for review and comments. Within ten days
of the receipt of definitive plans the Board shall set the date
for a public hearing. The hearing shall be advertised in a local _ _,
newspaper and notices shall be mailed to all abutters to the
subdivision, as provided by the Subdivision Control Law. The
16
-
Board of Heal th shall, within forty-five days after the
definitive plans are filed, report to the Planning Board in
writing approval or disapproval of said plans and in the event of
disapproval, shall make specific findings as to which, if any, of
the lots shown on such plans cannot be used for building sites
without injury to the public health and include such specific
findings and the reasons therefore in such report, and, where
possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof.
Failure so to report shall be deemed approval by the Board of
Health. The Public Works Department shall transmit to the
Planning Board the results of their review with respect to the
locations, sizes and grades of the existing and proposed streets,
rights-of-way, easements, drainage and municipal services and
utilities, and the recommendations for approval or disapproval of
the subdivision, including proposed modifications and conditions
of approval or specific reasons for disapproval, as well as the
estimated construction costs for streets and municipal services
and utilities needed to serve the proposed subdivision.
3.4.2 No subdivision shall be approved, unless it
complies with these Rules and Regulations and with applicable
provisions of the Zoning and other Town By-Laws and regulations
and of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nor
unless, in the opinion of the Planning Board, the proposed
subdivision meets the requirements of public safety including
precautions against possible natural disasters, of traffic safety
and convenience, of adequate storm water drainage and sewage
disposal and is designed with due regard for the rights, health
and welfare of the Town's inhabitants, including the future
residents of such subdivisions. Proposed subdivisions shall
conform, so far as conditions permit, to overall development
plans adopted by the Planning Board, if any, and shall adhere to
the principles of correct land use, sound planning and good
engineering.
3. 4. 3 After the public hearing, the Planning Board
shall approve the subdivision, with or without modifications and
conditions, or shall disapprove the subdivision. The action of
the Planning Board, including the conditions of approval or
specific reasons for disapproval, shall be stated in a
Certificate of Action, signed by the members of the Planning
Board. Where a preliminary plan has been submitted and acted
upon or where at least forty-five (45) days has elapsed since
submission of the preliminary plan, the Board shall file with the
Town Clerk a certificate of its action on the definitive plan
within ninety (90) days after such submission, or such further
time as may be agreed upon at the written request of the
applicant, and shall send notice of its action by certified mail
to the applicant. In the case of a residential subdivision where
no preliminary plan has been submitted and acted upon or where
forty-five (45) days did not elapse between submission of a
preliminary plan and submission of a definitive plan, the Board
shall file with the Town Clerk a certificate of its action on the
definitive plan within one-hundred thirty-five (135) days after
\._/. such submission, or such further time as may be agreed upon at
the written request of the applicant, and shall send notice of
17
its action by certified mail to the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board either to take final action or to file with the
Town Clerk a certificate of its action within the time frames
specified above shall be deemed to be an approval of such
definitive plan. Unless an appeal is taken to the Superior Court
from the action of the Planning Board and a notice in writing of
such appeal is received by the Town Clerk within twenty days of
the receipt of the Town Clerk of the Certificate of Action, the
Planning Board shall sign the approved definitive subdivision
plans and refer on the plans to any conditions of approval or to
an instrument describing such conditions of approval or to an
instrument describing such conditions and performance guarantees
furnished by the developer, provided that the construction of
ways and utilities is secured as outlined in paragraphs 3.4.9 and
3.5.1 hereof.
3.4.4 Twenty days after the approval or disapproval of
a definitive plan, the Planning Board shall return the original
tracings of such plan to the developer and in the case of
approval, the developer shall record the original ink tracings of
the street and lot plans, bearing the endorsement of the Planning
Board, with the Norfolk Registry of Deeds or file with the Land
Court, together with any instrument enumerating the conditions of
approval and the performance guarantees furnished by the
developer. The Planning Board will not approve any revision of
the definitive plans, release of lots or reduction of surety,
until the definitive plans and instruments have been recorded or
filed as outlined above. The copies (prints) of original plans
and the copies of all documents, calculations and other
information submitted to the Planning Board shall become the
property of the Board. The Planning Board shall retain one
complete set of copies of the definitive plans and shall transmit
the remaining two sets to the Town Engineer.
3.4.5
private ways.
The Planning Board shall assign street names to
3.4.6 The approval of a subdivision by the Planning
Board does not make ways shown thereon public or Town ways; the
acceptance of streets as Town ways requires action by the Town
Meeting in accordance with Town By-Laws and with the General Laws
of the Commonwealth.
3.4.7 The approval of a subdivision by the Planning
Board does not affect any rights others may have in or over the
land to be subdivided, nor does it grant the developer the right
to perform work on land owned by others. The Planning Board
assumes any plans submitted for its approval or consideration to
be correct, unless evidence is presented to the contrary. The
acquisition of necessary rights and the presentation of complete
and correct information to the Board are the responsibilities of
the applicant.
3.4.8 All expenses for advertising, engineering and
plans, construction, inspection, recording of plans and documents
and all other expenses in connection with and for a subdivision
18
-
shall be borne by the developer. Expenses per linear foot
associated with sanitary sewers and storm drains for engineering
service, supervision and inspection by the Needham Department of
Public Works shall be as specified in the Covenant.
3.4.9 As a condition of approval of a subdivision, the
developer shall agree to construct streets and install all
required municipal services and utilities in such subdivision,
including all work incidental thereto, such as grading of lots to
provide proper drainage, construction of retaining walls and
other details, outlined in Sub-Section 3.3 of these Rules and
Regulations or as specifically required by the Planning Board.
3.4.10 As further condition of approval of a
subdivision, the developer shall grant to the Town of Needham a
perpetual right and easement to construct, repair, replace,
extend, operate, use and forever maintain all streets, water,
mains, sewer mains, and all surface and subsurface storm water
drains in, through or under the streets and easements as
indicated on definitive plans. The above shall not be construed
to relieve the developer, and his successors in title to a
portion of the land or a street in the subdivision, or
responsibility to complete all construction, as required by the
developer's agreements with the Town, and to thereafter maintain
all streets and municipal services and utilities in satisfactory
condition until they are accepted by the Town. Such grant shall
be executed and delivered to the Planning Board in a form
acceptable to such Board within a reasonable time but, in any
event, prior to the transfer or conveyance of any lot or interest
therein.
Sub-Section 3.5 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
3.5.1 The developer shall guarantee compliance with
the conditions imposed by the Planning Board and the performance
of all construction and installation of municipal services and
utilities by means of either a covenant, prohibiting the sale of
lots other than by mortgage deed, or building upon lots in a
subdivision until the conditions imposed by the Planning Board
have been complied with; or a Surety Agreement with the surety in
the amount and of a type satisfactory to the Board in accordance
with the provisions M.G.L. Chapter 41, Section 81-U. The
conditions imposed and the surety may be varied from time to time
by the Planning Board, provided that the Planning Board shall not
approve the reduction of surety by or to an amount of less than
Five Thousand Dollars {$5,000), except that in the case of a
subdivision whose only street is less than 250 feet in length,
the minimum amount shall be Two Thousand, Five-Hundred Dollars
{$2,500). All documents used as performance guarantee shall be
subject to approval by the Town Counsel as to form and legality.
19
In addition to any performance required by the Planning
Board regarding the construction of municipal services and
utilities, the developer may also be required to provide the
Planning Board with a performance guarantee to satisfy the
requirements of the Board of Health.
3.5.2 In requesting the cancellation or any reduction
in the amount of surety, the developer shall submit to the Public
Works Department a copy of the definitive subdivision plan as
approved by the Planning Board upon which shall be indicated the
location of all underground utilities including, but not limited
to, gas transmission mains, fire alarm system wiring, telephone
cables, and electrical conduits; and the developer shall also
submit the original of the Subdivision Inspection Form listing
the items of work completed, and the work still incomplete. The
Subdivision Inspection Form, may be obtained from the Department
of Public Works. No reduction or release of surety shall be
granted by the Planning Board until the original of the
Subdivision Inspection Form, properly completed, has been
submitted to the Planning Board by the developer. The Planning
Board may request a report and recommendations from the Public
Works Department, acting as inspection agency on subdivisions,
regarding the estimated costs of items of work not completed to
the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.
Within forty-five days after the receipt of the request for
the reduction or release of surety, the Planning Board shall act
by releasing, canceling or reducing such surety or by notifying
the Town Clerk and the developer by registered mail of specific
details wherein the work fails to comply with its Rules and
Regulations or the conditions of approval and by refusing the
request.
Upon completion of construction work in accordance with any
applicable covenants, agreements or specifications for which a
performance security was given either by bond, deposit or
covenant, the applicant shall send by registered mail to the Town
Clerk and to the Planning Board, a written statement that the
said construction or installation in connection with which such
bond, deposit or covenant was given, has been completed in
accordance with these Rules and Regulations. Such statement
shall include the address of the applicant. The administration
of releases of any performance bond, deposit or covenant made
under these Rules and Regulations shall be in accordance with the
provisions of Section 81-U of Chapter 41 of the General Laws as
amended.
3.5.3 Failure of the developer to complete within the
period specified in the surety agreement all work required in a
manner satisfactory to the Planning Board may be remedied by
action of the Town by enforcing the bond or applying the deposit
towards the reasonable cost of satisfactory completion of such
work and in case of a Covenant - by injunction restraining any
further sale of lots or buildings thereon until all required work
has been satisfactorily completed
20
3.5.4 Coincident with the developer's request for
final release of surety, the developer will submit to the Board
of Selectmen a petition for acceptance as public ways the streets
within the subdivision. After referral of petition(s) from the
Board of Selectmen to the Planning Board, the latter shall 45
days from date of receipt to make its report with recommendations
for acceptance.
Sub-Section 3.6 COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS
AND INSPECTION
3.6.1 In accordance with Article III, SECTION 3 and 3A
of the General By-Laws of the Town of Needham, all construction
work shall conform to the Specifications therefore adopted by the
Selectmen, in particular the "Standard Specifications for
Highways" dated April 30, 1964 as amended, and the "Standard
Cross-Section for Street Construction" dated January 1961, as
amended. Said "Standard Specifications", and said "Standard
Cross-Sections" are herewith made by reference a part of these
Rules and Regulations. The Planning Board will consider any
alternative cross sections after detailed drawings and other
required information, specified by the Planning Board, is
submitted and reviewed by the Public Works Department on behalf
of the Planning Board. The developer shall consult with the
Planning Board and Public Works Department prior to any proposed
deviation from the "Standard Specifications" noted herein.
3.6.2 In accordance with Section 81-R of the
Subdivision Control Law and with Section 4.2.3 of the Town of
Needham Zoning By-Law, as amended, the Planning Board may waive
strict compliance with the minimum frontage and area requirements
for lots and with these Rules and Regulations. The Planning
Board may authorize deviations from the "Standard Specifications"
and "Standard Street Cross-Sections" referred to above.
3. 6. 3 The Director of Public Works may be the
inspector for the construction of streets and the installation of
municipal services and utilities in subdivisions; he may delegate
the inspection work to qualified members and employees of the
Public Works Department. The Planning Board may also employ
experts and clerical and other assistants, subject to budget
limitations, to ensure the proper administration of the
Subdivision Control Law and of these Rules and Regulations.
The Planning Board may require as a condition of the
subdivision approval that the developer furnish test boring data
and other soils information data. Where the need is indicated by
such data, the developer shall excavate and replace all
unsuitable material within the street and beyond the street
limits to a point where a 2 to 1 downward slope meets acceptable
materials as necessary for the lateral stabilization of the
proposed roadway.
The Public Works Department shall be notified by the
developer prior to the commencement of each phase of construction
as identified on the Subdivision Inspection Form. Upon
21
completion of each phase of the construction, the developer shall
notify the responsible department head, who shall perform the
required inspection within two working days of such notification.
If the work is completed to the satisfaction of the department
head, the developer shall obtain the signature of the department
head on the Subdivision Inspection Form.
3.6.4 In accordance with Section 81-B of Chapter 41 of
the Massachusetts General Laws, members and employees of the
Planning Board and other persons acting under the authority of
the Planning Board as its agents, may enter upon any lands and
carry out such surveys and inspections as may be deemed
necessary, and place and maintain monuments and marks. As a
condition of subdivision approval by the Planning Board, a
developer shall cooperate with the Planning Board and Town
officials and assist them in their efforts to verify that the
layout, design and construction work in his subdivision are
satisfactory and conform to Town Specifications and the
requirements of the Planning Board.
3. 6. 5 The upkeep and maintenance of streets and
municipal services and utilities within a subdivision are the
responsibilities of the developer and his successors in title to
a portion of land or street. The Town may assess betterments for
any work needed to make such streets conform to the Town
standards prior to acceptance thereof as Town ways.
3.6.6 Failure to comply with these Rules and
Regulations and with the Town of Needham specifications referred
to above shall constitute a basis for corrective action by the
Planning Board. Such action may include the realization upon any
surety posted by the developer, the withdrawal of subdivision
approval and other measures provided by law.
Sub-Section 3.7 REVISION OF SUBDIVISIONS AND
DISCONTINUANCE OF STREETS
3.7.1 The procedure for revisions of exterior lines or
profiles {grades) of private ways previously approved, for change
of name and discontinuance {abandonment) of private ways shall,
insofar as applicable, conform to the requirements for approval
of definitive plans as regards application, plans, advertising
and public hearing, certificate of action and performance
guarantees. The requirements for approval of definitive plans
shall also apply to ways having no established exterior lines and
profile grades and to ways in existence at the time Subdivision
Control Law became effective in Needham which, in the opinion of
the Planning Board, do not have sufficient width, suitable grades
or adequate construction to provide for traffic needs and for the
installation of municipal services to serve the lands abutting
thereon and the buildings erected or to be erected on such lands.
3.7.2 The Planning Board may, after sending notices to
abutters, advertising in a local newspaper and holding a public
hearing, as provided for the approval of definitive plans, modify
or withdraw the approval of a subdivision or require a change in
22
plans as a condition of their retaining the approved status. such
modifications or rescissions of approval shall not affect lots
sold or mortgaged by the developer, subject to limitations
outlined in Section 81-W of - the Subdivision Control Law, as
amended.
3.7.3 Revisions of lot lines, municipal services and
utilities, easements and other changes which do not affect the
names, grades, or exterior lines of ways may be approved by the
Planning Board without a public hearing.
3. 7. 4 Any plan showing a revision of an approved
subdivision plan and submitted prior to the complete release of
lots in that portion of the subdivision affected by such plan or
prior to the release of bond or other surety for the construction
of ways or portions of ways shown on such plan shall bear a
notation referring to the original subdivision plan.
3.7.5 Any application for amendment or revision to an
approved definitive subdivision plan shall be accompanied by a
filing fee of $50.00 per lot for the number of lots affected by
such revision or amendment as determined by the Planning Board
with a maximum of $500.00 for each application. Said filing fee
shall be received prior to any required public hearing or before
any action by the Planning Board.
23
ARTICLE I
SECTION 4
PLANNING BOARD RULES
FOR
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SPECIAL PERMITS
RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND SPECIAL PERMITS
FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT SPECIAL PERMITS
SITE PLAN REVIEW SPECIAL PERMITS
GENERAL
These Rules are adopted by the Needham Planning Board as
authorized by M.G.L., CHAPTER 40A, Section 9 for the purpose of
establishing uniform rules and procedures for conducting the
business of the Planning Board under its jurisdiction as a
Special Permit Granting Authority for "Planned Residential
Developments", "Residential Compounds", "Flexible Developments",
and Site Plan Review by virtue of the applicable provisions of
the Massachusetts General Laws and the Needham Zoning By-Law.
These Rules shall also establish uniform procedures for
conducting the business of the Planning Board in its review of
and comment on "minor projects" under Site Plan Review,
Sub-Section 7.4.3 of the Zoning By-Law.
ARTICLE II THE APPLICATION
Section 1. Applicant
An application for a Special Permit to allow a Planned
Residential Development, Residential Compound, Flexible
Development or Site Plan Review may be filed by a property owner,
a prospective purchaser, or other applicant provided that
documentation from the owner certifying the applicant's legal
interest in the property and right to file accompanies the
application.
Section 2. Pre-Application Review
To promote better communication and to avoid
misunderstanding, the applicant is encouraged, prior to the
preparation of a formal application, to meet with the Planning
Board and Planning Director for informal discussions regarding a
proposed site, plans and other issues relative to a proposed
project. · In the case of a Site Plan Review, discussion of
project category (major or minor project) is best broached during
such pre-application interview; determination of project category
shall include consultation with the Building Inspector.
Section 3. Application Form
An application for a Planned Residential Development Special
Permit, Residential Compound Special Permit, Flexible Development
Special Permit or Site Plan Review Special Permit shall be made
on an appropriate official application form entitled "Planning
24
Board - Application for Special Permit" which shall be furnished
upon request. Any communication purporting to be an application
shall be treated as a mere notice of intention to seek Planning
Board action until such time as an official application form has
been submitted. All information called for by the form shall be
furnished by the applicant in the manner therein described. The
forms to be used are hereby made a part of these Rules.
Section 4. Filing of Application
All applications for Planned Residential Development Special
Permits, Residential Compound Special Permits, Flexible
Development Special Permits and Site Plan Review Special Permits
shall be filed with the Planning Board who shall transmit a copy
forth with to the Town Clerk. Prior to filing with the Board,
the application shall be first reviewed with the Planning
Director to assure correctness, completeness, and clarity.
Section 5. Supporting Material
The application form shall be accompanied by ten (10) copies
of the following material, as indicated in each case:
(a) Planned Residential Developments - material as
specified in the Needham Zoning By-Law, Sub-Section 4.2.5.3
(b) •
(b) Residential Compounds - material as specified in
the Needham Zoning By-Law, Sub-Section 4.2.6 (e)
(c) Flexible Developments - material as specified in
the Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules of the
Planning Board, Sub-Section 3.2 "Submission of Definitive
Plans"
(d) Site Plan Review - material as specified in the
Needham Zoning By-Law, Sub-Section 7.4.4, third paragraph;
site photographs; and vital statistics of project (total
floor space, number of parking spaces, etc.).
Waiver for any item of required supporting material shall be
requested in writing at the time filing of the application.
Section 6. Information to be Furnished to the Board
The applicant shall be required to support factually all
points relied upon in the application concerning the proposed use
of land, conditions, and character of the development which show
that it will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of the
provisions for a Planned Residential Development, Residential
Compound, Flexible Development or Site Plan Review, respectively;
with the general and specific requirements of the Zoning By-Law
and all other provisions governing the land use and the zoning
district in which the land is located.
25
Such information, together with any relevant data, shall be
indicated on the application form or on the site plan, and
presented verbally or in writing at the public hearing.
Section 7. Filing Fees
Filing Fees shall be as follows:
Planned Residential Developments - $500.00 per plan, plus
$100.00 per unit; if submitted together with a Definitive
Subdivision Plan, the second fee may be waived by the Board;
Residential Compounds - $500.00 per plan, plus $100.00 per
unit;
Flexible Developments - no separate filing fee; see
Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules of the Planning
Board, Sub-Section 3.2 (as amended) for filing fee for Definitive
Subdivision Plan;
Site Plan Review - $600.00 for Major Projects; $300.00 for
amendments to an approved Major Project requiring public hearing,
and $200. 00 for amendments to an approved Major Project not
requiring public hearing; $100.00 for Minor Projects; see Needham
Zoning By-Law, Sub-Section 7. 4. 2 for definition of project
category.
Section 8. Other Costs
The applicant shall be responsible for costs associated with
the publication and mailing of the notices of public hearings
required by the Planning Board as a special permit granting
authority.
Section 9. Application for Amendments
Amendments to Special Permits previously granted by the
Planning Board as a special permit granting authority shall be
treated in the same manner as any new application under this
Article, except however, the Board shall have the right to waive
the filing fee in whole or in part.
ARTICLE III THE HEARING
Section 1. Hearing Date and Notice
Upon receipt of an application, the Planning Board shall set
the date of the public hearing, which shall be held within 65
days of the application filing date. Notice of the Hearing shall
be advertised as required by M.G.L., Chapter 40A, Section 11. In
addition, copies of the notice shall be sent by certified mail at
least seven days prior to the date of the hearing to all parties
in interest.
26
'• -
Section 2. Hearing Representation
An applicant may appear in his own behalf or be represented
by an agent or attorney. In the absence of an appearance, the
Board may, in its discretion, decide the matter using the
information it has received or dismiss the application with or
without prejudice.
Section 3. Hearing Procedure
(a) Hearings will start at the time stated in the
notice unless delayed because of prior hearings.
(b) At the Hearing, any party whether entitled to
notice thereof or not may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
(c) At the Hearing, the chairperson may administer
oaths, summon witnesses and call for the production of
papers. The Planning Board may retain any record which has
been introduced as evidence for reference in the
consideration of the case.
(d) No person shall address a Hearing of the
Planning Board without leave of the chairperson, and all
persons shall, at the request of the chairperson, be silent.
If a person, after warning from the chairperson, persists in
disorderly behavior the chairperson may order him to
withdraw from the hearing, and, if he does not withdraw, may
order a constable or any other person to remove him and
confine him in some convenient place until the Hearing is
adjourned.
(e) The chairperson may close the Hearing
immediately if ,in the chairperson's opinion, these Rules are
being violated or the Hearing becomes disorderly.
(f) The chairperson will open each Hearing by
reading, or causing to be read, the notice as advertised.
(g) The petitioner or his representative will then
present his case, stating fully the reason(s) why the
petition or application should be granted.
(h) When the petitioner or his representative has
concluded the presentation, the chairperson will allow all
those in favor of the matter under consideration to speak.
Those who wish to speak will rise, address the chairperson,
give their names and addresses, then proceed.
(i) When all those in favor have spoken, the
chairperson will then allow those in opposition a similar
opportunity to be heard.
(j) Rebuttals may only be allowed at the discretion
of the chairperson.
27
(k) Similarly, no cross-examination will be allowed,
although questions seeking information and deemed relevant
by the Planning Board may be allowed at its discretion.
(1) Members of the Planning Board who are hearing
the case may direct appropriate questions during the
hearing.
(m) When all facts have been presented, the
chairperson close the Hearing and inform the petitioner or
his representative and others present that they will be
notified of the Planning Board's decision.
Section 4. Hearing of Application for Amendments
The Planning Board shall have the authority to waive the
requirement for a hearing in conjunction with an application for
an amendment if, in its opinion, such amendment is minor in
nature and does not constitute a substantial change in the plan
or plans referenced in the original Special Permit Decision.
ARTICLE IV FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT (PLANNED RESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENT) IS A SUBDIVISION
All applications for Flexible Developments shall be reviewed
simultaneously with the application for a Definitive Subdivision
as prescribed under M.G.L., Chapter 41, Sections 81K-81GG. If a
Planned Residential Development is also a subdivision within the
meaning of the Subdivision Control Law, the above procedure shall
also pertain.
ARTICLE V ACTIONS BY THE BOARD
Section 1. Voting Requirements
The concurring vote of four of the five members of the
Planning Board shall be necessary to decide in favor of the
application for a Special Permit for a Planned Residential
Development, Residential Compound, Flexible Development or Site
Plan Review. The Planning Board shall cause to be made a
detailed record of its proceedings, showing the vote of each
member or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact,
and setting forth clearly the reason or reasons for its decision
and of its· other official actions, copies of which shall be filed
in the Off ice of the Town Clerk.
Section 2. Withdrawal
An application may be withdrawn without prejudice by notice
in writing to the Planning Board at any time prior to the
publication of the notice of a public hearing. Withdrawal
thereafter with or without prejudice requires Planning Board '--~
approval and, in either event, there shall be no return of any
fee paid with such application.
28
Section 3. Repetitive Petition
,'---../ No application which has been unfavorable and finally acted
upon by the Planning Board shall be acted favorably upon within
two years after the date of final unfavorable action unless the
Planning Board finds by a four-fifths vote of the Board specific
and material changes in the conditions upon which the previous
unfavorable action was based, and describes such changes in the
records of its proceedings, and unless all but one of the members
of the Planning Board consent to consideration of the matter.
Notice to parties in interest shall be given of the time and
place of the proceedings at which the question of consent will be
considered.
Section 4. Limitation on Approval/Extension
If an application for a special permit is approved by the
Board, all permits necessary for the prosecution of the work
shall be obtained and substantial use thereof shall be commenced
except for good cause or construction begun except for good cause
within two years from the date of filing of the Board's decision
in the Off ice of the Town Clerk unless the Board otherwise
provides for a lesser period of time in the decision. A
reasonable extension of said time shall be granted by the Board
in the case of an appeal to the Superior Court under M.G.L.,
Chapter 17 or for other good cause shown.
Section 5. Decisions
(a) The Clerk of the Planning Board will send a copy
of its decision to the property owner, the applicant if
other than the property owner, the Town Clerk and, when
applicable other Town Boards and departments, and will send
notices of its decision to parties in interest and every
person present at the public hearing who requests that
notice be sent and states the address to which it is to be
sent.
(b) The applicant is responsible for filing the
certified decision in the Registry of Deeds and for paying
the recording fees. A copy of the recorded decision,
certified by the Registry, must be submitted to the Planning
Board before a building permit dependent on the Special
Permit can be issued by the Building Inspector, or before
any lots can be released from a restrictive covenant.
ARTICLE VI POLICIES AND ADVICE
Any advice, opinion, or information given to the applicant
by a Planning Board member, the Building Inspector, the Planning
Director, or other official or employee of the Town prior to a
public hearing shall not be binding on the Board. Individuals
are discouraged from appealing personally to the members of the
Planning Board prior to a public hearing and a final decision.
29
ARTICLE VII AMENDMENTS
These Rules may be amended by a majority vote of the members
of the Planning Board, provided that such amendment shall be
presented in writing at a regular meeting and action taken
thereof at a subsequent regular meeting.
ARTICLE VIII EFFECTIVE DATE
These Rules were adopted at a regular meeting of the
Planning Board on April 22, 1986 and became effective as of that
date; amendments were adopted October 28, 1986, February 10, 1987
and December 13, 1988. Any rules and regulations previously
adopted by the Planning Board with respect to the issuance of
special permits are hereby repealed.
ARTICLE IX RELATED VARIANCES
An applicant shall be responsible for filing any request for
required variances from the Zoning Board of Appeals prior to any
application filed with the Planning Board in accordance with
these Planning Board Rules for Planned Residential Development,
Residential Compound, Flexible Development and Site Plan Review
Special Permits. The Planning Board recommends to the applicant
that any request for Planning Board public hearings be delayed
until action by the Zoning Board of Appeals including the appeal
period, in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws, has
expired.
30
TOWN OF NEEDHAM
MASSACHUSETTS
Room 20, Town Hall
Needham, MA 02192
617-444-5100
PLANNING BOARD
APPLICATION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT
for
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
RESIDENTIAL COMPOUND
FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT
This application must be completed, signed, and submitted with the filing fee by the
Applicant or his representative in accordance with the Planning Board's Rules as
adopted under its jurisdiction as a Special Permit Granting Authority.
Name of Applicant Address Tel.# -------------------------- ~----------------- ----------
Applicant is Owner _I_ __ _. Tenant I... __ _. Agent/Attorney(_ ___ _ Purchaser I.._ _ Property Owner's Name Address Tel.#
(if not Applicant) --------------~----- -----------------~ ----------
Characteristics of Property: Lot Area ---------------- Present Use ----------------
Map # Parcel H Zoning District -------------- ------------------- --------------------
Nature and justification of request for a special permit under the Zoning By-law,
Section 4.2.5. Planned Residential Development; Section 4.2.6. Residential Compound;
or Section 4.2.4. Flexible Development:
I hereby request a hearing before the Planning Board with reference to the above application.
Signature of Applicant (or his representative) ----------------------------
Address if not Applicant ----------------------------
Tel.II ----------------------------
Owner's permission if other than applicant ~--------------------------
TOWN OF NEEDHAM
MASSACHUSITTS
PLANNING BOARD
Room 20, Town Hall
Needham, MA 02192
617-444-5100
APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW
Project Determination:
by Planning Board/
Building Inspector
Major Project
Minor Project
Requiring special
permit from Board
of Appeals
This application must be completed, signed, and submitted with the filing fee by the
Applicant or his representative in accordance wi~h the Planning Boa~d's Rules as
adopted under its jurisdiction as a Special Permit Granting Authdrity.
Applicant is Owner ~I _ __. Tenant _I_ _ Agent/Attorney I __ Purchaser!.. . _
Property Owner's Name Address Tel.I
(if not Applicant) ----------- ---------~ -----
Characteristics of Property: Lot Area -------- Present Use --------
Map 8 _______ Parcel # __________ Zoning District _________ _
Description of Project for Site Plan Review under Section 7.4. of the Zoning By-law:
I hereby request a hearing before the Planning Board with reference to the above application.
Signature of Applicant (or his representative) ____________ __
Address if not Applicant ---------------
Tel.fl ---------------
Owner's permission if other than applicant---------------
32
SECTION 5
RECOMMENDED DESIGN CRITERIA FOR PRIVATE STREETS
IN PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS AND RESIDENTIAL COMPOUNDS
Adopted by the Needham Planning Board on February 11, 1986
These criteria are to be used as design guidelines; the Planning
Board reserves the right to waive or modify any of these
standards.
STANDARD
Min. Width of
Right of Way
Min. Width of
Road Surf ace
24 ft.
Max. Lengt~ of
a Dead End
TUrnaround
Max. Grade
Sub-base
Surf ace
Leveling
Area
ACCEPTED TOWN
STREET(S)
50 - 40 ft.
34 - 24 ft.
14 lots max.
radius of 60 ft.
8%
2" crushed gravel
on 10" gravel base
1" Surf ace bit. con.
on 2 II Bond bit. con.
Max. 1% - within 50'
of intersection
UNACCEPTED (PRIVATE)
WAY(S)
1 - 3 units: 30 ft.
4 - 7 units: 36 ft.
8 + units: 40 ft.
1 - 3 units: 18 ft.
4 - 7 units: 22 ft.
8 + units:
1,000 ft. SRA
600 ft. SRB
Turnaround Design
Subject to Fire
Chief's recommendation
10% Secondary access
8% Primary access
same
same
Max. 1% - within 25'
* Private Dead End means that the length of private way extending
from an accepted public way
33
CUrbing
Storm Drains
Sidewalk
both sides
Slopes
Sa~itary Sewer
Water Service
Electricity
and Telephone
Off-Street
Parking
See Section 3.3.6 of
"Subdivision Regulations"
See Section 3.3.13
4.5 ft. sidewalks on
o - 5% grade bit.
con. berm may be
required; 5% + bit.
con. berm required
same
2 -3 units: may not
be required
Max. 2:1
See Section 3.3.11
See Section 3.3.12
See Section 3.3.14
34
4 - 7 units: one
generally required
8 + units: two
generally required
Retaining Walls or
other Approved Means
for Slopes greater
than 2:1
If Common Septic
Tank(s) are used,
show feasibility to
edge of development
Design based on state
D.E.Q.E. Division of
Water Supply standards
same
2 Per Unit, Not
Including Garage
Space; otherwise,
width of pavement may
be increased to permit
passage of emergency
vehicles
APPENDIX A
APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT OF PLAN
BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL
TOWN PLANNING BOARD
Submit lv.-0 (2) copies. One copy lo be filed with the Planning Boanl <1ml one with the Town Clerk as required
by S«tion 81-P, Chapter .;1 of the General Laws. This application must be accompanied by the ORIGINAL TRACING
AND TWO (2) COPIES OF PLAN.
?'\ ecdham, l\fass.
TO THE PLANNING BOARD:
The undersigned. believing that the accompanying plan of land in the Town of Needham d~ not constitute
a subdi\"ision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law, for the reasons outlined below, herewith submits
said plan for a detc"'!ination and endorsement that Planning Board approval under the Suhdh·ision Control
Law is not required.
L Name of Applicant .................................................................................................................................................................... , .... .
Address ·································································································································-·····'·····················································
2. Name of Engineer or Sun·cyor ............................... . .................................................................................................................. .
Address ............................................................................................................................................................................................. .
3. Deed o( property recorded in ................................................ Registry. Book .................................... Page ....................... .
4. Location and description of property ......................................................................................................................................... .
5. Reasons approval is not required (check as appliable):
(a) Every lot shown has the area and front:tge required by the Zoning By-Law on a way, :is defined by Stttion
81-1.., Chapter 41 of the General Laws.
(b) Land designated ........................................................... shall not be used as separate building lot{s) but only together
with adjacent lots having the required area and frontage.
(c) Lot(s) having less than required frontage or area resulted from a taking for public purpose or have been
recorded prior to 3/26125, no land is available to make up the deficiency and the frontage and area of
1uch lots are not being reduced by this plan.
(d) ············································································································································································································
Signature of Applicant .............................................................................................................................. .
Address ............................................................................................................................................................ .
Application accepted this ......... day of ........................................................... 19 ..... .. . as duly
submitted under the rules and regulatio•\S o[ the Planning Board.
By .......................................................................................................... ···············-····--·--·-···············-··--·--·············
35
APPENDIX B
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY SUBDIVISION PLAN
TOWN OF NEEDHAM
MASSACHUSETTS
TOWN PLANNING BOARD
································-·········· 19 ······-
The undersigned herewith submits for approval as a preliminary subdivision plan as provided for in the Subdivision
Control Law and the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board governing the Subdivision of Land in the
Town of Needham, Massachusetts, plans and documents containing the following information:
a. The existing boundaries o( the proposed suhdi\·ision and of all lots abutting
upon it with the names of the owners of all such lots shown thereon;
b. Any zone or district boundaries established by the Zoning By-Law of. the. Town
of Needham;
c. The approximate boundaries, dimensions and areas of the proposed lots;
d. The existing and the propc>sed topography of the land. and the proposed systems
of drainage, water supply and sewerage as required by Section 3.1.l of
the Rules and Regulations; and
c. The title and legend provided for in the Rules and Regulations.
I. Names of Applicants .................................................................................................................................................................. _ ..
Address ......................... ············································································································---·--···---·-
2. Name of Registered Engineer or Land Sun·eyor preparing the plan ·······························································-·-·---
Address .................................................................................................. ·······························--··-·--········---·-
3. Deed of Property recorded in ............................................ Registry, Book ................................ Page ·-···-·············--·--
4. Location and Description of Property ..................................................................................................................................... .
5. Signature of Applicant ................................................................................................................................................................. .
Address
(All owners, authorized officers of a corporation or trustees must sign)
Received with two copies of plans on .................................... 19 ................... .
By ......................... ···························································-·
THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW REQUIRES SIMULTANEOUS SUB·
MISSION OF SUBDIVISION PLAN TO THE BOARD OF HEALTH and THE
APPLICANT TO NOTIFY THE-TOWN CLERK OF THIS SUBMISSION.
36
APPENOIX c
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A DEFINITIVE SUBDIVISION PLAN
TOWN OF NEEDHAM
MASSACHUSETTS
TOWN PLANNING BOARD
............................................................ 19 ·······'
The undersigned, on behalf of ....................................................................................................................................................... : ..
<owner's name or self)
of ................................................................................................• owner of land in Needham, the description of Aid land
<address>
·"--'.
being submitted herewith, desiring to make a subdivision of Aid land hereby submits the following required plam
and documents:
a. the original tracings and three full sized copies of each of the following plans -
-~ a key location map, } (may be combined)
u. a lot plan,
iii. a profile plan. }
iv. a municipal_ services and utility plan, (may be combined)
v. :1. topographic plan,
vi. any detail plans required
Each plan bearing titles. cndoncments and imprints required;
b. a filing fee of $300., plus $100. per lot.
c. a description of the boundaries of the entire area· to be subdi,ided; and
d. a list of the names and addresses of all abutters as they appear on the most recent Needham Assessors' records;
and
e. ······················································································································-·············································································-
(specify any additional material or informatiOn submitted)
and petitions the Pfanning Board to consider and approve such subdi\•ision plans under the provisions of the Subdivision
Control Law (Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter '41, Sections 81-A through 81GG inclusive, as amended)
and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations o{ the Needham Planning Board and the applicable By-Laws o{
the Town of Needham.
The undersigned certifies that the applicant(s) is/are the sole owner(s) of the entire land proposed to be subdivided
and that the subdivision pl~ns and the description submitted indicate the true boundaries of said land and the
correct names of all abutters as shown on the most recent records of the Needham Assessors.
(IC the applicant is not the owner, nor the owner's attorney, written authorization to act as agent must be attached)
.......................................................................................... (Owners)
By .................................................................................... (Agent)
This application is accepted by the Needham Planning Board in accordance with Sections 81-Q and 81-T of the
Subdivision Control Law.
NEEDHAM PLANNING BOARD
By ··································································································•
································································ 19 ......... . Olalnnan or Clerk
THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW REQUIRES SIMULTANEOUS SU BM IS·
SION OF SUBDIVISION PLAN TO THE BOARD OF HEAL TH and THAT
THE APPLICANT NOTIFY THE TOWN CLERK OF THIS SUBMISSION.
37
APPENDIX D
TOWN OF 1'££DHAM
NOTE REFERRING TO THE CONDITIONS Of APPROVAL
On Subdivision Plans of land not registered in the Land Court:
Approved subject to terms :md conditiom of Covenant given in
accordance with Section 81-U, Chapter ··I I o( General Liws.
Approved: ............................................................... 19 ....... .
NEEDHAM PLANNING BOARD
(Space for signatures ol the
majority of the Planning Board)
In case of registered !and or land to be registered, a separate statement is
executed by the Planning 3oard and recorded by the Developer:
~EEDHAM PL.\NNING BOARD
Statement of Conditioru of Plarming Board Approt'4l
The undersigned. being the majority of the Planning Board of the
Town of Needharn. hereby certify that the conditiom set forth in the
attached Covenant given by (Developer) were imposed :it the time of its
approval of a subdivision plan entitled (Title o{ Plan), drawn by (Name
of Engineer), Surveyor, dated (Date of Plan).
MAJORITY OF NEEDHA:\l PLANNING BOARD
(Spaces for signatures).
TOWN CLERK'S CERTIFICATE OF NO APPEAL
I, Town Clerk of the Town of i'\eedham, hereby certify that the notice of
approval of this plan by the Needham Planning Board has been received and
recorded at this office and no appeal \\·as recei\·ed during the twenty days next
after such receipt and recording of said notice .
................................ 19 ··········
Tm11n Clerlt
38
._/.
APPENDIX E SUBDIVISION INSPECTION FORM
Inspection by the appropriate department head is required for all items
~ before final release of surety. Approval of some items may justify a
reduction of surety after a written request has been made by the developer
through the Planning Board
ITEM INSPECTED BY
CLEARING AND GRUBBING -------- HIGHWAY SUPERINTENDENT
EXCAVATION TO SUBGRADE " " "
GRAVEL SUB BASE " " "
GRAVEL. BASE " " "
CHECK OF LINE AND STREET GRADES -------- TOWN ENGINEER
BASE COURSE BITUMINOUS CONCRETE HIGHWAT SUPERINTENDENT
FINISH COURSE BITUMINOUS CONCRETE " " "
SIDEWALK GRAVEL GRADES -------- TOWN ENGINEER
SIDEWALKS -------- HIGHWAY SUPERINTENDENT
CURBS (ASPHALT, CONCRETE, OR GRANITE)
GRASS BERMS " " "
SEWER MAINS AND APPERTENANCES -------- SEWER SUPERINTENDENT
DRAINS AND APPERTENANCES " If "
WATER MAINS AND APPERTENANCES -------- WATER SUPERINTENDENT
BOUNDS -------- TOWN ENGINEER
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS DATE
39
APPENDIX f
(SEAL)
TYPICAL TITLE BLOCK LAYOlrr
6 Inches
DEFINITIVE PLAN (or Preliminar}' Plan) of the Subdivision of
Land in the Town of l'tccdham, situated off . . .. Street.
DAT£ OF PLAN
Owner's name John Doe
and address ...... Any .... ······· ................... Bt., Needham, Mas&.
Developer's Doe Estate3, Inc .
name & address ..... .. MY ................................... Bt., Boston Ma33.
.r.t1191neer or
Surveyor's A Citizex ...... MY ....... ........................ St., 1\rlytowll. ...... , MMS name & address
Shttt #I of X Shttts Preliminary Plan Approved: May 10, 1966
Definitive Plan filed: Sept. 10, 1966
Vertical Scale: I inch=; feet Revisions dated: Sept. 30, 1966
Horiiomal Scale: I indt=40 feet
Oct. 16, 1966
·~ inches to edge of
Sheet
IY4 inches
to edge of
Sket
The following forms are for the con 1•enience of an applicant and shall in no way
tary the construction of the Subdivision Regulations and Procedural Rules of the Planning
Board of the Tou;n of Needham: by implication or otheru:itte.
40
