
CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
A. Designation
Section 1. The by-laws contained in this and the succeeding Chapters constitute
the Re-codified General By-laws of the Town of Oak Bluffs.
B. Penalty
Whoever violates a provision within a chapter or section for which a penalty
is not specified, unless other provision is expressly made, shall be liable for a
penalty not exceeding twenty dollars ($20.00).
Chapter II TOWN MEETINGS AND THE RULES FOR THE
GOVERNMENT THEREOF
A. Day and Time of Annual Town Meeting
The Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the second Tuesday in April beginning
at 7:00 P.M. and ending at 10:30 P.M. (with the conclusion of the article being
discussed); and the Annual Town Election shall be held on the following
Thursday of the same week during April.
B. Calling Town Meeting
All Town Meetings, including the Annual Town Meeting, shall be notified by
posting notice thereof in two or more public places in Town, at least fourteen days
prior to the Town Meeting. The Warrant shall be placed in a newspaper published
in the County at least fourteen days before the time of said meeting is to be held.
Such notice shall contain the Warrant in full (with the exception of Personnel
Schedules and the Actual Budget) which is to be acted upon at said meeting.
2
C. Quorum
At any meeting of the inhabitants of the Town qualified to vote in Town Affairs
the number of voters necessary to constitute a quorum shall consist of a number of
not less than fifty (50) registered voters, but a number less than a quorum may
from time to time adjourn such meeting. This by-law shall not apply to meetings
or parts of meetings as are devoted exclusively to the election of Town Officers.
D. Rule of Order
At each Special or Annual Town Meeting, the moderator shall use a handbook of
Parliamentary Law called “Town Meeting Time” to govern the way parliamentary
procedure is conducted by the Moderator. The Moderator may take a voice vote
and call the result whenever a two-thirds vote is required. (Amended STM 4/11/06,
AG Approval posted 6/12/06)
E. Warrant
1. At each Annual Town Meeting of the Town of Oak Bluffs, the warrant will
carry a Selectmen’s Article specifying an amount of money (including zero)
which may be taken from Surplus Revenue and used to reduce the total to be
raised by taxation in the budget approved for the next fiscal year.
2. The above amount to be taken from Surplus Revenue shall be proposed
by the Selectmen at a regular or special Selectmen’s meeting at least 30 days
before the Annual Town Meeting.
Chapter III ANIMAL CONTROL (Section replaced Art. 8 STM 11.14.17, AG Approved
2.26.18, Posted 2.27.18)
A. Definitions
1. Abandoned: A canine is considered abandoned within the meaning of this
chapter when it has been left alone or unattended by the owner for any period
greater than 24 hours without the owner providing for its needs.
2. Adequate Shelter: A structure that is large enough for the animal, whether it is
livestock or other domestic animal, to stand naturally, turn around and lie
down inside of the structure without being exposed to the elements or weather.
The roof and walls of the structure must be waterproof and windproof.
Bedding must be kept dry and changed regularly to preserve insulating qualities.
Insulation and an inner wall must be included in shelter for canines with
short fur (example: Pointers, Staffordshire Terriers, Boxers, Labrador Retrievers)
to provide adequate protection from cold. During cold weather a moveable
flap must be placed over the entrance to a canine shelter to preserve the
canine’s body heat. Adequate shelter from sun may be provided by a tarp
placed in a manner to provide deep shade and allow air to pass through for
ventilation
3
3. At large: Any canine that is not under immediate control of owner via lead restraint
or first call command.
4. Complainant: Any person, including the animal control officer who witnesses
any domestic animal in the act of committing a violation under this chapter, or
any other applicable law.
5. Cruelty to Animals: Any person who overdrives, overloads, drives when overloaded,
overworks, tortures, torments, deprives of necessary sustenance, cruelly
beats, mutilates or kills an animal, or causes or procures an animal to be
overdriven, overloaded, driven when overloaded, overworked, tortured, tormented,
deprived of necessary sustenance, cruelly beaten, mutilated or killed;
and any person who uses in a cruel or inhuman manner in a race, game, or
contest, or in training therefore, as lure or bait a live animal, except an animal
if used as lure or bait in fishing; and whoever, having the charge or custody of
an animal, either as owner or otherwise, inflicts unnecessary cruelty upon it,
or unnecessarily fails to provide it with proper food, drink, adequate shelter,
sanitary environment free of animal waste, or protection from the weather,
and whoever, as owner, possessor, or person having the charge or custody of
an animal, cruelly drives or works it when unfit for labor, or willfully abandons
it, or carries it or causes it to be carried in or upon a vehicle, or otherwise,
in an unnecessarily cruel or inhuman manner or in a way and manner
which might endanger the animal carried thereon, or knowingly and willfully
authorizes or permits it to be subjected to unnecessary torture, suffering or
cruelty of any kind.
6. Domestic Animal: Any canine, feline, farm animal including chickens and
other fowl, exotic pet or otherwise domesticated animal with an owner.
7. Intact: An un-spayed female canine or feline or an un-neutered male canine or
feline.
8. Owner: Any person, group of persons or corporation owning, keeping or harboring
a domestic animal.
9. Public Nuisance:
i. The keeping of any Domestic Animal which emits frequent or long
continued noise sufficient to disturb the reasonable comfort or repose
of any person shall be deemed a public nuisance.
ii. Any domestic canine shall be deemed a public nuisance when such canine
is witnessed to be engaged in any of the following activities:
a) Attacking, threatening, harassing, or menacing toward persons,
fowl, livestock or other domestic animals such as felines, canines or
other household pets as determined post investigation by the animal
control officer.
b) Being a canine at large (not under immediate control of owner via
lead restraint or first call command) upon any public park, playground,
schoolyard, beach or other public recreation area.
c) Being a canine at large upon any public way or private way to
which the public has access, chasing motor vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians.
4
d) Being a canine at large over the age of six months, not wearing a
suitable collar, current license and rabies tag.
e) Being a canine which has been abandoned.
f) Being a canine that deposits solid waste not removed by the canine’s
owner upon any public park, playground, schoolyard, beach or other
public recreation area, public or private way, sidewalk or any property
other than that of the canine’s owner.
g) Being a canine on public beaches between May 15th to September
15th of each year between 0800 hours and 1700 hours and on the Inkwell
Beach between 0700 hours and 1700 hours.
h) Any canine within 100 yards of a posted nesting habitat by federal
and state regulation.
i) Any canine or feline in noncompliance with Massachusetts General
Law Chapter 140 Section 145B stating whoever is the owner or keeper
of a canine or feline in the Commonwealth six months of age or older
shall cause such canine or feline to be vaccinated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian using a licensed vaccine according to the manufacturer’s
directions, and shall cause such canine or feline to be revaccinated
at intervals recommended by the manufacturer. Unvaccinated
canines and felines acquired or moved into the Commonwealth shall
be vaccinated within 90 (ninety) days after the acquisition or arrival
into the Commonwealth or upon reaching the age of six months,
whichever last occurs.
10. Restraint: The control of a Domestic Animal by physical means, such as a
leash, fence or other means of physically confining or restraining a canine.
B. Public Nuisance Prohibited
No owner of any Domestic Animal shall, while such Domestic Animal is within the
confines of the Town of Oak Bluffs, allow such Domestic Animal to be a public
nuisance as defined above.
C. Proper Shelter
Any person owning, keeping or otherwise responsible for a companion animal or pet
or farm animal or livestock who confines that animal by tethering, fencing or
other means of restraint, shall provide for that animal access to adequate shelter
as defined in chapter , from the elements of weather such as rain, cold, or
heat. Potable water must be available to the animal at all times.
D. Trapping
No person shall use, set, place or maintain any type of jawed leg hold trap, padded or
not padded, modified or unmodified, including, but not limited to, a soft catch
trapping system or any type of conibear trap within the limits of any private
property. Any person violating any provision of this by-law shall be punished
by a fine of $300 (three hundred dollars) for each offense.
5
E. Cruelty to Animals Prohibited
In compliance with Massachusetts General Law Chapter 272, Section 77 no owner of
a domestic animal shall, while within the confines of the Town of Oak Bluffs,
commit an act of cruelty against animals.
F. Enforcement:
1. In all cases it shall be the be the duty of the appointed animal control officer to
investigate any violation under this chapter either witnessed by officer or reported
to officer in a complaint by any citizen.
2. If after the animal control officer’s investigation of an alleged violation under
this chapter, such officer has reason to believe that the described violation did
in fact occur as set forth in said complaint or as witnessed by officer, it shall
be the animal control officer’s duty to issue the owner, the appropriate order
and/or impose the appropriate fine designed to prevent a recurrence or continuation
of such violation. The period of time during which the order shall be in
effect shall be on the order.
3. In all cases it shall be the duty of the animal control officer, if, in officer’s
opinion appropriate action is necessary to prevent further or continued violations
of this chapter pending a complete investigation, to take the following
action.
a. Notify the owner, if known and available, of the alleged violation and
issue of an alleged violation and issue a preliminary order requiring
the owner to restrain the Domestic Animal pending a complete investigation.
b. If the owner is not known or is not immediately available:
(i) Humanely restrain the domestic animal.
(ii) Confine the domestic animal in the Oak Bluffs Town
Pound or other approved animal shelter.
(iii)Use available means to attempt to identify the animal’s
owner.
(iv)Take such further actions as is allowed by law.
4. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any domestic animal impounded
to reclaim such domestic animal subject to the following criteria.
a. The owner shall pay the animal control officer for all costs incurred for
the care of the animal for each calendar day the Domestic Animal was in
custody.
b. If said animal is a canine, the owner shall have in their possession a current
town license for said canine as well as a license tag, both of which
shall have been issued with respect to that canine. The license tag shall be
attached to the canine by suitable collar before the canine is released from
the custody of the animal control officer.
5. Pursuant to Chapter 140 Section 173 of the Massachusetts General Laws, all
canines shall be licensed by January 1st of each year. Any person who does
not register, number, describe and license his or her canine annually by March
1st in the Town of Oak Bluffs, Dukes County, shall pay the fees and charges
under rules and regulations pursuant to Chapter 140 Section 139 will be required
to pay the Town of Oak Bluffs a penalty after the last day of February
6
annually in the amount of $10 on account of such failure for the first offense.
Any second and subsequent failures to so register, number, describe and license
the canine shall be subject to a penalty of $15 in addition to the annual
registration fee required by Dukes County regulations.
6. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation subjecting the
owner of any unlicensed canine to financial penalties as are allowed by this
chapter or as provided for in regulations promulgated by the Board of Selectman
7. All monies received by the Town Clerk’s office for the issuance of canine licensing
or other fees, fines, charges and penalties under Chapter 140 of the
Massachusetts General Laws and this chapter shall be paid into the treasury of
the town.
G. Violations and Penalties
1. Fines assessed for violation of this bylaw shall be as follows:
a. If it is the first offense so committed by such person within a calendar year
the animal control officer shall issue a written warning.
b. If it is the second offense so committed in the Town in the calendar year,
the animal control officer shall issue a fine of ($25.00) twenty five dollars per
public nuisance offense. Payment shall be made to the Town Clerk of Oak
Bluffs and serve as a final disposition of the charges.
c. If it is the third offense so committed in the Town in the calendar year, the
animal control officer shall issue a fine of ($100.00) one hundred dollars per
public nuisance offense. Payment shall be made to the Town Clerk of Oak
Bluffs and serve as a final disposition of the charges.
d. If it is the fourth or subsequent offense so committed in the Town in the
calendar year, the animal control officer shall issue a fine of ($150.00) one
hundred fifty dollars per public nuisance offense. Payment shall be made to
the Town Clerk of Oak Bluffs and serve as a final disposition of the charges.
2. If you desire to contest this matter, you may do so by making a written request
for a noncriminal hearing, and enclose a copy of the citation within 21 days of
the date of the notice to the Dukes County District Court.
3. These proceedings shall be deemed noncriminal and no person notifies to appear
before the clerk of the District Court shall be required to report to the
probation and no record of the case shall be entered in the probation records.
4. Pursuant of Chapter 272 Section 77 any person committing an act of cruelty
against animals shall be punished by imprisonment in the state prison for not
more the 5 years or imprisonment in the hose of correction for not more then 2
½ years or by a fine of not more the $2,500 (two thousand five hundred dollars),
or both such fine and imprisonment.
5. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, upon conviction for any violation
of Town bylaw Chapter III Section E, the defendant shall forfeit to the
custody of the animal to the animal control officer for the care and protection
of homeless or suffering animals, the animal whose treatment was the basis of
such conviction.
7
6. In accordance with Massachusetts General Law Chapter 140 Section 151A
canines at large shall remain in the custody of the animal control officer for
ten (10) days. If at the end of the ten (10) day period the canine has not been
claimed by the rightful owner, it shall be surrendered to a recognized animal
adoption organization.
Chapter IV BOARD OF HEALTH
(Amended STM 6/18/02 Art. 12)
A. Regulations
1. Swine How Kept
No person shall keep any swine within a distance of fifty feet of any public
way or place, or within a distance of one hundred fifty feet of any dwelling
house not his own without a permit from the Board of Health previously obtained.
B. Covers for Septic and Cesspools (Deleted Art. 12, ATM 4.10.12,
AG Approved 7.18.12, Posted 7.24.12)
C. Vehicles to be Clean (Deleted STM 6/18/02 Art. 12)
D. Removal of Swill and Garbage by Contract (Deleted STM 6/18/02
Art. 12)
Chapter V BUILDING DEPARTMENT
A. Building Inspector
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Inspector of Buildings/Building Commissioner
pursuant to General Laws Chapter 143, Section 3Y for a minimum term of
three years and upon an agreed method of compensation. (Amended STM 6/18/02
Art. 11)
B. Gas Inspector
The Building Inspector shall appoint an Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances
in buildings
C. Plumbing Inspector
The Building Inspector shall appoint a Plumbing Inspector.
8
Chapter VI COLLECTOR OF TAXES
A. Collections
The Collector of Taxes shall collect, under the title of Town Collector, all accounts
due the Town, which are committed to him.
B. Statements of Accounts
Every department of the Town shall deliver to the Town Accountant at least once
in every month a separate statement of each account due the Town arising through
any transaction with such department. Upon receipt of such statements of accounts,
the Town Accountant shall commit such accounts to the Town Collector
for collection. This section shall not apply to taxes and special assessments, licenses
and permits issued or granted by the various departments of the Town, nor
to costs and fees charged by said department, nor to interest on investments of
sinking or trust funds.
C. Abatements
Any account committed to the Town Accountant, which the Town Collector is
unable to collect by ordinary efforts, may be referred by the Town Collector to the
Town Counsel for instruction as to procedure. So far as permitted by law, any account
or portion thereof may be abated by the department in which such account
originated. The Town Accountant shall be notified in writing of the abatement of
any such committed account or portion thereof.
D. Receipts and Bonding
The Town Collector shall, once in each week or oftener, pay over to the Treasurer
all money received by him during the preceding week or lesser period on every
such account, including any sums received as interest on monies received by him
on such accounts and deposited in any bank. He shall give bond to the Town for
the faithful performance of his duties in a form approved by the Commissioner of
Corporations and Taxation and in such sum, not less than the amount that may be
established by said Commissioner, or shall be fixed by the Selectmen.
Chapter VII COUNCIL ON AGING
A. Council Established
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Council on Aging for the purpose of coordinating
or carrying out programs designed to meet the problems of the aging in
cooperation with programs of the Commission on Aging established under Chapter
6, Section 73 of the General Laws.
B. Membership and Term (Amended STM 1.18.05 Art 9, AG Approved
2.23.05, Published 3.11.05)
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the Council on Aging consisting of seven
(7) members and two (2) alternate members. Upon acceptance of this by-law, the
Board shall appoint three (3) members for three (3) years, two (2) members for
two (2) years and two (2) members for one (1) year terms. One alternate member
shall be appointed for a two (2) year term and one alternate member shall be ap9
pointed for a one (1) year term. The members of the council shall serve without
pay.
C. Vacancy
Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the membership of the Council, by reason of
death, resignation, inability to act or for any reason, the vacancy shall be filled by
appointment by the Selectmen for the remainder of the term.
D. Officers
The Council on Aging at its first annual meeting and thereafter, annually in April
of each year, shall elect from its membership a President, 1st Vice President and
Secretary. Each officer shall hold office until the next annual election. In the
event a vacancy occurs in any of the officers above, the Council shall hold a special
meeting for the purpose of electing one of its members to fill such vacancy.
E. Annual Report
The Council shall prepare and submit an annual report of its activities to the Town
and shall send a copy thereof to the Commission on Aging.
F. Appointments
The Council may appoint such clerks and other employees as it as it may require
Chapter VIII FINANCE AND ADVISORY COMMITTEE
A. ORGANIZATION
1. Service
There shall be a Finance & Advisory Committee consisting of nine registered
voters of the Town. Three members shall be elected each year for a full term
of three years. In the event of a vacancy in its membership, the Committee
shall notify the Moderator in writing, and the Moderator sha11 thereupon fill,
by appointment, said vacancy for an interim period to last until the next legally
held election when members may be elected to the balance of any vacated
term(s). The Committee shall choose its own officers. A majority of a quorum
may act for the committee. Any member who shall cease to reside in the
Town shall thereupon cease to be a member.
2. Compensation
The members shall serve without pay. However, the Committee may employ,
subject to appropriation, a clerk. The position of clerk may be filled from
among its membership or from the community at large. If a member fills the
position of clerk, that member shall act simultaneously as both a voting member
and a paid clerk.
B. DUTIES
Town Meeting
The Finance & Advisory Committee shall duly consider all matters included
within the articles of the Warrant for every Town Meeting and levy limit referenda,
and shall subsequently report its recommendations on all financial
matters and on such other matters as it deems appropriate (under Chapter 39,
Section 16 of the General Laws). The Committee may reserve its recommen10
dation on any article or motions there under in any warrant until the session of
the Town Meeting at which the article is to be acted upon. Recommendations
shall be conveyed either by oration, publication or both.
C. POWERS
1. Investigatory
The Finance & Advisory Committee shall consider any or all municipal questions
which it deems appropriate for the purpose of making recommendations
to the Town or any Town Officer, board, committee, or commission. It shall
have authority at any time to investigate the books, accounts, and management
of any department of the Town (Chapter 233, Sections 8,10 of the General
Laws; Chapter 40A, Section 18 of the General Laws) to appear before it and
to reasonably provide information related to any matter pertaining to the operation
of the Town. Within the limits of any appropriations made for the purpose,
the Committee may employ such expert and other assistance, as it may
deem advisable for the foregoing purpose. The books and accounts of all departments
and officers of the Town shall be open to the inspection of the
Committee and any persons emp1oyed by it for that purpose. The Committee
may appoint subcommittees of its members and or assigns and delegate to
them such of its powers, as it deems expedient, but all recommendations, suggestions
and explanations shall be those of the Committee.
2. Reserve Fund
The Finance & Advisory Committee (under Chapter 40, Section 6 of the
General Laws) shall have a reserve fund, subject to appropriation, not to exceed
five percent of the tax levy of the current fiscal year. The Committee
may vote to make transfers relative to requests made by department heads or
their assigns. Transfers shall be made to specific line item accounts within
the current fiscal years budget and shall be for extraordinary or unforeseen
expenditures.
3. Emergency
After approval from both the Finance & Advisory Committee and the Selectmen,
the Town may spend in excess of its appropriation for snow and ice
removal if the appropriation for snow and ice removal that year equaled or
exceeded such appropriation for the prior year, including transfers to the account.
The excess is added to the next tax rate (Chapter 44, Section 31D of
the General Laws).
D. ADMINISTRATION (Section replaced Art. 13 ATM 4.14.09, AG Approved
7/23/09, Published 8.8.09)
1. Budgeting Procedures
a. No later than four months prior to the Annual Town Meeting, the Finance
& Advisory Committee after conferring with the Personnel Board,
the Town Administrator and the Financial Director, will provide to all
Town boards, commissions, committees and departments charged with
the expenditure of Town monies, the prescribed budgetary forms and
formats with the deadlines and conditions for submittal thereof.
11
b. The Finance & Advisory Committee shall duly consider the estimates
and statements filed by the Town’s boards, commissions, committees
and departments, and may confer with said boards, commissions, committees
and departments, and hold hearings, if they deem it advisable.
The Finance & Advisory Committee shall thereupon recommend such
sums in such divisions of items for the ensuing fiscal year, as it considers
necessary and convenient (under Chapter 41, Section 60 of the General
Laws).
2. Annual Warrant Procedures
a. The Finance & Advisory Committee shall prepare its recommendations
for the annual warrant prior to the publication of the budget.
b. The Finance & Advisory Committee shall present the budget at the Annual
Town Meeting, which shall first be subject to amendments, if proposed,
by the Committee and then by the Board of Selectmen before any
other amendments are proposed.
3. General Procedures
a. Beginning the Year
The Finance & Advisory Committee shall elect a Chairman, Vice
Chairman, Clerk, and a member to the Capital Program Committee for a
term of one year. The Finance & Advisory Committee shall also appoint
for a full term of three years, or for any balance thereof, its appointees to
the Personnel Board.
b. Meetings
Meetings shall be held regularly and shall be scheduled at times convenient
to the Finance & Advisory Committee. The Chairman, subject to
proper noticing, may call special and emergency meetings.”
Chapter IX FIRE DEPARTMENT
A. Coal-burning or Wood-burning Stove
This section has been disapproved by the Office of the Attorney General due
to the conflict with the State Building Code
B. E-911
Every Building in the Town of Oak Bluffs including but not limited to dwellings,
apartments, condominiums and business establishments shall have a street number,
assigned by the Town, representing the address of such building. The street
number shall be posted on the building as follows:
1. The building number must face the street on which the number is listed.
2. Numbers shall be no less than 4" high nor greater than 10" high.
3. Numbers must be clearly visible from the street.
12
If a building is not seen from the street, the number shall be securely erected
or marked on a substantial object close to the road in a clearly visible area and
seen from the street day and night.
C. False Alarm
1.Whoever has control of a residence or any other building that employs an
electronic security or fire alarm system shall limit the number of false or
trouble alarms to not more than two per calendar year. Certain false or trouble
alarms caused by power disruption, lightning or other valid situations
will be exempted at the discretion of the Police Chief or Fire Chief.
2.Whoever violates this by-law shall pay a service charge of twenty-five
($25.00) dollars for the first offense, fifty ($50.00) dollars for the second
through fifth offenses, and one hundred ($100.00) dollars for each additional
offense. The owner will be notified by mail after each alarm and those accounts
remaining unpaid for more than six months will be subjected to an
additional penalty. Any building owned by the Town is exempt from this
by-law.
D. False Detector Calls
A fee shall be charged for answering false detector calls. The first call is no
charge, second call is $25.00, third call is $50.00, any call thereafter is $100.00.
E. Underground Fuel Tanks
Owners of underground fuel storage tanks are hereby required to allow the Town
of Oak Bluffs to have access to such tanks for the purpose of leak inspection and
testing.
Chapter X HARBOR
A. Boats in Lagoon Pond
Heads of all boats shall be sealed at all times when in Lagoon Pond. There shall
be no discharge of septage from boats into the water of the pond at any time. The
Lagoon Pond is hereby declared a No Discharge Zone (“NDZ”) for purposes of
designation by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The Harbormaster
shall use whatever means are available, at his discretion, to monitor vessels and
enforce the “NDZ”. Violations of the “NDZ” shall carry a fine of $200.00 (two
hundred dollars) per offense.
Living aboard a boat in Lagoon Pond shall be restricted to 3 (three) consecutive
days except in the event of severe storms of more than 3 (three) days duration, as
determined by the Harbor Master of the Town.
13
B. Harbor Regulations
Regulations governing the use of the Oak Bluffs Harbor:
1. Speed – No Wake.
2. Refuse – No dumping refuse of any sort into the Harbor.
3. Moorings – Permits required for all moorings.
4. Anchoring – under jurisdiction of the Harbormaster.
5. Commercial Vessels – dock only north of Bergeron’s wharf. Any boat not
in running order for more than one week may be moved from the harbor as
per the General Laws.
6. No Bikes, motor vehicles, mopeds, roller skates or skateboards permitted
on the Bulkhead.
7. No swimming in the harbor.
8. No leasing of private moorings.
9. Mooring installation by permit and under direction of the harbormaster.
10. No one person shall be allowed more than one mooring.
11. No soliciting of business on Town property.
12. Buses and taxis must leave Bulkhead stands immediately after boat departure
and may not arrive more than ½ hour prior to boat arrival.
13. No obstruction or disturbance at the Bulkhead will be permitted.
14. No discharge of any kind into the Harbor.
15. Dogs must be leashed and curbed.
Any violation of the above regulations may result in a fine in the amount of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per offense.
C. Jet Skis
Regulations governing the use of ponds, beaches and the Oak Bluffs Harbor:
No Jet Skis are permitted.
D. Vessels in the Waters of Oak Bluffs
No boat, ship or vessel of any kind or description shall deposit raw sewerage in
the waters of Oak Bluffs. Any violation of this by-law shall be punishable by a fine
of two hundred dollars. ($200.00) for each offense. (Amended Art. 11 ATM
4.10.12, AG Approved 7.18.12, Posted 7.24.12)
E. NOISE (Section added Art. 14 ATM 4.12.05, AG Approved 7.13.05, Published
7.26.05)
1.Every motorboat operating on the waters of Oak Bluffs shall be equipped at all
times with a muffler on the exhaust of its engine as required by Chapter 90B §6 of
the General Laws.
2. No person shall operate a motorboat on the waters of Oak Bluffs that is equipped
with a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device which prevents the proper operation
of or diminishes the operation capacity of the muffler.
3. No person shall operate a motorboat on the waters of Oak Bluffs in a manner to
permit the production of sound from its engine that equals or exceeds
14
a. Eighty eight (88) decibels (88dbs) on the “A” scale when subject to a stationary
sound level measurement at a distance greater than three (3) feet from
the stern for a motorboat docked, moored or anchored with its engine at idle
speed or
b. Seventy five (75) decibels (75dbs) on the “A” scale (dba) when subjected to
a stationary sound level measurement from the shoreline or edges of the harbor
for a motorboat underway.
c. If a motorboat is equipped with more than one engine, the said noise levels
shall apply when all engines are in operation.
The “A” level is defined as the total measure of all noise as measured with a sound
level meter using the “A” weighting network and the unit of measurement is the db
(A).
4. The Harbormaster, an Assistant Harbormaster, police officer or harbor staff who
has reason to believe that a motorboat is not in compliance with the sound levels established
in this section may direct the operator of the motorboat to submit to an onsite
test to measure the level of the sound emitted by the motorboat’s engine. The
operator shall comply with that direction. The Harbormaster, Assistant Harbormaster
or police officer may remain on board the vessel during the test at her/his discretion.
If the level of the sound emitted by the motorboat’s engine exceeds the sound
levels established in this section, the Harbormaster, an Assistant Harbormaster or
police officer may direct the operator to take immediate steps to correct the violation,
including returning the vessel to a mooring or dock, stopping the motor and
keeping the boat there until the violation is corrected or ceases.
5. This section does not apply to the operation of dredges, motorboats engaged in
construction or demolition work or to auxiliary engines on motorboats that do not
propel the boat through the water.
6. This provision may be enforced by non-criminal disposition under G.L. Chapter
40§ 21D, in the following manner:
A. For the first offense within a twelve (12) month period, a $100.00
fine;
B. For the second offense within a twelve (12) month period, a
$200.00 fine;
C. For the third and subsequent offense(s) within a twelve (12) month
period, a $300.00 fine.
Chapter XI LIBRARY
A. Custody and Control of the Library
The custody, management and control of the public Library and reading rooms
and all property of the Town relating thereto shall be vested in a Board of Trustees
consisting of six* persons residents of the Town, who shall serve without
compensation.*Amended ATM 4/08 Art. 3, AG Approved 5/14/08, Posted 6/6/08
15
B. Appointment of Trustees
The Selectmen shall appoint said Board of Trustees; one for the term of one year,
one for the term of two years, and one for the term of three years, and annually
thereafter one for the term of three years from the first day of April or until successors
shall be appointed. Vacancies may be filled at any time by the Selectmen,
and until filled the remaining Trustees shall exercise the powers of the Board.
C. Regulations
Said Board of Trustees shall organize immediately after appointment by the
choice of a Chairman and Secretary from their own number. They shall from
time to time prescribe regulations for the government of the Library.
D. Support and Maintenance of Library
All money appropriated by the Town for the support and maintenance of the Library,
and all money or property that the Town may receive by donation, or by
devise or bequest, on behalf of the Library, shall be expended under direction of
the said Board of Trustees for its support and maintenance, and in accordance
with the condition of each donation, devise or bequest accepted by the Town.
E. Report
The said Board of Trustees shall make a written report to the Selectmen annually
on or before the tenth day of February and shall include therein a statement of all
the property of the Town in their care and custody, together with such recommendations
as may be deemed proper.
Chapter XII PERSONNEL BOARD
A Personnel Board is hereby created.
Chapter XIII PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board shall consist of five members.
Chapter XIV POLICE
A. Camping, Tenting and Sleeping on Public or Private Property *
No person shall between the hours of 8:00 P.M. and 8:00 A.M. set up on any
Property, public or private, without the permission of the owner thereof, a camp, a
tent or sleep in the open on any property, public or private, within the limits of the
Town of Oak Bluffs. Penalty for a breach thereof shall be in an amount not in excess
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and each day or during any portion thereof
which violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
16
B. Circuit Avenue Parking
A one-hour parking limit shall be in effect on Circuit Avenue in the Business District
from 9:00 A.M. to 5:00 P.M. daily, on a year-round basis.
C. Control of Horses
No person shall ride, drive or suffer a horse under his control to go at an immoderate
or unreasonable rate in any street or public place within the Town, so as
thereby to endanger the life, safety or convenience or any person properly using
any street or public place aforesaid.
D. Consuming Alcoholic Beverages in Public Places or Town
Property *
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume and/or transport an open container
of alcoholic beverages on public highways, in public parks or in public parking
places, including vehicles thereon, or any property owned by the Town within the
limits of the Town of Oak Bluffs unless first applying for, and obtaining a permit
from the Board of Selectmen, in advance of the event to take place in or on a public
facility. Penalty for breach shall be in an amount of one hundred dollars
($100.00). The property known as “Sailing Camp Park” is exempted from the
provisions of this by-law and allows the consumption of beer and wine on the
premises for special events, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen and
upon securing a one day beer and wine license.
E. Crying Wares Restricted
No person hawking, peddling or selling or exposing for sale any articles enumerated
in Chapter 101, Section 17 of the General Laws and including ice cream and
fish, shall cry his wares to the disturbance of the peace and comfort of the inhabitants
of the Town.
F. Disorderly Conduct *
No person shall behave himself in a disorderly manner or use any profane or obscene
language in any street or public place within the Town of Oak Bluffs. Penalty
for a breach hereof shall be in an amount not in excess of one hundred( dollars
($100.00).
G. Firearms *
No person shall carry in a motor vehicle or shall leave unattended in a motor vehicle
any firearm as described under Chapter 140, Section 121 of the General
Laws, while within the boundaries of the Town of Oak Bluffs, unless such person
is engaged in hunting or in a hunting location during a regular prescribed hunting
season, at no time after the close of the hunting season shall any person carry in
their vehicle any firearm, unless enroute to or from a sporting event, or licensed
under Chapter 140, Section 131 of the General Laws. Penalty for breach hereof
shall be in an amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) dollars for each offense.
17
H. Hawkers and Peddlers
Requirements:
No person shall hawk or peddle any of the articles enumerated in Chapter 101,
Section 17 of the General Laws including ice cream and fish, until he has recorded
his name and residence with the Chief of Police, and been assigned a number
by him; nor unless any vehicle or receptacle in which he shall carry or convey
such articles shall have painted on it in letters or figures at least two inches in
height the name of the person selling, and the number given him by the Chief of
Police; nor unless he shall report on the first Monday in every month to the Chief
of Police.
I. Hours for Restaurants *
All restaurants within the Town of Oak Bluffs will close for business within the
hours of 1:00 AM and 5:00 A.M.
J. Indecent Exposure *
No person in a nude state shall swim or bathe in any waters within the Town of
Oak Bluffs, so as to be exposed to the view of the general public. Penalty for a
breach hereof shall be in an amount not in excess of one hundred dollars
($100.00).
K. Noise *
1. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons occupying or having charge
of any building or premises or any part thereof in the Town, other than that
section of any establishment licensed under Chapter 138 of the General
Laws, to cause or suffer or allow any unnecessary, loud, excessive or unusual
noise in the operation of any radio, phonograph or other mechanical
sound making device or instrument, or reproducing device or instrument, or
in the playing of any band, orchestra, musician or group of musicians, or in
the use of any device to amplify the aforesaid, or the making of loud outcries,
exclamations or other loud or boisterous noises or loud and boisterous
singing by any person or group of persons or in the use of any device to amplify
the aforesaid noise, where the noise is plainly audible at a distance of
one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the building, structure, vehicle or
premises in which or from which it is produced. The fact that the noise is
plainly audible at a distance of one hundred and fifty (150) feet from the vehicle
or premises from which it originates shall constitute prima facie evidence
of a violation of this by-law. Any person violating this by-law shall
be punished by a fine of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) for each offense.
This by-law shall apply from 11:00 P.M. to 8:00 A.M.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons being present in or about any
building, dwelling, premises, shelter, boat or conveyance or any part thereof,
other than that section of any establishment licensed under Chapter 138 of
the General Laws, who shall cause or suffer or countenance any loud, unnecessary,
excessive or unusual noises, including any loud, unnecessary, ex18
cessive or unusual noises in the operation of any radio, phonograph or other
mechanical sound making device or instrument, or reproduction device or
instrument or in the playing of any band, orchestra, musician or group of
musicians, or the making of loud outcries, exclamations or other loud or
boisterous noises or loud and boisterous singing by any person or group of
persons, or in the use of any device to amplify the aforesaid noises, where
the aforesaid noise is plainly audible at a distance of one hundred and fifty
(150) feet from the premises from which it originates shall constitute prima
facie evidence of a violation of this by-law. Any person shall be deemed in
violation of this by-law, who shall make, or aid, or cause or suffer, or countenance,
or assist in the making of the aforesaid and described improper
noises, disturbances, breach of the peace to a diversion tending to a breach
of the peace, and the presence of any person or persons in or about the
building, dwelling, premises, shelter, boat or conveyance or any part thereof
during a violation of this by-law shall constitute prima facie evidence that
they are a countenancer to such violation. Any person violating this by-law
shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred and fifty dollars
($150.00) for each offense. This by-law shall apply from 11:00 P.M to 8:00
A.M.
L. Obstructing Streets and Sidewalks
To the extent the requirements of this by-law do not violate the United States
Constitution and the Massachusetts Declaration of Rights, no person shall place or
cause to be placed in front of any building upon any public street or sidewalk any
article or anything whatsoever, and suffer or allow the same to remain in such position
without having first obtained written permission from the Selectmen, and
no person shall permit or suffer to remain on any public street, place, way or any
public sidewalk any stones, gravel, building material, wood, coal, barrels, boxes,
merchandise, or other like things belonging to him or under his charge or care for
more than one hour without the consent in writing of the Selectmen. Nothing in
this section shall be taken as preventing the placing of sawdust, sand, ashes, or
other suitable material upon icy sidewalks.
M. Peeping or Spying *
No person shall enter upon the premises of another with the intention of peeping
into the windows or a house or other building and spying upon any manner any
person or persons therein. Penalty for a breach hereof shall be in the amount not
in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00)
N. Posting of Handbills, Etc.
1. No person shall post or attach or directly or indirectly cause to be posted or
attached in any manner, any handbill, poster, advertisement or notice of any
kind on public property except by permission of the Board of Selectmen, or
on any private property without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
19
2. Any handbill or sign found posted or otherwise affixed on any public property
contrary to the provisions of this section may be removed by the Police
Department or the Highway Department.
3. The person or persons responsible for causing the unlawful posting of any
notice described herein will be liable for the cost of removal and for the
penalties described below. Persons liable under this section include but are
not limited to, any individual, corporation, partnership or other organization
whose advertisement, message or information appears on the unlawfully
posted notice.
4. Any person who violates this section shall be subject to a fine of $100.00
(one hundred dollars) for the first offense and $300.00 (three hundred dollars)
for each subsequent offense.
O. Roller Skates, Skateboards & Bicycles *
No person shall use roller skates or skateboards on the following streets or their
adjacent sidewalks within the Town of Oak Bluffs:
1. Circuit Avenue from Oak Bluffs Avenue to Narragansett Avenue;
2. Kennebec Avenue from Narragansett Avenue to Oak Bluffs Avenue;
3. Oak Bluffs Avenue from Circuit Avenue to the Steamship Authority.
4. David Healey Way (“Mini-Mall”) from Kennebec to Circuit Avenue
5. No person shall use a bicycle in the area specified in sections 1 and 4 of
this by-law.
Whoever violates the provisions of this by-law shall be subject to a fine of fifty
($50.00) dollars for each offense. (Amended STM 6/18/02 Art. 9)
P. Throwing Papers and Rubbish on Streets
No person shall be allowed to throw papers, handbills, flyers, advertising sheets,
waste or rubbish on the public streets, or ways of the Town.
Q. Vehicles
No person shall permit or allow any horse or other animal or any carriage, automobile,
motor cycle, cart or other vehicle under his control, to stand or remain on
any public sidewalk, or the location of such sidewalk, covered with grass, or drive
over such grassed sidewalk, and park lands, other than on roadways therein constructed.
R. Vehicles in Town Park *
No person shall permit or allow any motor vehicle, motorcycle or mini bike to
stand or remain, or no person shall operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle or
mini bike on any Town park except such vehicle owned by the Town, used in the
performance of their duties. Any persons violating this by-law shall be fined in
the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00).
20
S. Obstructing
No person shall obstruct any street, sidewalk, or other public place, or remain
about the doors of places of business, when requested by the owners or occupants
of said places to depart there from.
T. Loitering *
Any person who obstructs traffic on a street or sidewalk shall move on when
asked to do so by a Police Officer. Penalty for a breach hereof shall be in an
amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00).
U. Awnings
No person shall place or keep over any sidewalk of the Town, in front of any
building any awning, shade, sign, or other projection, less than seven and one-half
feet at the lowest part of thereof above the sidewalk.
V. Standing on Streets
The standing of public carriages upon the streets and avenues of the Town shall
be under the regulation of the Chief of Police, who shall prescribe said location,
and time.
W. Ball Playing and Missile Throwing in Streets *
No person shall play any game in which a ball, missile, Frisbee, bean bag or any
other object intended for sport is used in the following streets and their adjacent
sidewalks within the Town of Oak Bluffs. Penalty for a breach thereof shall be
subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00).
1) Circuit Avenue from Oak Bluffs Avenue to Narragansett Avenue
2) Kennebec Avenue from Narragansett Avenue to Oak Bluffs Avenue
3) Oak Bluffs Avenue from Circuit Avenue to the Steam Ship Authority
4) David Healey Way (“Mini Mall”) from Kennebec Avenue to Circuit
Avenue.
Whoever violates the provisions of this by-law shall be subject to a fine
of $25.00 for each offense. (Amended STM 6/18/02 Art. 10)
X. Fireworks and Firearms
No person shall explode any crackers, torpedoes, or other explosive article, or,
except in the defense of person or property or in the performance of some duty
required by law, discharge any fire arm, cannon or swivel, or any street or other
place where the public have a right to pass.
Y. Grazing Animals
No owner, or person having charge of any cow, horse, swine, sheep, goat, or any
grazing animal, shall permit the same to pasture in any public park, road or way in
21
the Town, either with or without a keeper; provided that this by-law or regulation
shall not affect the right of any person to the use of land within the limits of such
way adjoining his own premises.
Z. Propriety
On February 3, 1920, Article 24, the Town voted to pass an ordinance or by-law
restricting all people from walking through the public streets or parks with bathing
suits on unless the same be covered to within twelve inches of the ground by a
raincoat, bathrobe or other similar garment.
*(Amended ATM 4.10.12 Art. 9, Attorney General Approved and posted 11.15.12)
AA. PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF MARIJUANA OR
TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol
(as defined in G.L. c. 94C, § 1, as amended) while in or upon any street,
sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway, stairs, bridge, park, playground, beach,
recreation area, boat landing, public building, schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery,
parking lot, or any area owned by or under the control of the Town; or in or upon any
bus or other passenger conveyance operated by a common carrier; or in any place accessible
to the public.
This by-law may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity including ,
but not limited to, enforcement by criminal indictment or complaint pursuant to
G.L.c.40, §21, or by noncriminal disposition under G.L.c.40,§ 21D, by the Board of
Selectmen, the Town Administrator, or their duly authorized agents, or any police
officer. The fine for violation of this by-law shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00)
for each offence. Any penalty imposed under this by-law shall be in addition to any
civil penalty imposed under G.L.c.94C, § 32L.
(Amended ATM 4.9.13 Art. 20, AG Approved 7.3.13, Posted 7.11.13)
Chapter XV SELECTMEN
A. Custody of Town Property
The Selectmen shall have the care and custody of the Town Hall, and all other
property of the Town not otherwise placed by law in the hands of Special Town
Officers.
B. Duties of the Selectmen
The Board of Selectmen (the Board), in furtherance of their powers and duties,
shall:
1. Be the primary policy-makers, planners and financial management agency
of the Town, and be responsible for the development and annual revision of
a capital expense program;
2. Create an annual goal setting/community action statement, with the assis22
tance of the Executive Secretary and with input from the various Town departments,
which will outline short and long-term goals for the Town, establishing
priorities and objectives, as well as time-frames;
3. Be the only regulation enforcers and appointing and licensing authority of
the
Town, except where federal laws and/or state or Town regulations dictate
otherwise;
4. Have final authority over any administrative decisions including authority
over other elected officials or boards as well as appointed department heads,
except where federal laws and or state regulations dictate otherwise;
5. Communicate its majority decision to the Executive Secretary only through
the chair of the board; and
6. Have no authority as individuals over any Town employee or department
except in the event a Selectman holds a position which causes her/him to
have supervisory authority. (Amended STM 12.2.03 Art 10, AG Approved
2.13.04, Published 3.5.04)
C. Duties of the Chair of the Board of Selectmen
The Chair of the Board of Selectmen (the Chair), in furtherance of her/his powers
and duties, shall:
1. Be elected by majority vote of the Board at the beginning of the first meeting
following election, for a term of one year. Provision for removal for
cause shall be by unanimous vote of the balance of the board;
2. Meet regularly with the Executive Secretary to implement Board decisions
administratively;
3. Insure that action minutes of all meetings with the Executive Secretary are
kept with a general notation of business discussed;
4. Insure further that complete minutes are kept of all decisions made affecting
the ongoing operation of the Town and/or enforcement of Town regulation
or policies. These minutes will be made available to all members of the
Board in a timely manner.
D. Executing Instruments
Whenever it shall be necessary to execute any deed, or other instrument required
to carry into effect any vote of the Town, the same shall be executed by the Selectmen,
or a majority of them, in the name and behalf of the Town, unless the
Town shall otherwise vote in any special case.
23
E. General Authority of Selectmen
The Selectmen shall be agents to take the general superintendence of the business of
the Town to supervise the doings of subordinate agents and the disbursement of other
similar duties. They shall have authority as agents of the Town to appear and defend
suits brought against it, and to employ counsel therefore until specific action thereupon
shall be taken by the Town. They may annually retain counsel, who may be
consulted by the Selectmen and by any other boards or departments of the Town by
consent of the Selectmen.
F. Mopeds / Motor Scooters (Amended STM 4.13.04 Art 11, AG Approved
5.12.04, Published 5.28.04)
No person, business or corporation shall engage in the business of renting, leasing or
keeping for rent or lease any motor scooters or mopeds (motorized bicycles) without
first being licensed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the following regulations:
1. No such license shall be issued unless a majority of the Board of Selectmen
is satisfied after public hearing and investigation of all facts that the applicant
has a place of business suitable for such a purpose and has complied
with all of the requirements of the regulations as set forth hereafter.
2. Application for a license under this by-law shall be filed with the Board of
Selectmen and contain the following information:
a. The name of the owner of the business, or if application is made by a
corporation, then the full names and addresses of the President, Treasurer,
Clerk and Directors;
b. a detailed plan including building dimensions and training track location
for the proposed business;
c. a binder for compulsory coverage insurance;
d. proposed individual vehicle information including total numbers,
makes, and models for all vehicles.
3. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee
as established by the Board of Selectmen. If an application is approved by
the Board of Selectmen, the applicant, upon payment of an additional fee as
established by the Board of Selectmen, shall be granted a license which shall
be renewable on April 1st of each consecutive year. The annual fee for renewal
thereof shall be established by the Board of Selectmen. The Board of
Selectmen shall issue a license to each approved applicant which shall be
posted in a conspicuous manner at the place of business and each vehicle
will be issued a numbered Oak Bluffs moped rental registration decal for
placement on the rear fender. Upon issuance of the license, the licensee shall
be required to provide the Board of Selectmen with a certificate of compulsory
coverage insurance and individual vehicle information including: total
numbers, colors, makes, models and identification numbers (company serial
numbers and Massachusetts decal numbers).
4.The Board of Selectmen shall issue a maximum of five (5) licenses per year.
Licenses shall not be transferable, and no legal or beneficial interest in any
entity holding any license shall be transferable without the prior approval of
24
the Board of Selectmen. Licenses not used during one year’s time shall be
null and void, and any person, business or corporation who was a prior
holder of a license and who engaged in the business of renting, leasing or
keeping for rent or lease any motor scooters or mopeds without first obtaining
a new license shall be deemed to have forfeited its license. The maximum
number of licenses that the Board of Selectmen may issue shall be reduced
by one for each license that becomes null and void or forfeited under
this provision. (Amended STM 4/13/04 Art. 11)
5. Each licensee shall maintain a complete register of daily rentals (including
renters, accidents and Oak Bluffs Police and EMT involvement) available to
the Board of Selectmen at all times-upon Board or Police Department request.
6. Each licensee shall comply with Chapter 90 of the General Laws and any
amendments thereto, any other statute, or any Town by-law and shall post a
copy of Chapter 90 Section 1B of the General Laws and shall provide each
renter with a copy of same. All renters must read, initial and sign the “Caution
to moped operators risk notification” checklist, as well as completing
all parts of the safety verification and test drive before being allowed to rent
the moped.; (Amended ATM 4.11.17, Art 33, AG Approved 10.30.17, Posted
10.31.17)
7. Each licensee shall be responsible for instructing every operator in the
proper method of operation of the vehicle including providing a supervised
test drive on the licensee's on-premises unobstructed training track which
shall be at least 50 feet long and 25 feet wide. The Board of Selectmen may
waive the training track requirement upon written petition by the licensee
setting forth spatial limitations and a proposal for an alternative training
program. The alternative training program must include that an employee of
the licensee shall accompany all moped operators, their passenger and any
bags and/or possessions for the duration of the test drive.; (Amended ATM
4.11.17, Art 33, AG approved 10.30.17, Posted 10.31.17)
8. Each licensee shall require that the operator and any passenger have adequate
footwear covering the entire foot (thongs, flip-flops, sandals, slippers
or other footwear which is unsubstantial do not comply with this requirement).;
(Amended ATM 4.11.17, Art 33, AG approved 10.30.17, Posted
10.31.17)
9. No licensee may rent two-seater mopeds to an adult accompanied by a child
unless said child is at least 4’8” tall. The licensee shall refuse to rent to any
individual(s) that exceed the maximum manufactures suggested operating
weight. Each licensee shall have posted the maximum operating weight for
any model moped available for rent and shall provide a method to verify that
all provisions of this section are met.(Amended STM 6/18/02 Art. 16) and
(Amended ATM 4.11.17 Art. 33. AG approved 10.30.17, Posted 10.31.17).
10. The Board of Selectmen shall issue no more than 308 vehicle registration
decals in each year. Total number per licensee shall be determined at application
by Board review based on the number of applications, business premises
spatial limitations, and previous agency safety record and agency com25
pliance with # 7 above. No vehicle may be rented without a valid registration
decal. (Amended STM 4/13/04 Art. 11)
11. a. Complaints about violations of these regulations will be received from
any person by the office of the Board of Selectmen in writing. Said
complaints will be referred for investigation to the Police Department.
Should said police Department or the Board of Selectmen determine that
a hearing on an alleged violation is necessary, or that any further action
might be deemed necessary, notification will be mailed by Certified
Mail, return receipt requested, or hand delivered with receipt signature
requested, to the most recent address of the licensee as shown by the
records of the Board of Selectmen kept pursuant to this by-law. The notice
shall provide at least seven days advance notice of the hearing date
and time. The notice sha11 contain a brief description of the nature of
the complaint. Mailing notice of hearing or complaints or other notices
to the current mailing address on file with the Town using Certified
Mail, return receipt requested, such mailing being made 10 days prior to
any hearing, meeting or event requiring 7 days notice, shall be prima facie
evidence of due notice.
b. At said hearing, the Selectmen shall receive any oral statements and information
relevant to the complaints. The licensee shal1 be entit1ed to
present any information in its defense or in mitigation of the events it
deems appropriate. The licensee shall have the right to be represented by
counsel. The conduct of the hearing shal1 not be governed by formal
rules of evidence or procedure and shal1 be governed by and the procedures
followed shall be determined by the Board of Selectmen as is necessary
to afford a full, fair, and complete hearing of the issues.
12. If the Selectmen find, as a matter of fact, that a violation of this by-law has
occurred and it is the first violation of the preceding twelve (12) months, the
Selectmen may impose a suspension of the license for any period of time up
to one (1) week and in addition to or in substitution therefore, may impose a
fifty dollar ($50.00) fine. For any second finding of any violation of the bylaw
within the preceding twelve (12) months by the licensee, the Selectmen
may impose a suspension of the license for any period of time up to two (2)
weeks and in addition to or in substitution therefore, may impose a One
Hundred Dollar ($100.00) fine. For any third finding of any violation of the
by-law within the preceding twelve (12) months by the licensee, the Selectmen
may impose a suspension of the license for any period of time up to
four (4) weeks and in addition to or in substitution therefore, may impose a
Two Hundred Dollar ($200.00) fine. For any fourth finding of any violation
of the by-law within the preceding twelve (12) months by the licensee, the
Selectmen may impose a revocation of the license for the balance of the licensing
period. Any suspension of the license shall be for a specific time period,
said period to be within twelve (12) months of the date of the violation.
The Board of Selectmen may adopt and prescribe additional rules and regulations,
which it deems to be in the best interest of public need, safety and good order, in
26
licensing any business under this by-law, and all such additions shall apply to existing
license holders from the date of adoption.
G. Motor Vehicles, Motor Cycles
1. No person business or corporation shall engage in the business of renting,
leasing or keeping for rent or lease any motor vehicles, motorcycles, without
first being licensed by the Board of Selectmen
2. No such license shall be issued unless a majority of the Board of Selectmen
is satisfied after an investigation of all facts that the applicant has a place of
business suitable for such a purpose.
3. Application for a license under this by-law shall be filed with the Board of
Selectmen and contain any and all such information in their sole discretion
require.
4. Each application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee
as established by the Board of Selectmen, if an application is approved, by
the Board of Selectmen, the applicant upon payment of an additional fee, as
established by the Board of Selectmen, shall be granted a license which shall
be renewable on April 1st of each consecutive year. The annual fee for renewal
thereof shall be established by the Board of Selectmen. The Board of
Selectmen shall issue a license to each approved applicant, which shall be
posted in a conspicuous manner at the place of business.
5. Licenses shall not be transferable and licenses not used during one year's
time shall be null and void.
6. The Board of Selectmen may adopt and prescribe such rules and regulations
which it deems to be in the best interest of public need safety and good order,
in licensing any business under this by-law.
H. Passengers and Baggage
1. Selectmen Shall License
The Selectmen shall from time to time at their discretion grant licenses to
such persons and upon such terms as they may deem expedient, to set up,
employ and use any hackney carriage, wagon, cart, wheelbarrow or other
vehicle for the purpose of conveying passengers or baggage for hire from
place to place within the Town, and they may revoke such license at their
discretion, and a record of all licenses so granted and of the revocation
thereof shall be kept by the Selectmen.
2. No Person Shall Transport without License
No person shall set up, employ or use any hackney carriage, wagon, wheelbarrow,
cart or other vehicle for the purpose of conveying passengers or
baggage within the limits of the Town, for hire, without a license from the
Selectmen.
3. License Shall Contain Rates
Said license shall contain a list, or schedule of the rates hereinafter established
to be charged by said persons so licensed as aforesaid for the conveyance
of persons and baggage, and no person so licensed shall charge or re27
ceive a greater sum for the conveyance of persons or baggage than the rates
hereinafter established.
4. Rates to be Attached to Vehicles
The Selectmen shall provide cards with rates hereinafter established for
transporting persons or baggage plainly printed thereon, and every person licensed
to transport persons or baggage shall at all times keep a card so provided
by the Selectmen affixed to the vehicle used by him in the transporting
of persons or baggage.
5. Standing on Streets
The standing of public carriages upon the streets and avenues of the Town
shall be under the regulation of the Chief of Police, who shall prescribe said
location and time.
6. Expiration of Licenses
All licenses granted as aforesaid shall expire on the first day of May next after
the date of such license.
7. Rates for Passengers
The rates of fare for the conveyance of passengers within the limits of the
Town shall, until otherwise ordered, be as follows:
For conveyance from one place to another, each adult person, twenty-five
cents; each child between the ages of five and ten years, fifteen cents; each
child under the age of five years accompanied by an adult, no charge; except
that between the hours of 11P.M. and 4 A. M. double the foregoing rates
may be charged. By the hour, single teams, one dollar per hour, and double
teams, one dollar and fifty cents per hour; but extra rates may be made by
agreement.
I. Purchase of Fuel
The Selectmen shall make all purchases of wood, coal or other fuel for the
use of the Town, and it shall be their duty to advertise in a newspaper published in
said Town for sealed proposals for furnishing the same previous to making any
contract therefore. Said advertisement shall designate the place, day and hour at
which said proposals shall be opened and all bids so received shall be opened
publicly. Said proposals shall contain the terms for which said particular kind of
fuel will be furnished and shall be made on blank forms to be furnished by the Selectmen.
All contracts so made shall provide for the delivery of the fuel at such
times and places as the Selectmen shall direct and no contract shall be made for a
longer period than the date of the next Annual Meeting.
J. Repairs and Alterations of Buildings and Town Pier
The Selectmen shall have charge of all repairs, alterations and additions, which
may from time to time be made upon any of the Town buildings and Town pier.
The school buildings shall remain the control of the School Committee. Repairs,
28
alterations and additions shall be done by contract, and where the probable cost
will exceed ($4,000.00) four thousand dollars Selectmen or the School Committee
shall procure bids for, and shall furnish blanks for proposals. Said advertisements
shall designate the place, day and hour at which said proposals shall be opened,
and all bids so received shall be opened publicly.
K. Reports to be Printed with the Selectmen’s Report
The reports of the Auditor, of the School Committee, and of all boards, officers
and standing committees, a detailed estimate of the Finance Committee of the
amount of money which shall be required for the current fiscal year, a warrant for
the coming Town meeting, and an abstract of the births, marriages and deaths to
be furnished by the Town Clerk, shall be printed with the Selectmen's Report.
L. Conflict of Interest
No member of a Town board or committee shall hold a paid position with the
Town which is answerable either directly or indirectly to the Board or Committee
on which he or she serves. (This section was added in accordance with
the vote of STM 4/13/10 Art. 7, AG approved 8/2/10, Posted August 3, 2010)
M. Sale of Town Owned Land and Municipal Housing Trust
(Amended STM 11.17.15 Art. 14, AG approved 12.1.15, Published 12.7.15)
1. The Town Treasurer is required to advertise for two (2) consecutive weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation in Dukes County stating the location of
the land and the lot numbers and the date and hour of the public auction on
sales of low value tax title land.
2. The Selectmen are authorized to sell other tax title property not of low value
held by the Town of Oak Bluffs and which property is deemed by the Selectmen
not to be necessary for public use which land would be sold by the
Selectmen pursuant to the authority granted in Chapter 40, Section 3 of the
General Laws which land would be sold in the following manner:
a. The Selectmen would first determine after due inquiry to the necessary
Town Departments and the Oak Bluffs Municipal Housing Trust (under
G.L. c. 44 sec 55V (The Housing Trust”), which Trust is recorded with
the Dukes County Registry of Deeds in Book 1383, at Page 897. Reference
to the Oak Bluffs Municipal Housing Trust are in Sections
2(a);2(g);2(i); 2(j)(6); 2(k);(1) & (3) of the present version of the Bylaw.
The Housing Trust that the land in question was no longer needed
for municipal or The Housing Trust purposes and then certify to this.
b. Any interested person by written demand upon the Selectmen may request
the sale of Town owned land. A deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00) is
required with each request for a parcel of Town owned land to be sold.
This sum is to be returned to the person depositing it or credited to him
29
when the property is sold to the highest bidder. If no bids are received
equaling or exceeding the minimum bid, the fifty dollars ($50.00) deposit
shall be forfeited to the Town as compensation for the work and expense
of arranging the sale.
c. By virtue of this request or on their own initiative, the Selectmen shall
publish a notice of sale of said public land by properly describing the
land and location thereof and causing this notice to be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in Dukes County for 2 consecutive
weeks which advertisement shall state the date, hour and place of the
auction.
d. The Selectmen shall also post a notice on the land or in another convenient
place in the Town of said sale.
e. The Selectmen shall have the right to reject any and all bids and shall
have also the right to adjourn the sale to another time and place and shall
also have the right, if it is in the best interest of the Town, to terminate
the sale.
f. The property shall be sold to the highest bidder who must pay a specified
deposit at the time of the sale and make proper arrangements for the
balance in cash in full. The Town counsel shall prepare a proper Deed
without covenants to the purchaser and said Deed shall be recorded by
the Town within 60 days of the date of the auction sale. The expenses of
recording shall be borne by the purchaser who by making a successful
bid, authorizes the Town to record the deed.
g. Should The Housing Trust determine that property or properties are
needed for The Housing Trust purposes then the Board of Selectmen
shall have the right to authorize Town Counsel to prepare a proper Quitclaim
Deed without any covenants on behalf of the Town and said Quitclaim
Deed shall run to The Housing Trust and be recorded within 15
(fifteen) days of the date of the Deed. The expenses of the preparation
and recording of the Deed shall be borne by The Housing Trust.
h. All Town owned parcels or real estate sold by the Town at a public auction
shall be combined, if necessary, so as to meet the minimum requirements
of the Zoning district.
Where it is not possible to meet the minimum requirements of the zoning
district, the Town may sell non-conforming lots with the stipulation
that such lots are unbuildable unless such lots can be combined with an
adjacent ownership so as to meet the minimum requirements of the zoning
district.
i. Properties Deeded to The Town of Oak Bluffs Municipal Housing
Trust by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with (g.) may be conveyed
by a deed signed by a majority of both the Board of Selectmen
and The Housing Trust as authorized by a vote of the Board of Selectmen
and the committee in conformity with the following guidelines and
restrictions for the implementation of The Town of Oak Bluffs Municipal
Housing Trust to a person or persons who have qualified under the
following eligibility requirements and Rules and Regulations:
30
j. Eligibility Requirements (Amended STM 1.18.05 Art 8, AG Approved
2.23.05, Published 3.11.05)
1) The person or family must have lived in the Town of Oak Bluffs for a
minimum of five (5) years with one year being current. The person or
family must supply a minimum of four of the following documents to
establish residency:
a) Registered Voter
b) Rent Receipts/Sworn Statement from Landlord
c) Letter from Employer
d) Telephone listing
e) Post Office Address
f) Utility Bill
2) The person or family must have a combined income not to exceed
140% of the median income of Dukes County.
3) The person or family must agree to begin home construction within
one (1) year and complete said construction within two (2) years.
4) The person or family must not own or have previously owned any real
estate, or have had a beneficial interest in any real estate.
5) The applicant applying must be eighteen (18) years of age or older.
6) The Housing Trust may use any means it deems necessary to verify
information.
7) If the person or family is approved and is awarded a lot in the lottery
process they must obtain a mortgage commitment within ninety (90)
days. Applicant must submit a completed mortgage application within
thirty (30) days.
k. Rules and Regulations
1) The Housing Trust shall duly advertise to residents of the Town the
fact that a certain number of Housing Trust Lots will be available for
lottery distribution.
2) Eligible applicant and lots will be picked by lottery.
3) If an applicant is approved, his or her name will be included on a lottery
to be drawn at a scheduled selectmen’s meeting. The applicant
will be notified of the drawing. The Housing Trust will supply the Selectmen
with the name cards for verification prior to the drawing.
N. Sunday Entertainment (both Selectmen and Police)
In all establishments in the Town of Oak Bluffs where alcoholic beverages are
served there shall be no live entertainment, music, patron dancing, unless permitted
by the Board of Selectmen, or stage shows performed on Sundays: provided
however; that entertainment by a single performer, playing an instrument or singing,
acting, dancing, or doing comedy, all of which is not made louder or amplified
by electronic device, will be permitted. The Selectmen in their capacity as licensing
authority for the Town are empowered to enforce this by law with the assistance
of the Police Department.
31
Violations of this by-law shall be considered by the Selectmen as grounds for
suspension or revocation of the establishment's license to sell alcoholic beverages.
O. Town Hall Hours
All of the Offices in the Town Hall, as specified by the Board of Selectmen, are
required to be open from 8:30 a.m. until 4:00 p.m. daily except Saturdays, Sundays
and Legal holidays. In case of extreme emergencies or illnesses, or at other
times approved by the Board of Selectmen, the Board of Selectmen may allow the
closing of Town Hall at certain specified times.
(Amended at STM 11.17.15, Art. 13. AG Approval 12.1.15 posted 12.7.15)
P. Utility Poles Work Permit
No person or persons shall commence work on any utility pole adjacent to or upon
a public way in the Town of Oak Bluffs without first obtaining permission
from the Board of Selectmen, or, if an obstruction causes a public hazard or in
cases of emergency repairs, from the Chief of Police. In any case the Board of Selectmen
may adopt rules and regulations which it deems to be in the best interest
of public safety and good order in granting permission for such activity and the
handling of compensation for same within the guidelines of Chapter 44, Section
53C of the General Laws. STM 5.9.89
Q. Licensing Junk Dealers
The Selectmen may license suitable persons to be dealers in and keepers of shops
for the purchase, sale, or barter of junk, old metals, or second hand articles in the
Town. They may also license suitable persons as junk collectors, to collect, by
purchase or otherwise, junk, old metals and second hand articles from place to
place in the Town; and they may provide that such stops and all articles of merchandise
therein, and any place, vehicle, or receptacle used for the collection or
keeping of the articles aforesaid, may be examined at all times by the Selectmen
or by any person by them authorized thereto.
R. Selectmen’s Report
The Selectmen shall annually, but not less than four days before the Annual Meeting,
cause to be printed a detailed report of all monies received and paid by the
Town Treasurer during the preceding financial year, with such information and
recommendation as they deem proper.
S. Record of Property
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale, or barter of junk, old metals or second
hand articles, within the limits of the Town, shall keep a book, in which shall
be written, at the time of every purchase of any such article, a description thereof,
the name, age and residence of the person from whom, and the day and hour when
such purchase was made; such book shall at all times be open to inspection of the
Selectmen and of any person by them authorized to make such inspection; every
32
keeper of such shop shall put in a suitable and conspicuous place on his shop a
sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon in large letters;
such shop, and all articles of merchandise therein, may at all times be examined
by the Selectmen or by any person by them authorized to make such examination
and no keeper of such shop and no junk collector shall, directly or indirectly, either
purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any of the articles aforesaid
of a minor or apprentice, knowing or having reason to believe him to be such; and
no article purchased or received by such shopkeeper shall be sold until at least one
week from date of its purchase or receipt has elapsed. Such shops shall be closed
between the hours of 6:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. and no keeper thereof and no junk
collector shall purchase any of the articles aforesaid during such hours.
T. Police in Town Hall
It shall be the duty of the Selectmen to cause at least one Constable or police officer
to be present in said hall, at the expense of the persons using the same, for
the purpose of enforcing order and obedience to the laws of the Commonwealth,
whenever it shall be used for any of the purposes referred to in the preceding section.
U. Use of Town Hall
The Town Hall shall not be used for any of the purposes mentioned in Chapter
102, Section 172 of the Revised Laws, unless the same shall have been duly licensed
by the Selectmen according to law.
V. Prohibition of Smoking in Certain Places within the Town of
Oak Bluffs. (Added STM 6/18/02 Art. 13)
1. Definitions
As used in this article:
Bar: An establishment devoted to serving alcoholic beverages for on-premise
consumption
Public Indoor Place: Any indoor area or public transportation waiting area
open to the general public.
Private Club: A not for profit establishment with a defined membership.
Public Transportation Vehicle: Any bus, taxi and other means of transportation
available to the general public.
Retail Tobacco Store: Any establishment primarily selling tobacco products
and paraphernalia in which the sale of other products is incidental, and is not
required to hold a retail food permit.
Restaurant: Any establishment, including outdoor area(s) serving food for
consumption on the premises which maintains tables for customers either indoors
or outdoors, or both.
Smoking: inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted tobacco product.
Workplace: Any area of any structure or portion thereof in which two (2) or
more employees perform services for an employer.
33
2. Posting of Notice of Prohibition: Every person having control of premises
upon which smoking is prohibited by and under the authority of this regulation
shall conspicuously display upon the premises:
a. “No Smoking” signs provided by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health and available from the Oak Bluffs Board of Health, or
b. The international “No Smoking” symbol consisting or a representation
of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, having a red bar across it,
comparable in size to item (a) above,
3. Smoking Prohibited: No person shall smoke, nor shall any person, employer,
or other person having control of the premises upon which smoking is
prohibited by this regulation, or the agent or designee of such person, permit a
person to smoke in any Bar, Public Indoor Place, Public Transportation Vehicle,
Restaurant or Workplace.
4. Exceptions: Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 3 of this regulation,
smoking may be permitted in the following places, under the circumstances
noted:
a. In outdoor places, except outdoor areas of restaurants
b. In private residences, except portions used as a home business while
used as such.
c. In private vehicles when used for personal use.
d. In retail tobacco stores, unless persons under 18 are allowed
e. In hotel and motel rooms, if designated as smoking rooms
f. In hotel and motel conference and meeting rooms, and public
assembly rooms, while being used for private functions.
g. In separately ventilated private or semi-private rooms of nursing
homes and long-term care facilities occupied by one (1) or more patients,
if each person is a smoker and has requested in writing to be placed in a
room where smoking is permitted.
h.. In theaters, by performers on stage, if smoking is part of a theatrical
production.
i. In private clubs.
5. Conflict with Other Laws or Regulations: Notwithstanding the provisions
of the foregoing Section 4 of this regulation, nothing in this regulation shall be
deemed to amend or repeal applicable fire, health or other regulations so as to
permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by such fire, health or other
regulations.
6. Violations: Any such person in control of a regulated establishment, who
violates this regulation, may be subject to both:
a. A fine of one hundred dollars ($100) for a first offense, two hundred
dollars ($200) for a second offense within one (1) year of the date of
the first offense and three hundred dollars ($300) for a third or subsequent
offense within one (1) year of the date of the first offense
34
b. Suspension of any license(s) issued by the Board of Health for that
place for a period of up to two (2) days for each day of noncompliance.
A license may be suspended after notice and opportunity to be
heard.
7. Enforcement: As an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, violations
of this regulation may be enforced by the non-criminal method of disposition
as provided in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40, Section 21D by
the Board of Health or its agents. Any fines imposed under the provisions of
this regulation shall inure to the Town of Oak Bluffs for such use as the town
may direct.
One method may be periodic, unannounced inspections of those establishments
subject to this regulation.
Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this regulation may request
that the Board of Health investigate the incident.
Each day on which any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
8. Severability: If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be
illegal or against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the legality
of any remaining paragraphs or provisions.
9. No person shall smoke on any beach controlled by the Town of Oak
Bluffs, nor in the areas known as David Healey Way between Kennebec
and Circuit Avenues.(Section added ATM 4.13.10 Art. 21. AG Approval
posted 9.14.10)
W. Failure to Pay Local Municipal Charges
(Section added ATM 4.11.06 Art. 5 ,AG approval effective 7.17.06)
1. The Town of Oak Bluffs may deny any application for or revoke or suspend
any local license or permit including renewals and transfer issued by any
board, officer, department for any person, corporation or business enterprise
who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments
or any other municipal charges.
2. The tax collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal
taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter
referred to as ‘the collector’, shall annually furnish to each department,
board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as ‘the licensing authority’,
that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of
any person, corporation or business enterprise hereinafter referred to as ‘the
party’, that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve (12) month
35
period, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for
abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the appellate tax board.
3. The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals or transfers of any party whose name appears on said list
furnished to the licensing authority from the collector or with respect to any
activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit
and which activity event or matter which is carried out or exercised or is to be
carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose
name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the collector;
provided however, that written notice is given to the party and the collector,
as required by applicable provisions of law, can the party is given a hearing,
to be held not earlier than fourteen (14) days after said notice. Said list
shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license
or permit to any party. The collector shall have the right to intervene in
any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, suspension or revocation.
Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license
denial, suspension or revocation shall be made only for the purposes of
such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding
at law, except for any appeal from such license suspension, revocation
or denial. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this
section shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing authority receives a
certificate issued by the collector that the party is in good standing with respect
to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal
charges, payable to the municipality as of the date of issuance of said certificate.
4. Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said
limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be
conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to
comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation
of said license or permit; provided however, that the holder be given notice
and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
5. The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it
finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its
officers or stockholders if any, members of his or her immediate family, as defined
in Section 1 of Chapter 268A in the business or activity conducted in or
on said property.
6. This section shall not apply to the following licenses and business permits:
open burning; Section 13 of Chapter 48 bicycle permits; Section 11A of Chapter
85 sales of articles for charitable purposes; Section 33 of Chapter 101 children
work permits; Section 69 of Chapter 149 clubs, associations dispensing
food or beverage licenses; Section 21E of Chapter 140 dog licenses; Section
36
137 of Chapter 140 fishing, hunting trapping license; Section 12 of Chapter
131 marriage licenses; Section 28 of Chapter 207 theatrical events, public exhibition
permits; Section181 of Chapter 140.
X Washing Vehicles on Town Property
(Section added ATM 4.14.09 Art. 11, AG approved 7.25.09,Published 8.8.09)
It shall be a violation of the Town Bylaw to wash vehicles upon any
town owned road layout within the zoning districts known as the B-1
and B-2 districts. The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for
any fine hereunder. Any person who violates this section shall be
subject to a fine of $50 (fifty dollars) for the first offense and $100
(one hundred dollars) for each subsequent offense.”
Y Street Performers Bylaw
(Section added ATM 4.13.10 Art. 22, AG approved 11.22.10,Published
(12.2.10)
1. Purpose; Definitions.
A. Purpose. The Board of Selectmen finds that the existence of Town
street performers provides a public amenity and enhances the character of the
Town and seeks to encourage such performances to the extent that they do not
interfere with the reasonable expectations of residents of the enjoyment of
peace and quiet in their homes and businesses. This article seeks to balance
the interests of the performers with those of the residents of the Town of Oak
Bluffs.
B. Definitions. The following words used in this article shall have the
following meanings, unless a different meaning is clearly apparent from the
language or text:
BOARD OF SELECTMEN or SELECTMEN
The duly elected members of the Board of Selectmen for the Town of Oak
Bluffs, Massachusetts.
PERFORMER
A person who has obtained a permit pursuant to this article.
PERFORMING
Includes, but is not limited to, the following activities: acting, singing, playing
musical instruments, pantomime, juggling, magic, dancing, reading and reciting.
PERMIT
The permit issued by the Town for street performers.
POLICE OFFICER or OFFICER
Any officer authorized to make arrests or serve criminal process, provided that
he/she is in uniform and displays his/her badge of office.
37
PUBLIC AREAS
All public sidewalks, bicycle paths, beaches, parks, playgrounds and all public
ways in Oak Bluffs.
TOWN
The Town of Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts.
2. Prohibition.
No person may perform in a public area without a permit pursuant to paragraph
3 of this article.
3. Permit Required.
A. A street performer's permit shall be issued by the Town to each applicant
in exchange for a completed application and a fee of $50.
B. A completed application for a permit, and the permit itself, shall
contain such information as may be required by the Town and shall include
the applicant's name, current address, permanent address, social security number
and telephone number. The permit application shall be signed by the applicant
and it shall specify the type of performance for which a permit is requested.
C. The permit shall be valid from the date on which it is issued to the
end of that calendar year.
D. The permit shall be nontransferable and shall state the applicant's
name, type of performance, the permit number of the applicant and the year in
which the permit is valid. Each member of a group of performers who play
together shall be required to obtain an individual permit.
4. Display of Permit.
A performer shall clearly display his/her permit while performing and shall allow
inspection of the permit by any officer authorized to enforce this article
on request.
5. Permitted Performances.
A. Performances may take place in the following locations:
(1) In public areas, except within 200 feet of an elementary school, secondary
school, church while in session or a hospital open at any time, further
to except within 25 feet of a public entryway of an open business and
further to except public areas excluded by the Board of Selectmen or the
Chief of Police pursuant to paragraph 6.
(2) (Deleted).
(3) In public areas where the Town has authorized a street fair or public
festival to be conducted, with the permission of the sponsor of such fair or
festival.
38
B. Performance may take place at the following times:
(1) Monday through Saturday between 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(2) Sundays between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
C. No performer or group of performers may generate sound exceeding a
sound level of 80 decibels (db) measured at a distance of 50 feet from the performer
or group of performers. The use of sound amplification equipment is
expressly prohibited.
D. A performer may not create any interference with the traffic flow of the
public through a public area.
E. If a performer attracts a crowd sufficient to interfere with traffic flow of the
public through a public area or endanger the safety of the public or if said
crowd becomes disorderly, the police officer shall first request that the crowd
disperse or, if necessary, thereafter request that the performer leave the location.
F. No performer or group of performers may perform less than 75 feet from
another performer or group of performers.
G. A performer may request contributions at a performance, provided that no
sign requesting contributions shall be posted. Contributions may be received
in a receptacle, such as an open musical instrument case, box or hat. The
placement of any type of blanket or covering over any sidewalk or street during
a performance shall be prohibited.
6. Exclusion of Public Areas.
A. A specific public area may be excluded from performances by decision of
the Board of Selectmen after a public hearing, notice of which shall be advertised
once in a local newspaper no less than seven days prior to said hearing.
B. A specific public area may be excluded from performances by decision of
the Chief of Police to adequately protect the public or to preserve order. Any
permit holder who disputes the need for said exclusion may appeal to the
Board of Selectmen for review.
7. Town Sponsored Event.
This bylaw shall not apply to performances on town property sponsored or
approved by the Board of Selectmen or to performances in any park sponsored
or approved by the Parks Commissioners.
8. Violations and Penalties.
A. Noncriminal disposition. Whoever violates any provision of this article
may be penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D. The penalty for each violation shall be $50.
B. Suspension of permit. A performer who provides false information on the
application may have his/her permit permanently suspended. If a performer is
39
found to be in violation of any other provision of this article, the Chief of Police
may suspend a permit for no more than 30 days. Any permit holder who
disputes the suspension may appeal to the Board of Selectmen.
9. Exclusivity.
The provisions of this article shall take precedence over any other Town regulations
or bylaws applicable to street performances. To the extent other Town
regulations or bylaws are applicable and are inconsistent with this article, this
article shall govern.
10. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and if any part of this article
should be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity
shall not affect the remainder of the article, and the remainder of the article
shall stay in full force and effect.
Z. DEPARTMENTAL REVOLVING FUNDS
Purpose. This by-law establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by town departments,
boards, committees, agencies, or officers in connection with the operation
of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other receipts to support all or
some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established
under and governed by General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½.
Expenditure Limitations. A department or agency head, board, committee or officer
may incur liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and
authorized by this by-law without appropriation subject to the following limitations:
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the
fund shall also be paid from the fund (except for those employed as school bus drivers).
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by
town meeting on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any increased amount of that
authorization that is later approved during that fiscal year by the selectboard and finance
committee.
Interest. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
by-law shall be credited to the general fund.
Procedures and Reports. Except as provided in General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½
and this by-law, the laws, charter provisions, rules, regulations, policies or procedures
that govern the receipt and custody of town monies and the expenditure and payment
of town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by
the by-law. The town accountant shall include a statement on the collections credited
to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to the fund and the balance
available for expenditure in the regular report the town accountant provides the department,
board, committee, agency or office on appropriations made for its use.
40
Authorized Revolving Funds: This table establishes:
Each revolving fund authorized for use by a town department, board, committee,
agency, or officer under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½;
The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized to spend from
each fund;
The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the department, board,
committee, agency, or officer in connection with the program or activity for which
the fund is established that shall be credited to each fund by the town accountant or
other authorized town employee
The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be used;
Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund;, and
The fiscal years funds shall operate under this by-law.
Revolving
Fund
Agent Authorized
to
spend from
fund
Receipts
credited to
fund
Expenses
payable from
fund
Restrictions
on expenses
payable from
fund
Other Fiscal years
Fire Insp
Rev Fund
(14220)
Fire Chief Fees
charged
for inspections
Fire inspection
costs
Salaries or
wages of fulltime
employees
shall be
paid from the
annual budget
appropriation
or the Ambulance
revolving
fund as
appropriate
Annual limit
of expenditures
is
$50,000
FY2019 and
subsequent
years
Marina
Repairs
Rev Fund
(14296)
Harbormaster Surcharge
receipts
collected
from all
transient
visitors
Harbor related
costs and
infrastructure
expenses
Services, supplies,
and
wages shall be
related to activities
associated
with repairs
and
maintenance
of the harbor/
marina
Annual limit
of expenditures
is
$15,000
FY2019 and
subsequent
years
(Voted at ATM Article 2, April 10, 2018, AG Approved July 6, 2018, posted July 6,
2018)
41
Chapter XVI SHELLFISH COMMITTEE
The Shellfish Committee is allowed to be reduced from a seven member board to
a five member board in order to have a quorum.
Chapter XVII TOWN ACCOUNTANT
A. Contracts
No contract executed on behalf of the Town of Oak Bluffs which involves the
disbursement of Town funds shall be valid until the Town Accountant has certified
thereon that funds have been appropriated for the purpose(s) specified in the
contract and that said funds are available for expenditure.
B. Line Item Transfers
Department heads are allowed to transfer monies within various line items within
their department budget, excluding salary and wage line items, for purposes of
conducting normal business activities.
Chapter XVIII TOWN CLERK
The Town Clerk shall perform the duties, which by the laws of the Commonwealth,
Town Clerks are required to exercise and perform; shall keep a book of
record for the sole purpose of recording the location of all highways and Town
ways within the Town with an index thereto; shall notify immediately in writing
all committees that may be selected or appointed at any Town meeting, and the
nature of the business upon which they are and committees and officers of the
votes of the Town pertaining to their respective departments; and immediately after
every Town meeting furnish the Selectmen with a statement of all monies appropriated
at such meeting and the purpose for which such monies were respectively
appropriated.
A Town Clerk Fees
(Voted STM 11.16.10, Art 2, AG Approved 12.1.10, Posted 12.13.10)
Document Former Fee Description New Fee
Amending a Birth Record $10.00 $25.00
Birth certificate $5.00 $10.00
Entering delayed record of birth $10.00 $25.00
Filing business certificate $20.00 Every 4 years $40.00
Modification of business certificate $10.00 $10.00
Record of practice of podiatry $20.00 $20.00
Amending a Death Record $10.00 $25.00
Death Certificate $5.00 $10.00
Filing of Marriage Intention $15.00 $25.00
Recording marriage from outside the $5.00 $15.00
42
Commonwealth
Marriage Certificate $5.00 $10.00
Amending a Marriage Record $10.00 $25.00
Recording Power of Attorney $10.00 $10.00
Record of practice of optometry or
certified copy $20.00 $20.00
Recording certificate for physician of
osteopath in Commonwealth $20.00 $20.00
Recording order granting location,
alteration, or transfer of poles, piers,
abutments, or conduits
$40.00 flat rate,
$10.00 additional
streets
Includes provisions
of Section 22,
Chapter 166
$40.00 flat rate, $10.00
additional streets
Examining records relating to birth,
marriage, or death
Actual expense but
not less than $5.00
Actual expense but not
less than $5.00
Copying any record pertaining to a
birth, marriage, or death.(Not certified)
$5.00 $5.00
Receiving and filing of inventory of
items to be included in closing out
sale
$10.00 first page,
$2.00 each additional
page
$10.00 first page, $2.00
each additional page
Filing copy of trust by trustees of trust
or association or any amendment
thereof
$20.00 first page,
$2.00 each additional
page.
Section 2, Chapter
182
$20.00 first page, $2.00
each additional page.
Recording deed of plot in cemetery $10.00 $10.00
Recording any other documents
$10.00 first page,
$2.00 each additional
page
$10.00 first page, $2.00
each additional page
Voter's Card $5.00 $5.00
Storage Fuel License $75.00 $75.00
Auctioneer License $15.00 Per day $15.00
Raffles / Bazaar License $20.00 Per year $20.00
Pool, Sippio, Billiard Table or Bowling
Alley $50.00 each $100.00
Spayed or Neutered Dog License $6.00 $6.00
Non-Spayed or Non-Neutered Dog
License $10.00 $10.00
Kennel 1-4 Dogs $25.00 $25.00
Kennel 4-10 Dogs $50.00 $50.00
Chapter XIX TOWN TREASURER
A. Custody and Disposal of Trust Funds
All trust funds if not otherwise provided in the conditions of the trust and the income
of all trust funds, shall be held in the custody of the Town Treasurer, and
shall be paid out by him for the purpose named in the trust only upon orders duly
drawn upon him by the Selectmen. He shall keep a separate account of such
43
funds and the income thereof and submit the same to the Selectmen at the close of
the fiscal year for the publication in their report.
Chapter XX BOARDS AND COMMITTEES
A. Attendance at Meetings
If an appointed board or committee member is absent from three (3) consecutive
meetings, the appointing authority may consider the seat vacant and proceed to
fill the position with another candidate in the manner provided by statute or bylaw.
B. Capital Program Committee (Amended STM 6/18/02 Art.8)
A Committee, known as the Capital Program Committee, shall be established,
composed of one member appointed by the Finance Committee, one member appointed
by the Planning Board, one member by the Moderator, and three members
to be appointed by the Selectmen. The members from the Finance Committee and
the Planning Board and the Moderator shall be appointed for one-year terms. The
other members shall be appointed for three-year terms such that one will expire
each year. The Town Accountant shall be an ex-officio member without right of
vote. A member who ceases to reside in the Town shall resign. A vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term in the manner of the original appointment. The
Committee shall choose its own officers.
1. Preparation
The Capital Program Committee shall, in conjunction with the Board of Selectmen
through its Town Administrator, annually prepare a capital improvement
program at least thirty days prior to the date for submission of
the operating budget; unless some other time is provided by by-law.
2. Contents
The capital improvement plan shall include:
a. A clear summary of its contents;
b. An itemization of all capital improvements, including those of the
school
department, proposed to be undertaken during the next five fiscal years
with supporting data;
c. Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules;
and,
d. The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities included.
3. Public Hearing
The Capital Program Committee shall publish in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town a summary of the capital improvement plan and a
notice stating:
44
a. The times and places where entire copies of the capital improvement
plan are available for inspection by the public; and,
b. The date, time and place not less than fourteen days after such publication,
when a public hearing on said plan will be held by the
Committee.
4. Adoption
At any time after the public hearing but before the first day of the Town
Meeting, the Capital Program Committee shall by resolution adopt the capital
improvement plan with or without amendment, provided that each amendment
must be voted separately and that any increase in the capital improvement
plan as submitted must clearly identify the method of financing proposed to
accomplish this increase.
5. Authority to Promulgate a Capital Improvement Fund Policy and Debt
Policy
The Capital Program Committee shall consult with the Board of Selectmen,
Town Administrator, Finance and Advisory Committee, Town Accountant,
and Town Treasurer in the establishment of a Capital Improvement Fund Policy
and Debt Policy.
C. Clerks to Boards and Committees
Each board or committee of the Town of Oak Bluffs shall elect its own clerk or
secretary and not necessarily from its own membership.
D. Residency Requirement
On any Committee, Board or Commission that the members are appointed to
serve, the member who is appointed shall be a resident of the Town; such appointment
will become null and void and the office post will become vacant if the
residency requirement is not met per the terms of this by-law. This by-law shall
not apply to employees who work for the Town in regular, paid positions.
E. Terms of Committee Members
Unless otherwise provided by law, all appointed Boards/Committees shall have a
term commencing July 1 with all appointments to these Boards/Committees being
made within two (2) weeks prior to the commencement date of July 1.
F. Auditors
At the Annual Town Meeting next following the adoption of these by-laws there
shall be chosen by ballot a Board of Auditors consisting of three persons.
Chapter XXI MISCELLANEOUS
A. Plywood on Windows and Doors
45
No building in the central business district shall use unfinished or unpainted plywood
or any other material to cover window or door areas except in case of emergency,
and in an emergency, the covering shall be removed within 14 days. Permanent
off-season window or door covering shall not extend beyond the existing
windows or door areas.
B. Sidewalk, Curb-lines, Alleys
All owners of commercia1 property, or their tenants shall be responsible for the
cleaning of sidewalks, curb lines, and alleys, which form the boundary lines of
their property. All sidewalks and curb lines shall be kept clear of sand, litter, garbage,
trash and hazardous materials. In addition, all sidewalks and curb lines shall
be cleared of snow and ice within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of a snowfall.
Alleyways between buildings shall be kept clear of all litter, trash, garbage, and/or
hazardous materials except that which is properly contained in a metal trash container
and awaiting pick-up by a municipal or commercial refuse disposal service.
Commercial property owners shall assign a responsible agent to comply with this
by-law when they are absent from their property. Any and all violations of this
by-law shall be subject to a Twenty-five Dollar ($25.) fine for each day of violation.
C. Fees
Fees payable to the Town of Oak Bluffs are to be in accordance with Chapter 262,
Section 34 of the General Laws, Clauses 1-79.
Chapter XXII WETLANDS
A. Application
1. The purpose of this by-law is to protect the wetlands of the Town of Oak
Bluffs by controlling activities deemed to have a significant effect upon wetland
and water quality values, including but not limited to the following:
public or private water supply, groundwater, flood control, erosion control,
storm damage prevention, fisheries, shellfish, wildlife, recreation and aesthetics
(collectively the “interests protected by this by-law”).
2. No person shall remove, fill, dredge, alter, or build upon or within one hundred
feet of any bank, freshwater wetland, beach, dune, flat, marsh, meadow,
bog, swamp, or upon or within one hundred feet of any estuary, creek,
river, stream, pond or lake, or within one hundred feet of any land subject to
any tidal action, coastal storm flowage, flooding or inundation, or within
one hundred feet of the 100 year storm line, without filing written application
for a permit to so remove, fill, dredge, alter, or build upon, including
such plans as may be necessary to describe such proposed activity and its effect
upon the environment, and receiving and complying with a permit issued
pursuant to this by-law.
3. Such application may be identical in form to a Notice of Intent filed pursuant
to Chapter 131, Section 40 of the General Laws; shall be sent by certified
mail to the Oak Bluffs Conservation Commission (“Commission”), and
46
must be filed concurrently with or after application for all other variances
and approvals required by the Zoning by-law, the Subdivision Control Law
or any other by-law or regulation have been obtained. The Commission
shall set a filing fee by regulation, but no filing fee is required when the
Town of Oak Bluffs files an application for a permit.
B. Entry upon Private Property
The Commission, its agents, officers and employees, may enter upon privately
owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this by-law.
C. Request to Determine If By-law Applies
Upon written request of any person, the Commission shall, within twenty-one
days, make a written determination as to whether this by-law is applicable to any
land or work thereon.
1. Hearing
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application within twenty-
one days of its receipt from the applicant or his agent.
2. Burden of Proof
The applicant shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
credible evidence that the work proposed in the application will not harm
the interests protected by this by-law. Failure to provide adequate evidence
to the Commission supporting a determination that the proposed work will
not harm the interests protected by this by-law shall be sufficient cause for
the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions, or in the
Commission’s discretion to continue the hearing to another date to enable
the applicant or others to present additional evidence. The Commission and
the applicant may also mutually agree to continue the hearing.
3. Permit and conditions
If, after the public hearing, the Commission determines that the area which
is the subject of the application is significant to the interests protected by
this by-law, the Commission shall, within twenty-one days of such hearing,
issue or deny a permit for the work requested. If it issues a permit after
making such a determination, the Commission shall impose such conditions
as it determines are necessary or desirable for the protection of those interests,
and all work shall be done in accordance with those conditions. Permits
shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless renewed prior to
expiration, and all work shall be completed prior to the expiration.
4. Appeals
Any aggrieved person may appeal the Order of Conditions issued by the
Commission within 60 days to the Superior Court.
5. Relationship to Chapter 131, Section 40 of the General Laws
Since the Wetlands Protection Act Chapter 131, Section 40 of the General
Laws, establishes minimum standards, the Commission shall not impose additional
or more stringent conditions in any order pursuant to Chapter 131,
Section 40 of the General Laws than it imposes pursuant to this by-law.
47
D. Emergency Projects
The notice provision of this by-law shall not apply to emergency projects necessary
for the immediate protection of the health or safety of the citizens of Oak
Bluffs as certified in writing by the Commission.
E. Pre-Acquisition Violation
Any person who purchases, inherits, or otherwise acquires real estate upon which
work has been done in violation of the provision of this by-law or in violation of
any permit issued pursuant to this by-law, shall forthwith comply with any such
order to restore such land to its condition prior to any such violations. No action,
civil or criminal, shall be brought against such persons unless commenced within
three years of the violation of this by-law.
F. Regulations (Amended STM 11.8.05 Art 15, AG Approved 2.14.06, Published
2.22.06)
After due notice and public hearing, the Commission may promulgate rules and
regulations to effectuate the purpose of this by-law. Failure by the Commission to
promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by
a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effects of this by-law.
(Section 1 through 3j deleted STM 10.17.06 Art 10, AG Approved 11.2.06 and notice
published 11.16.06)
G. Security
The Commission may require, as a permit condition, that the performance and observance
of other conditions be secured by one or both of the following methods:
1. By a bond or deposit of money negotiable securities in an amount determined
by the Commission to be sufficient and payable to the Town of Oak
Bluffs.
2. By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant running with the
land, executed and properly recorded (or registered, in the case of registered
land).
H. Enforcement
Any person who violates any provision of this by-law or of any condition of a
permit issued pursuant to it shall be punished by a fine of not more that $300.00.
Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. This by-law may be enforced pursuant to Chapter 40, Section
21D of the General Laws by a Town Police Officer or other officer having police
powers.
Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen and Town Counsel
shall take legal action as may be necessary to enforce this by-law and permits issued
to it.
48
Chapter XXIII COTTAGE CITY HISTORIC DISTRICT BY-LAW
(Section added ATM 4/03 ART 18, AG Approved 8.21.03, Published
9.15.03)(Amended STM 12.2.03 Art 11, AG Approved 4.13.04, Published 5.7.04)
A. Purpose
The purpose of this by-law is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the inhabitants and property owners of the Town of
Oak Bluffs through the preservation and protection of the distinctive characteristics
of buildings and places of historical significance to the Town or the
architecture of such buildings and places, and through the maintenance and
improvement of settings for such buildings and places and the encouragement
of design compatible therewith.
B. Boundaries
The CCHD shall be located and bounded as shown on the map entitled, "Cottage
City Historic District, Town of Oak Bluffs, Dukes County, Massachusetts,"
dated April 8, 2003 and further described as follows:
Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Oak Bluffs Avenue and
Lake Avenue and running along the centerline of Lake Avenue to the B-1
zoning district boundary as of August 8, 1991; then along said zoning district
boundary to the intersection of the centerline of Samoset Avenue and said
zoning district boundary; then along the centerline of Samoset Avenue to the
intersection of the centerlines of Circuit Avenue and Samoset Avenue; then
along the centerline of Circuit Avenue to the intersection of the centerlines of
Circuit Avenue and South Circuit Avenue; then along the centerline of South
Circuit Avenue to a point adjacent to the northwesterly boundary of Lot 23,
Map 18 as shown in the FY 2002 Oak Bluffs Map and Ownership Volume;
then southerly and then easterly along Farm Pond's shoreline to a point at the
southwesterly boundary of Lot 31, said Map 11; then along the southeasterly
boundary of said Lot 31 to the centerline of Sea View Avenue; then along the
centerline of Sea View Avenue to the intersection of the centerlines of Sea
View Avenue and Oak Bluffs Avenue; and then to the point of origin.
(Boundaries extended Art. 12, ATM 4/12/05, AG Approved 7.13.05, Published
7.26.05)
And, beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Oak Bluffs Avenue
and Seaview Avenue Extension, thence northwesterly along the centerline of
Seaview Avenue Extension to its intersection with Circuit Avenue Extension
and thence southwesterly, southerly and southeasterly along the centerline of
Circuit Avenue Extension to its intersection with Oak Bluffs Avenue and
thence northeasterly along the centerline of Oak Bluffs Avenue to the point of
origin.
49
C. Make –Up of the Commission
Members There is hereby established the CCHD Commission, consisting of
seven (7) members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. Prior to making any
appointments to the original membership of the CCHD Commission, the
Board of Selectmen shall submit a written request for two nominees from each
of the following organizations: the Oak Bluffs Historical Commission, the
Park Commission and the Planning Board. The Board of Selectmen shall appoint
one of the two nominees submitted by each organization. The additional
members as advertised in the local newspaper, covering the town of Oak
Bluffs, shall include, one member who is a real estate broker or salesman licensed
in the state of Massachusetts, one member who is an architect and two
(2) members who are residents or owners of property in the District to be administered
by the commission. If within 30 days after submission of a written
request as required by MGL Chapter 40C, for nominations by an organization
entitled to submit nominations for membership on the Commission or in addition
to the written request to the nominating organizations, the appearance of
an ad in the local newspapers requesting membership interest, no such nominations
or letters of interest have been made, the appointing body may proceed
to make the appointment to the commission without nomination by such
organizations or letters of interest by residents or property owners in the District.
Thereafter, the Board of Selectmen, to the extent possible, shall appoint
successors to the commission in the same manner as was used for the original
appointment of the position that the new appointee will fill.
Alternate Members Alternate members, who need not be from nominees of
organizations entitled to nominate members or respondents to newspaper advertisements,
may be appointed, by virtue of their training, occupation or experience
to further the intent and purposes of this bylaw, not to exceed in
number the principal or regular members. Their term shall be 3 years. In the
case of absence, inability to act, or unwillingness to act because of selfinterest
on the part of a member of the Commission, that member’s place shall
be taken by an alternate member designated by the Chairman of the Commission.
Each member and alternate member shall continue in office after the
expiration of his or her term until his or her successor is duly appointed and
qualified. All members shall serve without compensation. The Commission
shall elect annually a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from its own number
and a Secretary from within or without its own number. All members of the
commission shall be residents of the Town of Oak Bluffs. Vote by the Commission
shall be by majority vote. Five members shall constitute a quorum.
Terms Each member of the CCHD Commission shall be appointed for a
term of three (3) years, except that when the Commission is first established,
two of its members shall be appointed for a term of one year, two of its members
shall be appointed for a term of two years and three of its members shall
be appointed for a term of three years.
50
D. Definitions
As used in this chapter the word "altered" includes the words "rebuilt," "re
constructed," "restored," "removed," and "demolished"; the word "building"
means a combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or
property; the word "commission" means the commission acting as the historic
district commission; the word "constructed" includes the words "built,"
"erected," "installed," "enlarged," and "moved"; the words "exterior architectural
feature" mean such portion of the exterior of a building or structure as is
open to view from a public street, public way, public park or public body of
water, including but not limited to the architectural style and general arrangement
and setting thereof, the kind, and texture of exterior building materials
applied to exterior surfaces and the type and style of windows, doors, lights,
signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures; the words "person aggrieved"
mean the applicant, an owner of adjoining property, an owner of property
within the same historic district as property within one hundred feet of said
property lines and any charitable corporation in which one of its purposes is
the preservation of historic structures or districts; and the word "structure"
means a combination of materials other than a building, including a sign,
fence, wall, terrace, walk or driveway.
E. Certificates of Appropriateness, Non-Applicability or Hardship
Except as this by-law may otherwise provide in accordance with Section G
(exclusions) or Section H (ordinary maintenance), no building or structure
within the CCHD shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior
architectural features unless the Commission shall first have issued a Certificate
of Appropriateness, a Certificate of Non-applicability, or a Certificate
of Hardship with respect to such construction or alteration.
Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Commission shall file
with the Commission an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, a
Certificate of Non-applicability or a Certificate of Hardship, as the case may
be, in such form as the Commission may reasonably determine together with
such plans, elevations, specifications, material and other information, including
in the case of demolition or removal, a statement of the proposed condition
and appearance of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably deemed
necessary by the commission to enable it to make a determination on the application.
No building permit for construction of a building or structure or for alteration
of an exterior architectural feature within the CCHD and no demolition permit
for demolition or removal of a building or structure with the CCHD shall be
issued by the Town or any department or official thereof until the certificate
required by this Section has been issued by the Commission.
F. Standards of Review
In passing upon matters before it, the Commission shall strive to advance the
purpose of this by-law, and shall consider, among other things, the historical
51
and architectural value and significance of the site, building or structure, the
general design, arrangement, proportions, texture and materials involved, the
relation of such features to similar features of buildings and structures in the
surrounding area, and the position of such buildings or structures in relation to
the public streets, public ways, public parks or public bodies of water in the
surrounding area. The physical character of the landscape shall enhance rather
than detract from the prevalent Victorian architecture and shall enhance
the inviting and open vistas of the parks. The Commission shall not consider
interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view. Variety
is to be maintained as a key element in the fabric of the overall district
presentation.
The authority of the Commission shall extend to, but not be limited to, the review
of the following categories:
1. Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks, and similar structures above grade
level
2. Decks, porches and other accessory structures
3 Walls and fences
4. Outdoor lighting fixtures, such as post and driveway/walkway lights visible
from the street
5. Signs (consisting of letters painted on wood without symbol or trademark
and if illuminated, illuminated only indirectly) if permitted by a certificate
of appropriateness shall conform to the following:
a. Non-residential buildings or structures in the District may include one
sign of not more than 10 square feet in total area, plans for which must
be presented to and approved by the Commission.
b. Residential use of any building or structure within the District may include
one sign advertising ownership, occupancy, or services offered,
of not more than one square foot in total area, plans for which must be
presented to and approved by the Commission.
c. Not withstanding sub-sections a. and b. above, signs containing brief
historical information, and of a design approved by the Commission,
may be attached to any building or structure within the District upon
the approval of the Commission.
The commission shall not make any recommendation or requirements except
for the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects
or the architectural characteristics of the surroundings and of the CCHD.
G. Exclusions
1. The authority of the commission shall not extend to the review of any of
the following categories of buildings or structures or exterior architectural
features in the CCHD, and the buildings or structures or exterior architectural
features so excluded may be constructed or altered within the CCHD
without review by the commission:
52
a. Temporary structures or signs, subject, however, to such conditions as
to duration of use, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the
commission may reasonably specify.
b. Terraces, walks, driveways and sidewalks, provided that any such
structure is substantially at grade level.
c. Storm doors and storm windows, screens, lighting fixtures, and antenna
(except satellite dishes over 18 inches in diameter).
d. The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design and materials,
of a building, structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed
by fire, storm or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is begun
within one year thereafter unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission
and is carried forward with due diligence.
2. The Commission may determine from time to time after public hearing,
that certain categories of exterior architectural features, structures or signs,
may be constructed or altered without review by the Commission without
causing substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this by-law
and of the Historic Districts Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
40C, as amended.
3. The Commission may further determine from time to time after public
hearing that the authority of the Commission shall be limited only to those
exterior architectural features within the CCHD subject to view from one
or more specifically designated public streets, public ways, public parks
or public bodies of water, as opposed to all exterior architectural features
within the CCHD subject to view from a public street, public way, public
park or public body of water, without substantial derogation from the intent
and purposes of this by-law and of the Historic Districts Act, Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 40C, as amended.
4. Upon request, the Commission shall issue a Certificate of Nonapplicability
with respect to construction or alteration in any category then
not subject to review by the Commission.
H. Ordinary Maintenance
Nothing in this by-law shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance,
repair or replacement of any exterior architectural feature within the CCHD
which does not involve a change in design, material or the outward appearance
thereof, nor to prevent landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed
to prevent the meeting of requirements certified by a duly authorized
public officer to be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition, nor construed to prevent any construction or alteration under
a permit duly issued prior to the effective date of this by-law.
I. Commission Powers, Functions and Duties
The Commission shall have the following additional powers, functions and
duties:
53
1. If the Commission determines that the construction or alteration for which
an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness has been filed will be
appropriate for and compatible with the preservation or protection of the
CCHD, the Commission shall cause a Certificate of Appropriateness to be
issued to the applicant. In the case of a disapproval of an application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness, the Commission shall place upon its records
the reasons for such determination, and shall forthwith cause a notice
of its determination, accompanied by a copy of the reasons therefor as set
forth in its records, to be issued to the applicant, and the Commission may
make recommendations to the applicant with respect to appropriateness of
design, arrangement, texture, material and similar features. Prior to the issuance
of any disapproval, the Commission may notify the applicant of its
proposed action accompanied by recommendations of changes in the applicant’s
proposal, which, if made, would make the application acceptable
to the Commission. If within fourteen (14) days of the receipt of such notice,
the applicant files a written modification of the application in conformity
with the recommended changes of the Commission, the Commission
shall cause a Certificate of Appropriateness to be issued to the applicant.
2. In the case of a determination by the Commission that an application for a
Certificate of Appropriateness or for a Certificate of Non-applicability
does not involve any exterior architectural feature which is not then subject
to review by the Commission in accordance with the provisions of
Section K, the Commission shall cause a Certificate of Non-applicability
to be issued to the applicant.
3. If the construction or alteration for which an application for a Certificate
of Appropriateness has been filed shall be determined to be inappropriate,
or in the event of an application for a Certificate of Hardship, the Commission
shall determine whether, owing to conditions especially affecting
the building or structure involved, but not affecting the CCHD generally,
failure to approve an application will involve a substantial hardship, financial
or otherwise, to the applicant, and whether such application may be
approved without substantial detriment to the public welfare and without
substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this by-law and of
the Historic Districts Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C, as
amended. If the Commission determines that owing to such conditions
failure to approve an application will involve substantial hardship to the
applicant and approval thereof may be made with such determination on
an application within the time specified in Section 12 hereof, the Commission
shall cause a Certificate of Hardship to be issued to the applicant.
4. Each certificate issued by the Commission shall be dated and signed by its
Chairman, Vice-chairman, Secretary, or such other person designated by
the Commission to sign such certificates on its behalf.
5. The Commission shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions
and determinations and of the vote of each member participating
therein, and shall adopt and amend such rules and regulations not incon54
sistent with the provisions of this by-law and the provisions of the Historic
Districts Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C, as amended, and
prescribe such forms as it shall deem desirable and necessary for the regulation
of its affairs and the conduct of its business. The Commission shall
file such rules and regulation with the Town Clerk.
6. The Commission shall file with the Town Clerk, and with any department
or official of the Town having authority to issue building permits, a copy
or notice of all certificates and determinations of disapproval issued by it.
7. The Commission may, after public hearing, set forth in such manner as it
may offer for consideration the various designs of certain appurtenances
and materials which will meet the requirements of the CCHD, but no such
determination shall limit the right of an applicant to present other designs
or materials to the Commission for its approval.
8. The Commission may, subject to appropriation employ clerical and technical
assistance or consultants and incur other expenses appropriate to the
carrying on of its work, and may accept money gifts and expend the same
for such purposes.
9. The Commission shall have, in addition to the powers, authority and duties
granted to it by this by-law, such powers, authority and duties as may
be delegated or assigned to it from time to time by vote of the Town Meeting.
J. Commission Meetings and Rules
Meetings of the Commission shall be held monthly or shall be called at the
request of two members of the Commission and in such other manner as the
Commission shall determine in its rules. A majority of the members of the Commission
shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of the majority of the
members of the Commission shall be necessary to issue a Certificate of Appropriateness,
a Certificate of Non-applicability or a Certificate of Hardship.
K. Procedure in Decision Making
The Commission shall determine promptly, and in all events within fourteen
(14) days after the filing of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness,
a Certificate of Non-applicability or a Certificate of Hardship, as the
case may be, whether the application involves any exterior architectural features
which are subject to approval by the Commission. If the Commission
determines that such application involves any such features which are subject
to approval by the Commission, the Commission shall hold a public hearing
on such application unless such hearing is dispensed with as hereinafter provided.
The Commission shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing on any application
subject to approval and shall give public notice of the time, place and purposes
thereof at least fourteen (14) days before said hearing in the local newspaper,
and by mailing, postage prepaid, a copy of said notice to the applicant; to
the Planning Board; to any person filing a written request for notice of hearing
55
( such request to be renewed yearly in December); to other property deemed
by the Commission to be materially affected thereby as they appear on the
most recent real estate tax list of the Board of Assessors; to such other persons
as the Commission shall deem entitled to notice; and, at the applicant’s expense,
to the owners of all adjourning property.
As soon as convenient after such public hearing, but in any event, within thirty
(30) days after the filing of the application, or within such further time as
the applicant may allow in writing, the Commission shall make a determination
on the application. If the commission shall fail to make a determination
within such period of time, the Commission shall thereupon issue a Certificate
of Hardship.
A public hearing on an application need not be held if such hearing is waived
in writing by all persons entitled to notice thereof. In addition, a public hearing
on an application may be waived by the Commission if the Commission
determines that the exterior architectural feature involved or its category, as
the case may be, is so insubstantial in its effect on the CCHD that it may be
reviewed by the Commission without public hearing on the application, provided,
however, that if the Commission dispenses with a public hearing on an
application, notice of the application shall be given to the owners of all adjoining
property and other property deemed by the Commission to be materially
affected thereby, as provided above, and ten (10) days shall elapse after the
mailing of such notice before the Commission may act upon such application.
L. Appeal Procedure
Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may, within
twenty (20) days after the filing of the notice of such determination with the
Town Clerk, file an appeal in the Superior Court sitting in equity for the
County of Dukes County pursuant to the provisions of Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 40C, Section 12A, as amended.
M. Enforcement
The superior court sitting in equity for the County of Dukes County shall have
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this by-law and the determinations,
rulings, and regulations issued pursuant thereto and may, upon the petition of
the Board of Selectmen or of the Commission, restrain by injunction violations
thereof; and, without limitation, such court may order the removal of any
building, structure or exterior architectural feature constructed in violation
thereof, and may issue such other orders for relief as may be equitable.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this by-law shall be punished by a
fine of not less than ten (10) dollars nor more than five hundred (500) dollars.
Each day during any portion of which a violation continues to exist shall constitute
a separate offense.
56
N. Authority for Enlargement, Reduction or Addition
An historic district may be enlarged or reduced or an additional historic district
in the Town may be created in accordance with the provisions of Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 40C, Section 3.
O. Amendment Procedure
This by-law may, from time to time, be amended in any manner not inconsistent
with the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C, by a
two-thirds vote of a Town meeting, provided that the substance of such
amendment has first been submitted to the historic district commission having
jurisdiction over such district for its recommendation and its recommendation
has been received or sixty (60) days have elapsed without such recommendation.
P. Severability Provisions
In the event that any provision of this by-law shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional
by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions
shall continue in full force and effect.
Chapter XXIV The Preservation of Historically Significant Buildings
(Section Added STM 12.2.03 Art 12, AG Approved 2.13.04, Published 3.5.04)
Intent and Purpose
This by-law is enacted for the purpose of preserving and protecting significant
buildings within the Town which constitute or reflect distinctive features of
the architectural, cultural, economic, political or social history of the town and
to limit the detrimental effect of demolition on the character of the town.
Through this by-law, owners of preferably preserved buildings are encouraged
to seek out alternative options that will preserve, rehabilitate or restore such
buildings and residents of the town are alerted to impending demolitions of
significant buildings. By preserving and protecting significant buildings,
streetscapes and neighborhoods, this by-law promotes the public welfare by
making the town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live and
work. To achieve these purposes the Historical Commission is authorized to
advise the Building Inspector with respect to demolition permit applications.
The issuance of demolition permits is regulated as provided by this by-law.
Definitions
APPLICANT – Any person or entity who files an application for a demolition
permit. If the applicant is not the owner of the premises upon which the building
is situated, the owner must indicate on or with the application his/her assent
to the filing of the application.
57
APPLICATION – An application for the demolition of a building.
BUILDING – Any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals,
or property.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER – The person occupying the office of Building
Commissioner or otherwise authorized to issue demolition permits.
COMMISSION – The Oak Bluffs Historical Commission or its designee.
DEMOLITION – Any act of pulling down, destroying, removing, dismantling
or razing a building or commencing the work of total or substantial destruction
with the intent of completing the same.
DEMOLITION PERMIT – The building permit issued by the Building Inspector
for a demolition of a building, excluding a building permit issued solely
for the demolition of the interior of a building.
PREFERABLY PRESERVED – Any significant building which the Commission
, following a public hearing, that it is in the public interest to be preserved
rather than demolished. A preferably preserved building is subject to
the six month demolition delay period of this by-law.
SIGNIFICANT BUILDING – Any building within the town (city) which is in
whole or in part one hundred years or more old and which has been determined
by the Commission or its designee to be significant based on any of the
following criteria:
? The Building is listed on, or is within an area listed on, the National Register
of Historic Places; or
? The Building has been found eligible for the National Register of Historic
Places; or
? The Building is importantly associated with one or more historic persons
or events, or with the broad architectural, cultural, political, economic or
social history of the Town or the Commonwealth; or
? The Building is historically or architecturally important (in terms of period,
style, method of building construction or association with a recognized
architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of buildings.
Procedure
No demolition permit for a building which is in whole or in part one hundred
years or more old shall be issued without following the provisions of this bylaw.
If a building is of unknown age, it shall be assumed that the building is
over one hundred years old for the purposes of this by-law.
An applicant proposing to demolish a building subject to this by-law shall file
with the Building Commissioner an application containing the following information:
? The address of the building to be demolished.
? The owner’s name, address and telephone number.
? A description of the building.
? The reason for requesting a demolition permit.
58
? A brief description of the proposed reuse, reconstruction or replacement.
? A photograph or photograph(s) of the building.
The Building Commissioner shall within seven days forward a copy of the application
to the Commission. The Commission shall within fifteen days after
receipt of the application, make a written determination of whether the building
is significant.
Upon determination by the Commission that the building is not significant, the
Commission shall so notify the Building Commissioner and applicant in writing.
The Building Commissioner may then issue the demolition permit.
Upon determination by the Commission that the building is significant, the
Commission shall so notify the Building Commissioner and the applicant in
writing. No demolition permit may be issued at this time. If the Commission
does not notify the Building Commissioner within fifteen days of receipt of
the application, the Building Commissioner may proceed to issue the demolition
permit.
If the Commission finds that the building is significant, it shall hold a public
hearing within thirty days of the written notification to the Building Commissioner.
Public notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in town hall for a period of not less than seven
days prior to the date of said hearing and the applicant and the building inspector
shall be notified in writing of the meeting time and place.
The Commission shall decide at the public hearing or within fourteen days after
the public hearing whether the building should be preferably preserved. If
agreed to in writing by the applicant, the determination of the Commission
may be postponed.
If the Commission determines that the building is not preferably preserved,
the Commission shall so notify the Building Commissioner and applicant in
writing. The Building Commissioner may then issue the demolition permit.
If the Commission determines that the building is preferably preserved, the
Commission shall notify the Building Commissioner and applicant in writing.
No demolition permit may then be issued for a period of six months from the
date of the determination unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission. If
the Commission does not so notify the Building Commissioner in writing
within twenty-one days of the public hearing, the Building Commissioner may
issue the demolition permit.
Upon a determination by the Commission that any building which is the subject
of an application is a preferably preserved building, no building permit for
new construction or alterations on the premises shall be issued for a period of
59
six months from the date of the determination unless otherwise agreed to by
the Commission.
No permit for demolition of a building determined to be a preferably preserved
building shall be granted until all plans for future use and development
of the site have been filed with the Building Commissioner and have been
found to comply with all laws pertaining to the issuance of a building permit
or if for a parking lot, a certificate of occupancy for that site. All approvals
necessary for the issuance of such building permit or certificate of occupancy,
including without limitation any necessary zoning variances or special permits,
must be granted and all appeals from the granting of such approvals
must be concluded, prior to the issuance of a demolition permit under this section.
The Building Commissioner may issue a demolition permit or a building permit
for a preferably preserved building within the six months if the Commission
notifies the Building Commissioner in writing that the Commission finds
that the intent and purpose of this by-law is served even with the issuance of
the demolition permit or building permit.
Following the six month delay period, the Building Commissioner may issue
the demolition permit.
Administration
The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to
administer the terms of this by-law.
The Commission is authorized to adopt a schedule of reasonable fees to cover
the costs associated with the administration of this by-law.
The Commission may delegate authority to make initial determinations of significance
to one or more members of the Commission or to a municipal employee.
The Commission may pro-actively develop a list of significant buildings that
will subject to this by-law.
Buildings proposed for the significant building list shall be added following a
public hearing.
Emergency Demolition
If after an inspection, the Building Commissioner finds that a building subject
to this by-law is found to pose an immediate threat to public health or safety
due to its deteriorated condition and that there is no reasonable alternative to
the immediate demolition of the building or structure, then the Building
Commissioner may issue an emergency demolition permit to the owner of the
building or structure. The Building Commissioner shall then prepare a report
explaining the condition of the building and the basis for his decision which
shall be forwarded to the Commission.
60
Enforcement and Remedies
The Commission and/or the Building Commissioner are each specifically authorized
to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or equity, as
they may deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements
of this by-law or to prevent a threatened violation thereof.
Any owner of a building subject to this by-law that demolished the building
without first obtaining a demolition permit in accordance with the provisions
of this by-law shall be subject to a fine of not more than Three Hundred Dollars.
Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense until a
faithful restoration of the demolished building is completed or unless otherwise
agreed to by the Commission.
If a building subject to this by-law is demolished without first obtaining a
demolition permit, no building permit shall be issued for a period of two years
from the date of the demolition on the subject parcel of land or any adjoining
parcels of land under common ownership and control unless the building permit
is for the faithful restoration referred to above or unless otherwise agreed
to by the Commission.
Historic District Act
Following a determination that the building is significant and preferably preserved,
the Commission may recommend to town meeting that the building be
protected through the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40C,
and the Historic Districts Act. The steps required under M.G.L. Chapter 40C
shall be followed prior to the establishment of a local historic district. Nothing
in this by-law shall be deemed to conflict with the provisions of the Historic
District Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C. If any of the
provisions of this by-law do so conflict, that act shall prevail.
Severability
In case any section, paragraph or part of this by-law be for any reason declared
invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph,
and part shall continue in full force and effect.
Chapter XXV COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
(Section added STM 6.28.05 – Approved by AG 9.16.05 – Posted 9.22.05)
A. Establishment
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee, consisting of
nine (9) voting members pursuant to MGL Chapter 44B. The composition of the
committee, the appointing authority and terms of office for the committee members
shall be as follows:
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by said Commission
for a term of three (3) years;
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by said Commission
for a term of three (3) years;
61
One member of the Affordable Housing Committee as designated by said
Committee for a term of three (3) years;
One member of the Parks and Recreation Commission as designated by said
Commission for an initial term of two (2) years and thereafter for a term of term
of three (3) years;
One member of the Planning Board as designated by said Board for an initial
term of one (1) year and thereafter for a term of three (3) years;
Four (4) members from the voters at large to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen,
two (2) members to be appointed for terms of one (1) year and thereafter
for terms of three (3) years, and two (2) members to be appointed for terms of
two (2) years and thereafter for terms of three (3) years.
Should any of the Commissions, Boards, Committees or individuals having appointing
authority under this by-law no longer exist for whatever reason, the appointing
authority for that Commission, Board, Committee or individual shall become
the responsibility of the Board of Selectmen.
B. Duties
1. The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs, possibilities
and resources of the town regarding community preservation. The Committee
shall consult with existing municipal boards, including the Conservation
Commission, the Historical Commission, the Planning Board, the Parks and
Recreation Commission and the Affordable Housing Committee or persons
acting in those capacities or performing like duties in conducting such studies.
As part of its study, the Committee shall hold one or more public informational
hearings on the needs, possibilities and resources of the town regarding
community preservation possibilities and resources, notices of which shall be
posted publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
2. The Community Preservation Committee shall make recommendations to the
Town Meeting to acquire, create, preserve, rehabilitate or restore:
Community Housing;
Open Space;
Land for Recreational Use; or
Historic Resources
3. The Community Preservation Committee may include in its proposal to Town
Meeting, a recommendation to set aside for later spending, funds for purposes
that are consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient revenues
are not then available in the Community Preservation Fund. The Community
Preservation Committee may recommend the issuance of general obligation
bonds or notes in anticipation of revenues to be raised pursuant to
MGL Chapter 44B, Section 3, the proceeds of which shall be deposited in the
Community Preservation Fund.
4. As provided in the Massachusetts Community Preservation Act, no expenditures
shall be made from the Community Preservation Fund without the approval
of Town Meeting.
62
5. The Community Preservation Committee will submit an annual administrative
and operating budget for the Community Preservation Committee which cannot
exceed five percent (5%) of the annual revenues in the Community
Preservation Fund, to Town Meeting for approval.
C. Requirement for a Quorum
The Community Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct business
without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the Committee
shall constitute a quorum. The Community Preservation Committee shall approve
its actions by a majority vote.
D. Requirement for Cost Estimates
Proposals to Town Meeting shall include their anticipated costs.
E. Exemptions
Taxpayers qualifying for the low-income exemption or the low and moderateincome
senior exemption as provided for in MGL Chapter 44B shall submit an
application for the exemption on a form provided by the Board of Assessors within
three (3) months after the tax bill or notice is sent.
F. Severability
In event any section, paragraph or part of this chapter be for any reason declared
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph
or part shall continue in full force and effect.
G. Effective Date
This by-law shall take effect upon approval of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth,
and after all requirements of MGL Chapter 40 Section 32 have been
met. Each appointing authority shall have thirty (30) days after approval by the
Attorney General to make their initial appointments.
Chapter XXVI ‘SEWER ASSESSMENT’ BY-LAW
(Section added STM 4.11.06, AG Approval posted 6/12/06)
1. Introduction and Authority
The cost of laying out, constructing and operating a system for the collection,
treatment and disposal of sewage for all or any part of the Town shall be borne by
the land benefited by such system, in accordance with the following provisions,
except that fifty percent (50%) of the costs incurred in connection with the planning
and construction of the Oak Bluffs Wastewater Treatment Plant, the installation
of the sewer lines identified on the Phase III Wastewater Facilities Plan dated
January 20, 1998, and all related costs incidental thereto, amounting to
$17,396,270.90, shall be borne by the owners of land benefiting therefrom. The
town Meeting may, subsequent to the April 2006 Annual Town Meeting, allocate
63
any portion of the cost of laying out and constructing new sewage collection facilities
to the taxpayers at large.
2. Assessment by Uniform Unit Method
a. The Town, acting through its Wastewater Commissioners, shall assess the
owners of all land abutting any way in which there is a public sewer line constructed
by the Town according to the uniform unit method, as authorized by
G.L. c. 83, § 15 and the Special Town Meeting held on April 10, 2001.
b. The Wastewater Commissioners shall make the assessments by establishing
sewer assessment units as follows:
(i) The owner of land used for a single family residence shall be assessed
on the basis of one (1) sewer unit. The owner of undeveloped
land zoned for single family residential use shall be assessed
on the basis of the maximum number of single family residences
which may be constructed on such land as of right under
the zoning then in effect.
(ii) The owner of land used for multi-family residential use shall be
assessed on the basis of .67 times the number of dwelling units
presently existing on such land, provided each unit has fewer
than three (3) bedrooms as defined by Title V of the State Environmental
Code (“Title V”). Vacant land zoned for multi-family
use shall be assessed on the basis of .67 times the maximum
number of units which can be constructed as of right under the
zoning then in effect. Multi-family units with three (3) or more
bedrooms shall be assessed on the basis of one sewer unit per
dwelling unit. Each owner of a condominium or cooperative
dwelling unit in a multi-family residential building shall be assessed
only for his or her dwelling unit.
(iii) The owner of land used or zoned for commercial, business, industrial,
institutional, or non-profit use (“non- residential property”)
that is metered for Town water use shall be assessed a number
of equivalent residential sewer units based upon the water
consumption for the calendar year preceding the order of assessment,
according to the following formula:
Water Usage (expressed in average gallons per day)
210 (based on 3 x 70 gpd per bedroom)
=
Equivalent Number of Sewer Units
(all decimals shall be rounded to the next whole number)
(iv) The owner of non-residential property that is not metered for
water use shall be assigned a water consumption volume by the
Wastewater Commissioners based on Title V, and than assessed
for the number of equivalent sewer units based on the formula
established in Section 2 (b) (iii).
64
(v) Municipal property is exempt from assessment. The owner of
land used or zoned for any other purpose not specified in the
foregoing sections shall be assigned a water consumption volume
by the Wastewater Commissioners based on Title V, and
then assessed for the number of equivalent sewer units based on
the formula established in Section 2 (b) (iii).
3. User Fees for Land Not Subject to Assessment
The Wastewater Commissioners shall establish just and reasonable fees for the
use of the public sewer system by the owner of land not liable to assessment,
which fee shall be based on the avoided cost of construction of sewage disposal
facilities to serve such land.
4. Assessment Rates
The Wastewater Commissioners shall establish the assessment rate for land being
assessed by dividing total costs to be assessed by the total number of existing and
potential sewer units within the assessed area.
5. Sewer Privilege Fees
The Wastewater Commissioners may establish reasonable fees pursuant to G.L. c.
83, § 17, to cover costs of construction of common sewers and other facilities required
to serve land not previously served by the sewer system and not previously
assessed to the owner of such land. Any such fee shall be reduced to the extent the
landowner pays such expenses, in accordance with G.L. c. 83, § 22.
6. Annual User Fee
The Wastewater Commissioners may from time to time establish just and equitable
annual user charges to cover the costs of maintenance, repairs and operations
of the sewer system.
7. Rules and Regulations Concerning Sewer Assessments
The Wastewater Commissioners may adopt such reasonable rules and regulations
with respect to the calculation of sewer assessments or fees as may be necessary
or appropriate to implement the provisions of this By-law.
8. Applicability of General Laws
Except as provided herein or in any special legislation applicable to the Town, the
provisions of the General Laws relative to the assessment, apportionment, division,
re-assessment, abatement and collection of sewer assessments and to liens
therefore and interest thereon shall apply to assessments made hereunder.
9. Rules and Regulations Concerning Use of Sewer System
The Wastewater Commissioners may establish rules and regulations concerning
the use of the public sewer system, including but not limited to rules and regulations
prohibiting the deposit of any harmful or deleterious substance into the sys65
tem, for regulating connections to the system and for establishing penalties for the
violation of such rules.
Chapter XXVII OAK BLUFFS AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST
(Section added ATM 4.13.10, Art 19, AG Approval posted 9/14/10)
THIS DECLARATION OF TRUST is executed as of the ____day of _____, 2010 by the members
of the Oak Bluffs Board of Selectmen and the members of the Oak Bluffs Affordable Housing Committee,
hereinafter called the Trustees, who shall serve in such capacity pursuant to the provisions of
M.G.L. Chapter 44, s 55C.
WHEREAS, The Town Meeting of Oak Bluffs has authorized the establishment of a Housing Trust
pursuant to the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 44, s 55C; and
WHEREAS, It is the intention of the Trustees, to establish a comprehensive trust in accordance with
the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 44, s 55C authorizing the establishment of thereof; and
WHEREAS, All monies received by this Trust for all purposes relevant to the Trust shall be considered
available for the purposes of accomplishing the mission of providing for the preservation and creation
of affordable housing in the Town of Oak Bluffs for the benefit of low and moderate income
households.
THEREFORE, in consideration of the agreements contained in this Trust, and the requirements of
M.G.L. Chapter 44, s 55C, the Trustees hereby acknowledge and agree for themselves and their successors
in trust to hold the same, together with such other property and funds as may be added thereto,
for the purposes hereof in trust for the benefit of all of the Inhabitants of the Town of Oak Bluffs, in
the manner and under the terms and conditions set forth herein.
ARTICLE I TRUSTEES
The Trustees shall be appointed in accordance with Article IV hereof.
ARTICLE II PURPOSE OF TRUST
The purpose of the Trust shall be to provide for the preservation and creation of affordable housing in
the Town of Oak Bluffs for the benefit of low and moderate income households.
ARTICLE III POWERS OF TRUSTEES
The Trustees shall have the following powers which shall be carried out in accordance with and in furtherance
of the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 44, s 55C (Municipal Affordable Housing Trust Fund) as
outlined below except that it shall have no ability to borrow money, or mortgage or pledge Trust assets,
purchase, sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any interest in real property without prior approval
of the Oak Bluffs Board of Selectmen:
1) to accept and receive real property, personal property or money, by gift, grant, contributions,
devise, or transfer from any person, firm, corporation or other public entity or organization
or tendered to the Trust in connection with provisions of any ordinance or bylaw
or any General Law or Special Act of the Commonwealth or any other source including
money from M.G.L Chapter 44B (Community Preservation);
2) with Town Meeting approval from Trustee recommendation, to sell, lease, exchange,
transfer or convey any personal, mixed, or real property at public auction or by private
contract for such consideration and on such terms as to credit or otherwise, and to make
such contracts and enter into such undertaking relative to Trust property as the Trustees
deem advisable notwithstanding the length of any such lease or contract;
3) to execute, acknowledge and deliver deeds, assignments, transfers, pledges, leases, covenants,
contracts, promissory notes, releases and other instruments sealed or unsealed,
66
necessary, proper or incident to any transaction in which the Trustees engage for the accomplishment
of the purposes of the Trust;
4) with Town Meeting approval from Trustee recommendation, to borrow money on such
terms and conditions and from such sources as the Trustees deem advisable, to mortgage
and pledge Trust assets as collateral; to the extent of the Trust's assets, and subject to 2/3
vote at any Annual or Special Town Meeting for greater than the extent of the Trust’s assets.
5) to construct, manage or improve real property; and to abandon any property which the
Trustees determine not to be worth retaining;
6) with Board of Selectmen approval from Trustee recommendation, to purchase and retain
real or personal property, including without restriction investments that yield a high rate
of income or no income;
7) to hold all or part of the Trust property uninvested for such purposes and for such time as
the Trustees may deem appropriate; and
8) to become the lottery and monitoring agent for affordable housing and accept compensation
for those services into the Fund,
9) to monitor the expiring use of any affordable housing in Oak Bluffs,
10) to compensate Town employees for services provided as authorized by the Town Administrator,
including but not limited to dedicated staff to Trustees, engineering support for
project specific activities, and other Town services, as requested by the Trustees to the
Town Administrator;
11) to employ advisors and agents, including but not limited to accountants, appraisers and
lawyers as the Trustees deem necessary;
12) to pay reasonable compensation and expenses to all advisors and agents and to apportion
such compensation between income and principal as the Trustees deem advisable;
13) to participate or join or form a partnership, corporation or any other legally organized entity
to accomplish the purposes of this Trust and to participate in any reorganization, recapitalization,
merger or similar transactions; and to give proxies or powers of attorney
with or without power of substitution to vote any securities or certificates of interest; and
to consent to any contract, lease, mortgage, purchase or sale of property, by or between
any corporation, and any other corporation, person or entity,
14) to apportion receipts and charges between incomes and principal as the Trustees deem
advisable, to amortize premiums and establish sinking funds for such purpose, and to create
reserves for depreciation depletion or otherwise;
15) to deposit any security with any protective reorganization committee, and to delegate to
such committee such powers and authority with relation thereto as the Trustees may
deem proper and to pay, out of Trust property, such portion of expenses and compensation
of such committee as the Trustees may deem necessary and appropriate;
16) to carry property for accounting purposes other than acquisition date values;
17) to make distributions or divisions of principal in kind;
18) to extend the time for payment of any obligation to the Trust,
19) to establish criteria and/or qualifications for recipients and expenditures in accordance
with Trust's stated purposes;
20) to compromise, defend, enforce, release, settle or otherwise adjust claims in favor or
against the Trust, including claims for taxes, and to accept any property, either in total or
partial satisfaction of any indebtedness or other obligation, and subject to the provisions
of this act, to continue to hold the same for such period of time as the Trustees may deem
appropriate;
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, Board of Selectmen approval shall be required for
any of the following actions:
a) to purchase real or personal property;
a) to sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any personal, mixed, or real property; and
b) to borrow money, or to mortgage or pledge Trust assets as collateral to the extent of the
Trust's assets.
67
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the Trustees may not borrow, mortgage or pledge
greater than the current Trust assets unless approved by the Board of Selectmen and by a 2/3 vote at
any Annual or Special Town Meeting.
The Trustees shall have full power and authority, at any time and from time to time and without the
necessity of applying to any court for leave to do so, to expend the 100% of the Trust funds, both principal
and interest, to the extent that all funds hereunder may be expended if the Trustees deem such
expenditure appropriate. All expenditures shall be made in conformance with the terms of this Trust
and M.G.L. Chapter 44, s 55C.
ARTICLE IV APPOINTMENT AND TENURE OF TRUSTEES
There shall be a Board of Trustees consisting of all the members of the Board of Selectmen and all the
members of the Affordable Housing Committee.
The Trustees shall be appointed for a terms corresponding to their terms as Selectmen or Affordable
Housing Committee members.
ARTICLE V MEETINGS OF THE TRUSTEES
The Trust shall meet at least quarterly at such time and such place as the Trustees shall determine.
Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or by any two (2) Trustees. Notice of any meeting
of the Trust shall be filed with the Town Clerk and posted in accordance with the Open Meeting Law,
M.G.L. Chapter 39, s 23A, 23B and 23C.
A quorum of the Board of Trustees shall be the majority of the number of authorized Trustees.
The Trustees shall annually elect one (1) Trustee who shall serve as Chairperson. The Chairperson may
establish sub-committees and/or ad hoc task related committees to carry out the purposes of the Trust.
Chairpersons of the sub-committees may be selected by the members of the sub-committees.
ARTICLE VI ACTS OF TRUSTEES
A majority of Trustees may exercise any or all of the powers of the Trustees hereunder and may execute
on behalf of the Trustees any and all instruments with the same effect as though executed by all
the Trustees. No Trustee shall be required to give bond. No license of court shall be required to confirm
the validity of any transaction entered into by the Trustees with respect to the Trust Estate.
ARTICLE VII TREASURER AS CUSTODIAN
The Town of Oak Bluffs Treasurer shall be the custodian of the Trust's funds and shall maintain separate
accounts and records for said funds.
He or she shall invest the funds in the manner authorized by M.G.L Chapter 44, s 55 (Public Funds on
Deposit; Limitations; Investments,) s 55A, (Liability of Depositor for Losses Due to Bankruptcy), s
55B (Investment of Public Funds).
Any income or proceeds received from the investment of funds shall be credited to and become part of
the Trust.
Expenditures by the Trust shall be processed through the warrant but shall be controlled by the provisions
of M.G.L. Chapter 44, s.55C. The yearly approved budget, and any approved budget revisions
will be recorded by the Town Treasurer.
As custodian, the Treasurer shall issue checks as directed by the Trustees.
In accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 44, s.55C (Municipal Affordable Housing Trust Fund), the books
and records of the Trust shall be audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance with accepted
accounting practices. The Trust shall be audited as part of the Town audit.
ARTICLE VIII DURATION OF THE TRUST
This Trust shall continue so long as authorized under the Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, The trust may be terminated by a majority vote of the Town
Meeting in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 4, s 4B, provided that an instrument of termination together
with a certified copy of the Town Meeting vote are duly recorded with the Dukes County Dis68
trict Registry of Deeds and the Land Court. Upon termination of the Trust, subject to the payment of
or making provisions for the payment of all obligations and liabilities of the Trust and the Trustees, the
net assets of the Trust shall be transferred to the Town and held by the Board of Selectmen for affordable
housing purposes. In making any such distribution, the Trustees may, subject to the approval of the
Board of Selectmen, sell all or any portion of the Trust property and distribute the net proceeds thereof
or they may distribute any of the assets in kind. The powers of the Trustees shall continue until the
affairs of the Trust are concluded.
ARTICLE IX CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS
In the construction hereof, whether or not so expressed, words used in the singular or in the plural respectively
include both the plural and singular, words denoting males include females and words denoting
persons include individuals, firms, associations, companies, trusts and corporations unless a
contrary intention is to be inferred from or required by the subject matter or context. All the powers
and provisions of the Trust herein contained shall take effect and be construed according to the laws of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Reference to the Trustee shall mean the Trustee or Trustees for the time being hereunder.
ARTICLE X RECORDING
This Declaration of Trust shall be recorded with the Dukes County District Registry of Deeds and the
Land Court.
ARTICLE XI AMENDMENTS
The Declaration of Trust may be amended from time to time except as to those provisions specifically
required under M.G.L. Chapter 44, s 5C, by a vote of town meeting or by an instrument in writing
signed by all of the Trustees and approved at a meeting called for that purpose, and approved by the
Board of Selectmen provided that in each case, a certificate of amendment has been recorded with the
Dukes County District Registry of Deeds and the Land Court.
ARTICLE XII RECORD TO BE CONCLUSIVE, CERTIFICATE AS TO FACTS
Every contract, deed, mortgage, lease and other instrument executed by a majority of the Trustees as
appears from instruments or certificates recorded with the Registry of Deeds and Land Registration
Office to be Trustees hereunder shall be conclusive evidence in favor of any person relying thereon or
claiming thereunder, that at the time of the delivery thereof this Trust was in full force and effect and
that the execution and delivery of such instrument was duly authorized by the Trustees except that instruments
of amendment pursuant to Article XI and an instrument of termination pursuant to Article
VIII hereof shall be conclusive only if it appears that the delegations, amendments or termination have
been executed by all of the Trustees. Any person dealing with the Trust property or the Trustees may
always relay on a certificate signed by any person appearing from instruments or certificates so recorded
to be Trustee hereunder as to the identity of the then current Trustees or as to the existence or nonexistence
of any fact or facts which constitute conditions precedent to acts by the Trustees or in any
other manner germane to the affairs of the Trust.
ARTICLE XIII TITLES
The titles to the various Articles herein are for convenience only and are not to be considered part of
said Articles nor shall they affect the meaning or the language of any such article.
Chapter XXVIII PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
A. Use of the Town Parklands and Beaches -
69
1. Government and Use of Town Parks and Beaches is under the care
and control of
The Oak Bluffs Parks Commissioners, who also have independent powers
under G.
L. c. 45.
2. Enforcement of Rules and Regulations by Town Police or Parks
Commissioners – Sections C and D.
3. Issuance of Special Use Permits – Generally – Section E.
4. Special Use Permits - Special Events – Section F.
5. Enforcement/Revocation of Special Use Permits – Section G.
B. Definitions/Commissioners Rules and Regulations
1. Parks and Beaches. Parks and Beaches shall include all sidewalks, buildings,
structures, land, beaches, ponds, and other waters under the custody,
care and control of the Oak Bluffs Parks Commissioners.
2. Rules and Regulations Governing the use of Parks & Beaches. In addition
to the rules and regulations governing Parks and Beaches contained in this Bylaw,
the Commissioners have also promulgated, and from time to time may
amend, additional rules and regulations under the authority granted to them by
G. L. c. 45, § 5. The Commissioners have also created application forms,
checklists, and informational materials related to the uses and permits
provided for herein, which can be obtained at the Parks Department.
C. Use of Parks/Prohibited Uses - Conduct
1. No littering, cigarette butts, or glass bottles.
2. No graffiti, defacing, or disfiguring park structures or vegetation.
3. No lewd behavior or threatening acts are allowed.
4. No animals in playgrounds or ball fields. Animals must be under the control
of their
owner at all times, and all waste must be properly removed.
5. No parking of motor vehicles on park greenspace is allowed unless authorized
by the Park Commissioners.
6. No open containers of alcohol or fires are allowed.
7. No commercial activity including, without limitation, signs, notices, advertisement,
concessions, or soliciting/selling of goods, services, or articles.
70
8. No overnight sleeping.
9. Bikes, skateboards, and similar vehicles must yield to pedestrians. No motorized
vehicles (except assistive devices) on pedestrian paths.
10. No amplified music.
11. Special Use Permits for events may permit or condition certain prohibited
uses
identified in subsections 6, 7, or 10.
D. Use of Beaches/Prohibited Uses-Conduct
1. Beach use is at individual's own risk. No Lifeguards on duty unless otherwise
posted.
2. No dogs allowed on public beaches from May 15th — September 15th between
8:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m., and on Inkwell Beach between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
(during the
same months).
3. Animals must be under the control of their owner at all times, and all waste
must be
properly removed.
4. No walking on jetties beyond signage or dunes, as posted.
5. No graffiti, defacing, or disfiguring beach structures or vegetation.
6. No boats, sailboards, or fishing in swimming areas between 7 a.m. and 6
p.m. from
May 15th — September 15th.
7. No smoking.
8. No commercial activity including, without limitation, signs, notices, advertisement,
concessions, or soliciting/selling of goods, services, or articles.
9. No littering, no glass bottles. Carry in - Carry out all trash and waste.
10. No disruptive behavior, including loud conversation, fighting, or similar
conduct
71
reasonably likely to interfere with the public’s enjoyment of the Parks and
Beaches.
11. No amplified music.
12. No fires or open containers of alcoholic beverages are allowed.
13. Special Use Permits for events may permit or condition certain prohibited
uses
identified in subsections or 8, 11, or 12.
E. Special Use Permits
1. The Commissioners may issue a Special Use Permit upon receipt of a complete
application for an otherwise prohibited activity identified in Sections C(6), (7), or
(10), or in D(8), (11), or (12), or for a Special Event as outlined in Section F. The
Commissioners shall decide each application on its merits, considering, in their discretion
whether issuance of a permit:
a.) increases or promotes public recreational opportunities;
b.) preserves, or may be adequately conditioned to preserve, the environmental integrity
of the particular park or beach; and
c.) is consistent with the rights of the public to use the park or beach simultaneously
with the event or use requested.
2. As noted in Section B(2), the Commissioners have promulgated, additional rules
and regulations under their authority granted to them by G. L. c. 45, § 5 governing,
and providing other limitations on, Special uses/Special Events, which the Commissioners
may amend from time to time as they determine is necessary to govern Town
Parks and Beaches.
3. The Commission has created application forms for Special Use Permit requests.
An applicant must follow the rules set out on the application. All applications must
be filed at a minimum of ten (10) days before the Commissioners meet in order to
give adequate time for posting and comment.
4. The Commissioners may grant the application, deny the application, or approve
the application with conditions. The Commissioners have broad discretion in acting
on Special Use Permit applications.
5. An applicant must comply with any terms and conditions contained within a Special
Use Permit. Any act authorized pursuant to a Special Use Permit may be performed
only by the person(s) named therein, and any such authorizations may not be
assigned or delegated, except as provided by the Special Use permit.
6. All person(s) receiving a Special Use Permit must agree, as a condition, to indemnify
and hold the Town, the Commission, its employees and agents harmless
72
against all claims relating to or arising out of the use of Parks or beaches. The
Commissioners may require the applicant to obtain liability insurance to support
the Permittee's obligation to indemnify and hold the Town harmless.
F. Special Use Permits – Special Events
1. Special Events are defined as supervised or organized activities involving one or
more participants or spectators, which might reasonably be expected to affect the
public use or enjoyment, or the general environmental quality, of any Park or Beach.
2. No person shall conduct any Special Event upon the lands or waters of a Park or
Beach without first obtaining a "Special Use Permit" from the Commissioners.
3. The "Special Event Permit Application" must be submitted ten (10) business days
before a scheduled Park Commissioners meeting.
4. There shall be no advertising, posting, or digital notification (for e.g. via email or
social medial distribution) of a proposed special event before the event has been
approved by the Park Commissioners and any other necessary town entities.
5. The contact person and/or group are responsible for fulfilling the requirements imposed
by the Special Event P-Use Permit.
6. Approved groups using park or beach areas shall respect the rights and privacy of
neighbors.
G. Enforcement
1. All Special Use Permits are in the nature of a license, and are revocable at-will, in
the discretion of the Commissioners.
2. Any violation of a Special Use Permit by its holder, its agents, employees or
guests of any term or condition therein shall constitute grounds for its revocation by
the Commissioners, whose action therein shall be final.
3. In case of revocation of any Special Use Permit, all monies paid for or on account
thereof shall, at the option of the Commissioners, be retained by the Commission, and
the holder of such permit, together with his or her agents, employees, and guests who
violated said terms or conditions shall be jointly and severally liable to the commission
for all damages and/or loss suffered by the Commission in excess of such monies
retained. Neither such retention by the Commission of the whole nor any part of such
monies nor the recovery or collection thereby of such damages, or both, shall in any
manner relieve such person(s) from criminal liability for violation of any other state
or local law, ordinance, rule or order, or from responsibility under governing law for
the violation.
73
4. This By-law may be enforced by non-criminal disposition under G.L. Chapter 40,
§ 21D, in the following manner:
a. For the first offense within a twelve (12) month period, a $100.00 fine;
b. For the second offense within a twelve (12) month period, a $200.00 fine;
c. For the third and subsequent offense(s) within a twelve (12) month period, a
$300.00
fine.
5. Each day, or portion thereof during which a violation continues, shall constitute a
separate offense.
6. This by-law may be enforced, including but not limited to the provisions of G. L.
c. 40, § 21D, by Town Police Officers or other officers having police powers.
7. Upon request of the Commission, with Board of Selectmen approval, Town Counsel
shall take legal action as may be necessary to enforce this by-law and the conditions
of Special Use Permits issued under its provisions.
8. The Commissioners may from time promulgate and amend a separate fine schedule
under the independent authority granted to them by Massachusetts law.
“Plastic Checkout Bag Bylaw
Findings and Purpose
Single-use plastic bags are an environmental nuisance; adversely affect public health;
are a detriment to tourism; and impair the overall quality of life of the Town’s residents
and visitors.
Because plastic bags are lightweight, they easily become airborne even when properly
disposed of, littering beaches, roadsides and sidewalks. They clog storm drainage
systems, contribute to marine and terrestrial pollution, and detract from the natural
beauty of the Town for visitors and residents alike.
Plastic bags photo-degrade, disintegrating into minute particles which adsorb toxins
and pose a threat to riparian and marine environments, contaminating the food chain,
water and soil. They are also a menace to marine life, killing birds, marine mammals,
sea turtles and fish each year through ingestion and entanglement.
The vast majority of plastic bags are not recycled, and recycling of plastic bags is not
available on Martha’s Vineyard. Their disposal adds to the Town’s waste management
expense, both through the cost of transporting waste to off-island landfills and
due to their contamination of the single-stream recycling system.
74
Single-use plastic bag ordinances have proven to be effective in reducing plastic bag
consumption and litter and are part of a growing global movement towards sustainability.
The Town is committed to protecting the environment and the public health, safety,
and welfare of its citizens. The goal of this bylaw is to reduce the common use of
plastic checkout bags and to encourage the use of reusable bags by consumers, thereby
reducing local land and marine pollution, advancing solid waste reduction, protecting
the Town’s unique natural beauty and irreplaceable natural resources, and improving
the quality of life for the citizens of the Town.
Definitions
“Checkout Bag” means a bag with or without handles provided by a Store to a customer
at the point of sale that is intended for the purpose of transporting food or merchandise
out of the Store.
“Plastic Checkout Bag” means a plastic Checkout Bag that is less than 4 mils thick
(and, for the avoidance of doubt, includes such plastic bags that are marketed as ‘biodegradable’
or ‘compostable’).
“Recyclable Paper Bag” means a paper bag with or without handles that is 100 percent
recyclable and contains at least 40% post-consumer recycled content (except that
an eight pound or smaller paper bag shall contain a minimum of 20% post-consumer
recycled content) and visibly displays both the word "recyclable" and the percentage
of post-consumer recycled content.
“Reusable Bag” means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured
for multiple reuse and is made of polyester, polypropylene, washable fabric, or
other durable material and, in the case of plastic bags, is at least 4.0 mils in thickness.
“Store” means any commercial enterprise selling goods, food or services directly to
the public, whether for or not for profit, including, but not limited to, convenience and
grocery stores, markets, restaurants, pharmacies, liquor stores, take-out food purveyors,
and merchandise retailers.
Use Regulations
No Store in the Town shall provide to any customer a Plastic Checkout Bag.
If a Store provides Checkout Bags, they may only provide Recyclable Paper Bags or
Reusable Bags.
This bylaw does not apply to the clear or opaque plastic bags without handles provided
to a customer:
a. to transport loose produce, prepared food, bulk food, or small unpackaged
products (e.g. beads and nails or other small hardware items) to the point of sale; or
75
b. to contain or wrap foods to retain moisture or to segregate foods (like meat or
ice cream) or other items to prevent contamination or damage when the items are
placed together in a Recyclable Paper Bag or Reusable Bag.
Stores may charge and retain a fee for any Recyclable Paper Bag or Reusable Bag
that they provide. The fee could be used to recover the costs of the bag and/or as an
incentive to customers to bring their own Reusable Bags. Customers are encouraged
to bring their own Reusable Bags when they shop, and Stores may offer a credit to
customers who bring their own bags.
Administration and Enforcement
4.1 This bylaw may be enforced by an agent of the Board of Health.
4.2 A person, individually or by his servant or agent, who violates any provision
of this bylaw may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. Chapter
40, Section 21D and the Town’s non-criminal disposition bylaw. The following
penalties apply:
first violation: a written warning.
second violation: $50 fine.
third and subsequent violations: $100 fine.
Each day the violation continues constitutes a separate violation.
Effective Date
5.1 This bylaw takes effect on January 1, 2018,or take any other action relating
thereto.
Section 6. Waiver
6.1 The Board of Health may waive the effective date for a Store for up to one year if
that store’s inventory of non-compliant bags will not be able to be used prior to January
1, 2018.
6.2 The Board of Health may, upon written application by a Store, waive the effective
date for that Store for up to one year upon a showing of undue hardship. The cost of
compliant bags shall not constitute undue hardship. The Board of Health shall determine
what constitutes hardship having regard to store design, checkout facilities,
among other concerns. The waiver may be extended for further one year periods for
up to two additional years upon a showing of continued hardship, provided the Board
is satisfied that the Store has taken reasonable steps to achieve compliance.
(Voted ATM April 11, 2017 Article 44. AG APPROVED July 12, 2017 POSTED July
18, 2017
76
“2018 Petition to ban the release of lighter-than-air balloons in Oak Bluffs.
Release of Balloons
(1) No person, nonprofit organization, association, firm or corporation ,shall knowingly
release, organize the release of or intentionally cause to be released into the atmosphere
any helium or other lighter-than-air gas balloons in the Town of Oak
Bluffs. Any violation of this bylaw shall result in a fine of $100.
(2) The provisions of section (1) shall not apply to balloons which are used for the
purpose of carrying scientific instrumentation during the performance of an experiment
or testing procedure or by a person on behalf of a governmental agency or pursuant
to a governmental contract for scientific or meteorological purposes.”
(Petition Article 28 ATM April 10, 2018 AG approved July 6, 2017, Posted July 6,
2017)
TOWN OF OAK BLUFFS
RECODIFIED ZONING BY-LAWS
APRIL 2003
(Includes changes adopted through May, 2019 )
A True Copy
Attest
Town Clerk
ZONING BY-LAWS
TOWN OF OAK BLUFFS, MASSACHUSETTS
SECTION 1.0 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
1.1 PURPOSE
1.2 AUTHORITY
1.3 SCOPE
1.4 APPLICABILITY
1.5 AMENDMENTS
1.6 SEPARABILITY
SECTION 2.0 DISTRICTS
2.1 ESTABLISHMENT
2.2 OVERLAY DISTRICTS
2.3 MAP
2.3.1 Rules for Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries
2.3.2 Amendment of Map
2.4 HEALTH CARE DISTRICT
2.4.1 Purpose
2.4.2 Permitted Uses
2.4.3 Uses by Special Permit
2.4.4 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures
2.4.5 General Regulations
SECTION 3.0 USE REGULATIONS
3.1 PRINCIPAL USES
3.1.1 Key
3.1.2 If Classified Under More Than One Use
3.1.3 Table of Use Regulations See Appendix A
3.2 ACCESSORY USES
3.2.1 Permitted Accessory Uses in All Districts
3.2.2 Nonresidential Accessory Uses in the B1 and B2 Districts
3.2.3 Residential Accessory Uses in All Districts
1. Family Day Care Homes
2. Adult Day Care Homes
3. Boarders in Single-Family Dwelling
4. Contractor’s Yard
5. Storage or Parking of Commercial Landscaping Equipment
6. Overnight Parking of Commercial Vehicles
3.2.4 Home Business – As of Right
3.2.5 Home Business – By Special Permit
3.3 HOME OCCUPATIONS (Section Replaced by 3.2.4 and 3.2.5)
3.4 ACCESSORY OR GUEST APPARTMENTS
3.4.1 Purpose
3.4.2 Conditions
3.4.3 Special Permit
3.5 NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
3.5.1 General
3.5.2 Abandonment
3.5.3 Changes
3.5.4 Exemption
3.5.5 Special Permit
3.5.6 Limitation of Restoration
SECTION 4.0 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
4.1 GENERAL
4.1.1 One Structure per Lot
4.1.2 Change of Lot
4.1.3 Table of Dimensional Requirements.
4.2 SPECIAL DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
4.2.1 Eaves and Steps
4.2.2 Corner Clearances
4.2.3 Special Rules in the B! District
4.2.4 More than One Dwelling on One Lot
4.2.5 Lot Coverage
4.2.6 Special Permit for Height in the HC District
4.2.7 Special Permit for Setbacks Within the R-1 District
4.2.8 Special Permit for Height in the B-1 District
4.3 SPECIAL PERMIT FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
4.3.1 General
4.3.2 Conditions
4.4 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN THE R1, R2, R3 AND R4 DISTRICTS
4.4.1 Less than 100 Square Feet
4.4.2 Less than 500 Square Feet; Used as a Garage
4.4.3 (Withdrawn)
4.4.4 Detached Bedroom
4.4.5 Pools
SECTION 5.0 GENERAL REGULATIONS
5.1 OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
5.1.1 General
5.1.2 Applicability
5.1.3 Required Off-Street Parking Spaces in the B1 District
5.1.4 Special Permit
5.1.5 Special Permit in the B-1 District
1. Purpose
2. Required Parking
3. Special Permit
4. Payment in Lieu
5.1.6 Shared Parking
5.2 LOADING AREAS
5.2.1 General
5.2.2 Layout & Design
5.2.3 Special Permit
5.3 SIGNS
5.3.1 Purpose
5.3.2 Definitions
5.3.3 Applicability
5.3.4 Sign Permits
5.3.5 Design Standards and Guidelines
5.3.6 Prohibited Signs
5.3.7 Signs Allowed in all Districts
1. Architectural Signs
2. Awning Signs
3. Directory Signs
4. Parking & Directional Signs
5. Agricultural Signs
6. Temporary Signs
a. Construction Signs
b. Exterior of Building Sign
c. Oak Bluffs Events Sign
d. Window Signs
e. Theater Signs
f. Menu and Announcement Signs
g. Vehicular Signs
7. Temporary Signs That Do Not Require A Permit
a. Political Signs
b. Real Estate Signs
5.3.8 Regulations for Residential Districts
5.3.9 Regulations for Business Districts
5.3.10 Signs Requiring Special Permits in Business Districts
5.3.11 Pre-existing Non-conforming Signs
5.3.12 Advisory Sign Review Board
5.3.13 Penalty
5.3.14 Owner’s Consent
5.4 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
5.4.1 General
5.4.2 Noise
5.4.3 Solid Waste Storage
5.4.4 Miscellaneous Standards
5.4.5 Erosion Control
5.5 GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
5.5.1 Purpose
5.5.2 Applicability
5.5.3 Landscaping Requirements for Certain Property Laws in the B-1 and B-
2 Districts
5.5.4 Coordination with Site Plan Approval
5.5.5 Maintenance of Landscaped Areas
SECTION 6.0 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
6.1 WIND ENERGY GENERATING FACILITY REGULATIONS
6.1.1 Regulations
6.1.2 Applicability
6.1.3 Definitions
6.1.4 Land Based Wind Energy Facilities Categories
6.1.5 General Requirements For The Installation of Any Wind Facility
6.1.5.1 Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations
6.1.5.2 Technical Requirements
6.1.5.3 Safety Wires
6.1.5.4 Wind Speed Controls
6.1.5.5 Towers
6.1.5.6 Connections
6.1.5.7 Monitoring
6.1.5.8 Site Clearing
6.1.5.9 Land Clearing
6.1.5.10 Rooftop Systems
6.1.5.11 Efficiency
6.1.5.12 Interference
6.1.6 Regulations
6.1.6.1 Private Wind Facilities
6.1.6.2 Municipal Wind Energy Generating Facilities
6.1.7 Special Permit
6.1.8 Terms of Use
6.1.8.1 Decommissioning
6.1.8.2 Removal Requirements
6.1.8.3 Abandonment
6.1.8.4 Surety
6.2 Windmills (Replaced by 6.1)
6.3 Unregistered Motor Vehicles
6.4 Trailers
6.4.1 General
6.4.2 Exception
6.4.3 Nonconforming Trailers
6.4.4 Parking or Storage of Trailers
SECTION 7.0 SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL REGULATIONS
7.1 CONVERSION TO DUPLEX
7.1.1 General
7.1.2 Conditions
7.2 CONVERSION OF AN EXISTING BUILDING TO MIXED USE
(COMMERCIAL WITH APARTMENT UNITS)
7.2.1 Overall
7.2.1.1 Purpose
7.2.1.2 Mixed-Use Special Permit
7.2.1.3 Waivers
7.2.2 Conversion of Existing One and Two-Story Building
7.2.3 Conversion of Existing Three-Story Building to Apartment Units
7.2.4 Conversion and Expansion or Tear Down and Re-Build with Expansion of
Existing Building to Apartment Units
7.2.5 Mixed Use / Apartments in B-1 District
7.2.5.1 Conditions
7.2.5.2 Historic
7.2.6 STANDARDS FOR MIXED-USE (MU) SPECIAL PERMIT
7.2.6.1 General Standards
7.2.6.2 Drainage and Stormwater Management
7.2.6.3 Internal Roadways, Walkways, Paths and Parking Areas
7.2.6.4 Parking
7.2.6.5 Service Access, Including Deliveries and Trash Removal
7.2.6.6 Wastewater Management
7.2.6.7 Utilities
7.3 FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT
7.3.1 Purpose
7.3.2 Definitions
7.3.3 Applicability
7.3.4 Procedures
7.3.5 Design Process
7.3.6 Modification of Lot Requirements
7.3.7 Basic Maximum Number of Dwelling Units
7.3.8 Density Bonus
7.3.9 Affordable Component
7.3.10 Types of Buildings
7.3.11 Roads
7.3.12 Parking
7.3.13 Contiguous Open Space
7.3.14 Ownership of the Contiguous Open Space
7.3.15 Buffer Areas
7.3.16 Stormwater Management
7.3.17 Decision
7.3.18 Relation to Other Requirements
SECTION 8.0 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
8.1 FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT (FPOD)
8.1.1 Statement of Purpose
8.1.2 Floodplain Overlay District Bounderies
8.1.3 Scope of Authority
8.1.3.1 Notification of Watercourse Alterations
8.1.3.2 Other use Regulations
8.1.4 Permitted Uses
8.1.5 Permitted Uses by Special Permit
8.1.6 Prohibited Uses
8.1.7 General Administration
8.1.8 Special Permit Administration
8.1.9 Regulations
8.1.10 Fees
8.1.11 Severability
8.1.12 Definitions
8.2 WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
8.2.1 Legislative Findings and Purpose
8.2.2 Definitions
8.2.3 Location
8.2.4 Prohibited Uses
8.2.5 Permitted Uses
8.2.6 Uses by Special Permit
8.2.7 Special Permit Granting Authority
8.2.8 Non-conforming Uses
8.2.9 Violations
8.3 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION OVERLAY DISTRICT (WCOD)
8.3.1 Purpose
8.3.2 Location
8.3.3 Applicability
8.3.4 Uses Available by Special Permit
8.3.5 Conditions
8.3.6 Submittal Requirements
8.4 REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY OVERLAY DISTRICT
(RMOD)
8.4.1 Purpose
8.4.2 Locations
8.4.3 Applicability
8.4.4 Definitions
8.4.5 General Requirements and Conditions for all Registered Marijuana
Dispensary
8.4.6 Special Permit Requirements
8.5 MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (MEOD)
8.5.1 Purpose
8.5.2 Locations
8.5.3 Applicability
8.5.4 Definitions
8.5.5 General Requirements and Conditions for all Marijuana Establishments
8.5.6 Special Permit Requirements
SECTION 9.0 DISTRICTS OF CRITICAL PLANNING CONCERN
(RENUMBER WITHOUT CHANGING THE TEXT OF SECTIONS XIII AND
XVIII AS NEW SECTION 9.0 AND INSERT HERE)
SECTION 10.0 ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
10.1 ADMINISTRATION
10.1.1 Permits
10.1.2 Enforcement
10.1.3 Penalties
10.2 BOARD OF APPEALS
10.2.1 Establishment
10.2.2 Powers
10.2.3 Regulations
10.2.4 Fees
10.3 SPECIAL PERMITS
10.3.1 Special Permit Granting Authority
10.3.2 Criteria
10.3.3 Procedures
10.3.4 Conditions
10.3.5 Plans
10.3.6 Regulations
10.3.7 Fees
10.3.8 Lapse
10.4 SITE PLAN REVIEW
10.4.1 Applicability
10.4.2 Exemptions
10.4.3 Procedures
10.4.4 Preparation of Plans
10.4.5 Contents of Plan
10.4.6 Waiver of Technical Compliance
10.4.7 Minor Site Plan
10.4.8 Approval
10.4.9 Lapse
10.4.10 Regulations
10.4.11 Fee
10.4.12 Appeal
SECTION 11.0 DEFINITIONS
SECTION 12.O SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
12.1 Purpose
12.2 General requirements
12.3 Solar Energy Systems Permitted by Right.
12.3.1. Building-Mounted and/or Integrated Solar Energy System
12.3.2. Ground-Mounted and/or Pole-Mounted Solar Energy System
12.4 Solar Energy Systems Allowed by Special Permit.
12.4.1. Special Permits
12.4.2. Required documents
12.5 Further requirements for large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems.
12.5.1 Large-scale systems
12.5.2 Design Standards
12.5.3 Safety and Environmental Standards.
12.5.4 Monitoring and Maintenance.
12.6 Special districts and uses
12.6.1. Agricultural land.
12.6.2. Contiguous open spaces
12.6.3. Community-shared solar energy system.
1
SECTION 1.0 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY
1.1 PURPOSE
These regulations are enacted to promote the general welfare of the Town, to protect the health
and safety of its inhabitants, to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the town, to
preserve the cultural, historical and agricultural heritage of the community, to increase the
amenities of the town, and to reduce the hazard from fire by regulating the location and use of
buildings and the area of open space around them, all as authorized by, but not limited by, the
provisions of the Zoning Act, G.L. c. 40A, as amended, and Section 2A of 1975 Mass. Acts 808.
1.2 AUTHORITY
This Zoning By-law is enacted pursuant to the authority provided by General Laws, Chapter 40A,
and any and all amendments thereto, and by Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
1.3 SCOPE
For these purposes, the construction, repair, alteration, reconstruction, height, number of stories,
and size of buildings and structures, the size and width of lots, the percentage of lot area that may
be occupied, the size of yards, courts, and other open spaces, the density of population, and the
location and use of buildings, structures and land in the Town are regulated as hereinafter
provided.
1.4 APPLICABILITY
All buildings or structures hereinafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or moved, and the
use of all premises in the Town, shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning By-law.
No building, structure or land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than is
expressly permitted within the district in which such building, structure or land is located. Where
the application of this By-Law imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by any other
regulations, permits, restrictions, easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this
By-law shall control. Uses not expressly allowed are prohibited.
1.5 AMENDMENTS
This By-law may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition, or repeal by the Town
Meeting in the manner provided in G.L. c. 40A, s.5, and any amendments thereto.
2
1.6 SEPARABILITY
The invalidity of any section or provision of this By-law shall not invalidate any other section or
provision herein.
SECTION 2.0 DISTRICTS
2.1 ESTABLISHMENT
For the purpose of this By-law, the Town is divided into the types of zoning districts set forth
below:
Residence One R1
Residence Two R2
Residence Three R3
Residence Four R4
Business One B1
Business Two B2
Health Care HC
2.2 OVERLAY DISTRICTS
In addition, the following overlay districts are also hereby established:
Section 8.0: (Amended 4.12.06 ATM Art 18, AG approved and published 7.17.06)
Map of the Oak Bluffs Massachusetts
Water Protection Overlay District January 2006
Flood Plain FPOD
Wireless Communication
Overlay District WCOD
Section 9.0:
Districts of Critical
Planning Concern DCPC
3
Article 23. Voted unanimously to delete the current FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT
BOUNDARIES AND BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND FLOODWAY DATA and adopt the
following FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT BOUNDARIES AND BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND
FLOODWAY DATA.
SECTION A. FLOODPLAIN DISTRICT BOUNDARIES AND BASE FLOOD
ELEVATION DATA
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district. The Floodplain Overlay
District (FPOD) includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Oak Bluffs
designated as Zone A, AE, AO, V, or VE on the Dukes County Federal Insurance Rate Map
(FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the
administration of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The map panels of the
Dukes County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Oak Bluffs are panel
numbers 25007C0102H, 25007C0103H, 25007C0104H, 25007C0106H, 25007C0108H,
25007C0111H, 25007C0112H, 25007C0116H, dated July 6 2010. The exact boundaries of
the District may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and
further defined by the Dukes County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 6, 2010.
The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the
conservation commission and the zoning administrator.
SECTION B. BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals
or other developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, within
unnumbered A zones. (Amended ATM 4.13.10 Art. 23, AG Approved 8.30.10, Published
9.14.10)
StormSmart Coasts Committee
2.3 MAP
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are hereby established as shown on a map
entitled, "Oak Bluffs Zoning Map," approved by the Attorney General on May 21, 2002. Said
map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk. All explanatory legend and memoranda thereon or
attached thereto are hereby declared to be a part of this By-law. Any change in the location of
boundaries of a zoning district hereafter made through the amendments of this By-law shall be
indicated by the alteration of such Map, and the Map, thus altered, is declared to be a part of the
By-law thus amended. Photographic reductions of this Zoning Map may serve as copies of the
Zoning Map.
Article 13. Voted in excess of the 2/3rds required to amend the “Oak Bluffs Zoning Map”, as
defined in 2.3 of the Oak Bluffs Zoning By-laws, by altering the boundary between the B-1
Zoning District and the R-1 Zoning district so as to include the property known as 52 Narragansett
Ave (Assessors Map 11, Parcel 25) within the B-1 Zoning District.
Yes 97 No 37. (Amended STM 1.18.05 Art 13, AG Approved 2.23.05, Published 3.11.06)
4
Petitioned Article
Article 8. Voted in excess of the required 2/3rds to amend the Oak Bluffs Zoning Map by
adding Assessors Map 7, Parcel 2 (82 Eastville Avenue) to the Health Care District (HCD).
(Amended STM 10.20.09 Art 8, AG Approved 11.24.09, Published 12.8.09)
Petitioned Article
2.3.1. Rules for Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries. Where uncertainties exist as to
the boundaries of districts as shown on the Zoning Map (Map) the following shall apply:
1. Where the boundary lines are shown upon the Map within the side lines of public and
private ways, railroads or water courses, the center lines of such ways shall be the
boundary lines.
2. Where the boundary lines are shown upon the Map, approximately on the location of
property or lot lines, and the exact location of property, lot or boundary lines is not
indicated by means of dimensions shown in figures, then the property or lot lines shall be
the boundary lines.
3. Boundary lines located outside of such lines of public and private ways and shown
approximately parallel thereto shall be regarded as parallel to such side lines and
dimensions shown in figures on the Map between such boundary lines and side lines of
public and private ways are the distances in feet of such boundary lines from such side
lines, such distances being measured at right angles to such side lines unless otherwise
indicated.
4. In all cases which are not covered by other provisions of this Section, the location of
boundary lines shall be determined by the distance in feet, if given, from other lines upon
said Map, by the use of identifications as shown on the Map, or by the scale of the Map.
5. Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was, as a matter of record, in
existence on the effective date of this chapter, the Board of Appeals may permit, by special
permit, the extension of the regulations of the less restricted district a distance not to
exceed 30 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot in the more
restricted district.
6. Where boundary lines are contour lines they are of indicated elevation above the datum
mean sea level of the U.S. Geological Survey.
2.3.2 Amendment of Map. Any change of the Zoning Map shall constitute an amendment of this
By-law and the procedure for making such a change shall conform to the requirements for
5
amending this By-law.
2.4 Health Care District (Section added 4.12.06 ATM Art 20, AG approved and published
7.17.06)
2.4.1 Purpose
The Health Care District is intended primarily for health care related uses, including but
not limited to the following: hospitals, physicians offices, nursing and convalescent
homes, long term care facilities, laboratories, elder and child care establishments,
substance abuse services, and other uses associated with the maintenance and restoration
of the physical and mental well-being of the residents of and visitors to Martha’s Vineyard
and other uses ancillary thereto.
2.4.2 Permitted Uses
In the Health Care District, no building or structure shall be constructed or altered, and no
building(s), structure(s), or premises shall be used for any purpose except:
2.4.2.1 Any uses authorized in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Residential Districts
2.4.2.2 A health care related use, consistent with the purposes set forth in Section
2.4.1 above and so long as the total floor area of all structures in the Health Care
District used for health care related uses does not exceed 100,000 square feet.
2.4.3 Uses by Special Permit
At any time that the total floor area of all health care related uses in the Health Care
District exceeds 100,000 square feet, any additional or expanded health care related use(s)
may only be granted by Special Permit, The Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit
for such health care related use(s). In determining whether to grant such a Special Permit,
the Board of Appeals shall consider the factors set forth in Section 10.3 of this By-law.
2.4.4 Permitted Accessory Uses and Structures Within the Healthcare District
Any use which is customarily accessory, subsidiary, and incidental to a permitted principal
use, or any use which is supportive of or reasonably necessary for a permitted use shall be
permitted on the same lot with said principal use.
2.4.5 General Regulations
It shall be permissible to erect more than one (1) structure on a single lot in the Health
Care District provided that the dimensional requirements of this Section 2.4 and Appendix
B are met for such structures.
SECTION 3.0 USE REGULATIONS
3.1 PRINCIPAL USES
6
No land shall be used and no structure shall be erected or used except as set forth in the following
Table of Use Regulations, including the notes to the Schedule, or as otherwise set forth herein, or
as exempted by General Laws. Any building or use of premises not herein expressly permitted is
hereby prohibited.
3.1.1 Key. In the Table of Use Regulations, the following terms shall be employed:
Y - Permitted as of right
N - Prohibited
BA - Special permit/Board of Appeals
PB - Special Permit/Planning Board
SB - Special Permit/Selectboard
3.1.2 If Classified Under More than One Use. Where an activity may be classified as more than
one of the principal uses listed in the Table of Use Regulations, the more specific classification
shall determine permissibility; if equally specific, the more restrictive shall govern.
3.1.3 Table of Use Regulations. SEE APPENDIX A.
3.2 ACCESSORY USES
3.2.1 Permitted Accessory Uses in All Districts. The following accessory uses are specifically
permitted as of right or by special permit:
1. Accessory Scientific Uses. Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities
permitted as a matter of right, which are necessary in connection with scientific research or
scientific development or related production, may be permitted upon the issuance of a
special permit by the Board of Appeals, provided that the Board finds that the proposed
use does not substantially derogate from the public good.
2. Wireless Communication Equipment. Wireless communications equipment may be
placed on any appropriate existing structure, including a monopole authorized by special
permit in the Wireless Communication Overlay District, upon site plan approval by the
Planning Board. Such equipment may be placed upon or inside existing buildings or
structures, including water tanks and towers, church spires, electrical transmission lines,
and the like. In such cases, the facility height shall not exceed two (2) feet above the
7
height of the existing structure or building. The construction of new monopoles shall be
regulated by Section 8.3, herein.
3.2.2 Nonresidential Accessory Uses in the B1 and B2 Districts. Any use permitted as a
principal use is also permitted as an accessory use provided such use is customarily incidental to
the main or principal building or use of the land. Any use authorized as a principal use by special
permit may also be authorized as an accessory use by special permit provided such use is
customarily incidental to the main or principal building or use of the land. Any use not allowed in
the district as a principal use is also prohibited as an accessory use. Accessory uses are permitted
only in accordance with lawfully existing principal uses. In all instances where site plan review
and approval is required for a principal use, the addition of any new accessory use to the principal
use, where such addition exceeds the thresholds established in Section 10.4, shall also require site
plan review and approval.
3.2.3 Residential Accessory Uses in All Districts. (Amended 4.12.06 ATM Art.16, AG approved
and published 7.17.06)
Home businesses are allowed in accordance with Section 3.2.4 herein upon fulfillment of the
application, fee, and all other requirements. The following specific uses are permitted as of right
or by special permit when accessory to a residence in all districts as set forth herein.
1. Family Day Care Homes. Small family day care homes, are allowed as an accessory
use as of right. Large family day care homes may be authorized upon the grant of a special
permit by the Board of Appeals.
2. Adult Day Care Homes. Small adult day care (up to six nonresident adults
over the age of sixteen (16) may be offered as an accessory use of right; large
adult day care (seven or more nonresident adults over the age of 16) may be
authorized as an accessory use upon the grant of a special permit by the Board of
Appeals (Added STM 12.2.03, AG Approved 3.26.04, Published 4.9.04)
3. Boarders in Single-Family Dwelling. The renting of rooms and/or furnishing
of board to not more than three unrelated persons in a single family dwelling by the
owner/occupant thereof shall be a permitted accessory use. The renting of rooms and/or
furnishing of board to four or more unrelated persons shall be deemed a boarding house
subject to the provisions of the Table of Regulations and G.L. c. 140 s. 22. (Added STM
12.2.03, AG Approved 3.26.04, Published 4.9.04)
4. Contractor’s Yard. The use of a residential premises as a place for the storage of
building materials or equipment is permitted as an accessory use on a parcel larger than 2
Acres as of right after site plan approval by the Planning Board, or by special permit of the
Board of Selectmen on a smaller parcel. (Added STM 12.2.03, AG Approved 3.26.04,
Published 4.9.04)
8
5. Storage or Parking of Commercial Landscaping Equipment. The use of
a residential premises as a place for the storage or parking of commercial landscaping
equipment or supplies is permitted as an accessory use on a parcel larger than 2 Acres as of
right after site plan approval by the Planning Board or by special permit of the Board of
Selectmen on a smaller parcel. (Added STM 12.2.03, AG Approved 4.26.04, Published 4.9.04)
6. Overnight Parking of Commercial Vehicles. (Added STM 12.2.03, AG Approved
3.26.04, Published 4.9.04)
The use of residential premises as a place for the overnight parking of commercial vehicles
owned or operated by a resident of the premises is authorized as an accessory use, subject to
the following limitations:
a. One or two commercial vehicles less than 15,000 gvw are allowed as
of right.
b. three or more commercial vehicles less than 15,000 gvw are allowed by special
permit of the Board of Selectmen.
c. One or two commercial vehicles more than 15,000 gvw but less than 26,000 gvw
may be allowed by special permit of the Board of Selectmen.
3.2.4 Home Business – As of Right (Section added ATM 4.12.06 Art.16 – Replacing section
former 3.3, AG approved and published 7.17.06)
One (1) home occupation may be conducted by the resident owner of a premises as of right upon
fulfillment of the application, fee, and all other requirements, provided that it meets all of the
following conditions:
Such business shall:
1. be conducted solely within a dwelling and solely by the person(s) occupying the
dwelling as a primary residence;
2. be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential purposes;
3. not produce offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, lighting, electrical
interference, radioactive emission or environmental pollution in accordance with the provision in
Section5.0;
4. not utilize exterior storage of material or equipment (including the parking of
commercial vehicles) except as may be otherwise allowed by the Zoning By-law;
5. not exhibit any exterior indication of its presence or and variation from residential
appearance;
6. not produce any customer, pupil, client or delivery trips to the occupation site and has
no non-residential employees; and
7. be registered as a business with the Town Clerk.
3.2.5 Home Business – By Special Permit
One (1) home occupation may be conducted by the resident owner of a premises upon the grant of
9
a Special Permit by the Board of Selectmen upon fulfillment of the application, fee, and all other
requirements. Such Special permit shall expire at the transfer of the property. Such Special Permit
shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. No more than three (3) persons (excluding members of the family residing on the
premises) shall be employed on the premises in the home occupation;
2. Such business shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for
residential purposes;
3. Except for a permitted sign, there shall be no exterior display or exterior storage of
merchandise, material or equipment and no indication of the home occupation or variation from
the residential character of the area;
4. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, heat or glare shall be produced;
5. Traffic generated shall not exceed volumes normally found in residential
neighborhoods;
6. Parking generated shall be accommodated off-street other than in a required front yard
and shall be limited to five (5) parking spaces;
7. Such parking shall be screened from the street and all adjoining lots so as not to vary
from the residential character of the area;
8. All home businesses shall conform to the rules and regulations of the Oak Bluffs Board
of Health;
9. There shall be no retailing, wholesaling or rental of items not principally produced on
the premises unless incidental to other allowed activities;
10. Items left for service shall be stored indoors within the prescribed area(s) set forth in
subsection 12.
11. A home business shall be limited to not more than five (5) customers or persons
utilizing a service on the premises at any one time;
12. The area used for a home business shall be limited to one of the following:
a. 750 sq. ft. within a dwelling
b. 750 sq .ft. within an accessory building
c. 750 sq .ft. within any combination of dwelling and accessory building.
13. The owner of any home business legally existing at the time of the adoption of this Bylaw
must register with the Town Clerk within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this By-law;
14. If the owner of a legally pre-existing home business wishes to change or expand the
home business s/he must apply for a Special Permit.
3.3 HOME OCCUPATIONS (Section replaced STM 12.2.03 Art 15, AG Approved 3.26.04,
Published 4.9.04)(This section was deleted and replaced by above section 3.2.4 and 3.2.5 at the
4.12.06 ATM Art. 16, AG approved and published 7.17.06).
3.4 ACCESSORY OR GUEST APARTMENTS
3.4.1 Purpose. For the purpose of (a) providing small additional dwelling units to rent without
adding to the number of buildings in the Town, or substantially altering the appearance of the
Town, (b) providing alternative housing options for elder residents, and (c) enabling owners of
10
single family dwellings larger than required for their present needs, particularly elderly
homeowners, to share space and the burdens of home ownership, an accessory or guest apartment
is a permitted use in the R1, R2 and R3 Districts, subject to the following conditions:.
3.4.2 Conditions. The Building Commissioner shall verify that all of the following conditions
have been met:
1. A plot plan of the existing dwelling unit and proposed accessory apartment shall be
submitted, showing the location of the building on the lot, proposed accessory apartment,
location of any septic system and required parking. A mortgage inspection survey shall be
sufficient to meet this requirement.
2. The house must have been owner occupied by the applicant for the five previous years
and must continue to be owner occupied after the conversion is allowed. An affidavit shall
be provided stating that one of the two dwelling units shall be occupied by the owner of
the property, except for bona fide temporary absence; seasonal occupation by the owner
shall not disqualify the applicant.
3. Not more than one accessory apartment may be established on a lot. The accessory
apartment shall not exceed 750 sq. ft. in floor space and shall be located in the principal
residential structure on the premises or in an accessory structure.
4. There must be at least 7500 square feet of open space on the lot which is unpaved and
unoccupied by any structure.
5. The external appearance of the structure in which the accessory apartment is to be
located shall not be significantly altered from the appearance of a single-family structure.
6. Sufficient and appropriate space for at least one (1) additional parking space shall be
constructed by the owner to serve the accessory apartment. Said parking space shall be
constructed of materials consistent with the existing driveway and shall have vehicular
access to the driveway.
7. No permits under this section may be granted within the coastal district.
3.4.3 Special Permit. If the applicant is unable to satisfy one or more of the conditions set forth
above, the Board of Appeals may, by special permit authorize such dwelling unit. Such special
permit may be granted by the Board of Appeals only upon a finding that the construction and
occupancy of the apartment will not be detrimental to the neighborhood in which the lot is located
and after consideration of the factors specified in Section 10.3 of this Zoning By-Law, governing
special permits.
11
3.5 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES (Section replaced 4.12.05 Art. 17, AG
Approved 7.13.05, Published 7.26.05)
3.5.1 General. Except as hereinafter provided, a zoning by-law shall not apply to structures or
uses lawfully in existence or lawfully begun, or to applications made for Permits, Special Permits
and Building Permits submitted before the first publication of the notice of public hearing on such
by-law. This Zoning By-law shall apply except as provided herein to the following:
1. Any change or substantial extension of a non-conforming use.
2. Reconstruction extension or structural change of a non-conforming use.
3. Any alteration of a structure begun after the first publication of notice of
public hearing of the by-law.
3.5.2 Abandonment. A non-conforming use which has been abandoned for a period of two (2)
years shall not be reestablished and any future use shall conform with the Oak Bluffs Zoning By-
Laws.
3.5.3 Changes. Once changed to a conforming use, no structure shall be permitted to revert back
to a non-conforming use, except where this by-law makes provisions for Special Permit
consideration.
3.5.4 Exemption. Where alteration, reconstruction, extension or structural change to a single or
two family residential structure does not increase the non-conforming nature, neither public
hearing nor Special Permit from the Board of Appeals is required for said alteration,
reconstruction, extension or structural change.
3.5.5 Special Permit. No pre-existing non-conforming uses and structures shall be changed,
moved or extended and no pre-existing non-conforming uses and structures or buildings shall be
altered or enlarged or replaced by a new building except as permitted in Section 3.5.4, 3.5.6 and
G.L. c. 40A, s.6 unless, upon application to the Board of Appeals for a Special Permit, the Board
of Appeals has made a finding that such change, extension or alteration shall not be substantially
more detrimental than the existing non-conforming use or structure to the neighborhood.
3.5.6 Limitation of Restoration. In the case that any non-conforming building is damaged by
fire or any other cause, restoration work must be undertaken within two (2) years of the time
damage is inflicted unless, upon application to the Board of Appeals, it can be shown that
restoration within the time limit is impossible, in which case extension of time may be granted. In
the event that a non-conforming building is destroyed or damaged by fire or other cause, the same
may be reconstructed or repaired on the same location for the same or less conforming use,
provided that the new building may be equal in extent and character to the original structure
12
SECTION 4.0 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
4.1 GENERAL
No structure shall be erected or used, premises used, or lot changed in size or shape except in
conformity with the requirements of this section, unless otherwise exempted by this By-Law or by
statute.
4.1.1 One Structure per Lot. Except as otherwise provided herein, not more than one principal
structure may be placed on any lot.
4.1.2 Change of Lot. No existing conforming or non-conforming lot shall be changed in size or
shape except through a public land taking or donation for road widening, drainage, or utility
improvements or except where otherwise permitted herein, so as to create a non-conformity or
increase the degree of non-conformity that presently exists. If land is subdivided, conveyed,
devised or otherwise transferred in violation hereof, no building or other permit shall be issued
with reference to said transferred land until the lot retained meets the requirements of this By-
Law.
4.1.3 Table of Dimensional Requirements. See Appendix B.
4.2 SPECIAL DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
4.2.1 Eaves and Steps. Projecting eaves and uncovered steps shall not be governed by this
Section 4.0.
4.2.2 Corner Clearances. On a corner lot no fence, wall, structure, planting shrubbery or foliage
more than 30" in height above the plan of the established grade of the streets shall be erected in
any part of a yard herein established, that is included within the street lines at points which are
twenty (20) feet distance from their point of intersection measured along said street lines, which
would materially obstruct the view of a driver of a vehicle approaching a street intersection.
4.2.3 Special Rules in the B1 District. Any structure in existence at the time of the enactment of
this Zoning By-law that is higher than 35 feet or within 5 feet of the front lot line shall not be
considered a non-conforming structure for the purposes of any proposed alteration or change to
said structure.
4.2.4 More than One Dwelling on One Lot. No permit shall be granted for more than one
dwelling structure per parcel or defined lot of land, unless each such structure complies with lot
area requirements without counting any land twice, and the Planning Board certifies that each
structure will be provided with access and utilities in the same manner as otherwise required for
lots within a subdivision.
13
4.2.5 Lot Coverage. No permit shall be granted for the construction of a new dwelling that
would occupy more than one third of the lot area.
4.2.6 Special Permit for Height in the HC District. Notwithstanding the provisions of the
Table of Dimensional Requirements, the Board of Appeals may authorize by the grant of a special
permit a structure not higher than fifty (50) feet. In addition to the criteria set forth in Section
10.3.2, the Board of Appeals shall consider the impact of such height increase and accompanying
shadows on neighboring properties and view corridors. (Section added 4.12.05 Art.16, AG
Approved 7.13.05, Published 7.26.05)(Section renumbered ATM 4.12.06 Art 19, AG approved
and published 7.17.06)
4.2.7 Special Permit for Setbacks Within the R-1 District. The purpose of this provision is to
maintain the historic character of the buildings and the streetscapes within an area consisting
primarily of historic structures on very small lots and with much smaller setbacks than those
required by current zoning regulations.
Within those sections of the R-1 Residential District consisting of the Copeland Overlay District
Sections A, B, C, and D, the Board of Appeals may grant Special Permit relief from the
requirements for the front setback(s) of a lot. (Section added 4.12.06 ATM Art 22, AG approved
and published 7.17.06)
4.2.8 Special Permit for Height in the B-1 District
The height of a building in the B-1 District shall not exceed 35 (thirty-five) feet except for the
purpose of restoring or reproducing Victorian architectural features such as turrets or towers
and/or decorative elements that extend above the main roof line. The Board of Appeals may grant
a Special Permit in excess of 35 (thirty five) feet in dimensional height for such purpose if
determined to be historically appropriate. In considering the Special Permit application, the Board
of Appeals shall request comments from the Oak Bluffs Historical Commission on the
appropriateness of the application. (Section added ATM 4.12.06 Art 21, AG approved and
published 7.17.06)
4.3 SPECIAL PERMIT FOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
4.3.1 General. The Planning Board may grant a special permit for the construction of an
affordable dwelling unit on a lot having not less than five thousand square feet, subject to the
following conditions.
4.3.2 Conditions.
1. The unit shall be sold at a price affordable to a household or person in Dukes County
under the applicable guidelines of the Commonwealth's Department of Housing and
Community Development earning not more than 80% median income. If the unit is to be
14
constructed and occupied by the original applicant for the special permit, such applicant
shall meet the income guidelines applicable for the sale of such unit and the unit shall be
deemed to have a value no greater than the limits established by the Department for resale
purposes.
2. The unit shall be deed restricted for a period of not less than THIRTY (30) years as
affordable for persons or families in Dukes County under the applicable guidelines of the
Commonwealth's Department of Housing and Community Development earning less than
80% of the median income.
3. Prior to the sale or any subsequent sale of the unit, deed restrictions complying with the
terms set forth above shall be approved as to form by the Board’s legal counsel.
4. The lot shall be served by municipal water.
5. The structure shall meet the front setback requirement. The side and rear yard
requirements for the district may be adjusted by special permit of the Planning Board.
6. Nothing herein shall be construed to waive otherwise applicable provisions of G.L. c.
40A, s. 6, Para. 4, governing the merger of lots.
4.4 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES IN THE R1, R2, R3 AND R4 DISTRICTS
(Amended 4/12/06 ATM Art. 15.)
4.4.1 Less than 100 Square Feet. The minimum setback between any
shed of one hundred (100) square feet or less and any lot line other
than the street line shall be five (5) feet.
4.4.2 Less than 500 Square Feet; Used as a Garage: The minimum
setback between any structure of five hundred (500) square feet or
less used solely as a garage, and any lot line other than the street
line shall be ten (10) feet.
4.4.4 Detached Bedroom: (Added 4.12.06 ATM Art 15, AG approved and published
7.17.06)
In any residential district, a detached bedroom is allowed by Special Permit
issued by the Board of Appeals. A detached bedroom is defined as either a
free-standing structure or a bedroom over a non-habitable accessory
structure with all of the conditions set forth in Section 3.4.2 and the
following:
1. Bedroom and bathroom only
2. No sitting room(s), no entrance alcove(s), no hallways
3. Living space to be no larger than four hundred (400) square feet,
including but not limited to bathroom, closet(s) and enclosed porches
15
4. Bathroom plumbing only. Only one (1) each hand sink, toilet and
tub/shower
5. No stove or refrigerator
6. There must be at least seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of
open space on the lot which is unpaved and unoccupied by any structure
7. Building Official is allowed right of entry for compliance inspection
4.4.5 Pools (Section added 4.12.06 ATM Art 17, AG approved and published 7.17.06)
4.4.5.1 General A swimming pool may be considered accessory to the use of a
residence, subject to the following conditions:
4.4.5.2 Conditions
1. Such pool is used solely by the residents and their guests;
2. Except by Special Permit from the ZBA, no portion of the pool may be located
within 20’ of any property bound in zoning districts R1 & R2 and 50’ in R3 & R4.
3. The pool is securely fenced and the enclosure shall meet the requirements of
780CMR 421.9; and
4. Such pool must meet all Board of Health setback requirements for septic and any
other applicable regulations.
SECTION 5.0 GENERAL REGULATIONS
5.1 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
5.1.1 General. Required parking shall be provided on the same lot as the main use it is to serve.
All required parking spaces shall be 9' x 18'.
5.1.2 Applicability. In the B1 District only, no structure shall be changed from residential to
nonresidential or multifamily use and no permit to construct or enlarge a business structure shall
be issued unless adequate off-street parking is provided and approved by the Planning Board.
5.1.3 Required Off-Street Parking Spaces in the B1 District.
1. Retail sales and services establishments: one parking space for each 100 sq. ft. of new
floor area for the first 500 sq. ft. and one parking space for each additional new 200 sq. ft.
2. Places of public assembly: one parking space for every additional five seats within.
3. Restaurants, Theaters, Halls, Clubs: one parking space for each additional four seats.
4. Office or professional use: one parking space for each 150 sq. ft. of new gross floor
area.
5. Inns, hotel or guest houses: one parking space for each 24 of the first additional five
16
bedrooms and one parking space for each three additional bedrooms.
6. Other undefined uses: the number of parking spaces required will be determined by the
Planning Board after evaluating the projected demands.
5.1.4 Special Permit. (Section replaced STM 12.2.03 Art 16, AG Approved 3.26.04, Published
4.9.04) Except in the B-1 District, any parking requirements set forth herein may be reduced upon the
issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board if the Board finds that the reduction is not
inconsistent with public health and safety, or that the reduction promotes a public benefit. Such cases
might include:
a. Use of a common parking lot for separate uses having peak demands occurring
at different times.
b. Age or other characteristics of occupants of the facility requiring parking
which reduces auto usage.
c. Peculiarities of the use which make usual measures of demand invalid.
d. Availability of on street parking or parking at nearby municipally owned
facilities.
e. Where a special permit is granted, a reserve area to be maintained indefinitely
as landscaped open space may be required sufficient to accommodate the
difference between the spaces otherwise required and the spaces reduced by
special permit. The parking/site plan shall show (in dotted outline) how the
reserve area would be laid out to provide the otherwise required number of
spaces.
5.1.5 Special Permit in the B-1 District. (Section added STM 12.2.03 Art 16, AG Approved
3.26.04, Published 4.9.04)
1. Purpose. The B-1 District is the business area of Oak Bluffs. Parking
generally provided on street to shoppers and business employees. This bylaw
has been adopted pursuant to M.G.L. c. 40A, s 9 in order to authorize
an increase in intensity of uses in the B-1 District where the applicant
provides traffic and pedestrian improvements and other amenities.
2. Required Parking Uses in the B-1 District shall meet the off street
parking requirements set forth in Section 5.1.1, herein
3. Special Permit Where a proposed use in the B-1 District cannot meet the
off street parking requirements set forth in Section 5.1.1 such off street
parking requirements may be waived by special permit granted by the
Planning Board where the applicant makes a payment in lieu to the Oak
Bluffs B-1 District Parking Mitigation Trust.
4. Payment in Lieu Payments in lieu shall be calculated using the following
formula:
17
Number of Required 1-5 Each additional space Each additional space
Off-street Parking 6-15 after the first 15
Spaces
Annual Payment in $100/space $75/space $50/space
5.1.6 Shared Parking. (Renumbered from 5.1.5 STM 12.2.03Art 16, AG Approved 3.26.04,
Published 4.9.04) Parking required for two (2) or more buildings or uses may be provided in
combined facilities where it is evident that such facilities shall continue to be available for the
several buildings or uses and where the parking provided meets all of the requirements of this
section for each of the uses in the combination.
1. Evidence shall be submitted that parking is available within five hundred (500) feet of
the premises, which lot satisfies the requirements of this by-law and has excess capacity
during all or part of the day, which excess capacity shall be demonstrated by competent
parking survey conducted by a traffic engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
2. A contract, agreement, or suitable legal instrument acceptable to legal counsel, shall be
filed with the application for building permit, occupancy permit, or special permit which
shall specify the location of all spaces to be jointly used, the number of such spaces, the
hours during the day that such parking shall be available, and the duration or limit, if any
on such parking.
3. Any reduction in area required for parking because of these joint use provisions may be
required as reserved landscaped open space; such area shall be computed at the rate of four
hundred (400) square feet per parking space.
4. Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner from providing parking facilities in
accordance with this by-law if subsequently the joint use of parking facilities shall
terminate.
5.2 LOADING AREAS. (New section added 12.2.03 STM Art 17, AG Approved 3.26.04,
Published 4.9.04)
5.2.1 General All buildings requiring the delivery of goods as part of their function shall be
provided with bays and suitable space for the off street maneuvering and loading of vehicles.
5.2.2 Layout and Design of the Loading Facilities
1. Individual loading spaces, maneuvering areas, entrances and exits shall be suitably
identified with lines and arrows, as deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner.
18
2. Screening and Landscaping Requirements. Loading areas shall be screened in
accordance with Section 5.4, herein.
5.2.3 Special Permit. The Planning Board may vary any requirement of Section 5.2 upon the grant
of a special permit, where such relief will not result in substantial detriment to the
neighborhood or the town.
5.3 SIGNS
5.3.1 Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to encourage signage in Oak Bluffs which
will be appropriate to the Town's architectural styles and visual qualities, compatible with the
Town's architecture and visual setting, appropriate to the activity announced, legible in the
circumstances in which they are seen, and professional in appearance, construction and material.
5.3.2 Definitions. The following special definitions shall apply in this Section 5.3:
ARCHITECTURAL SIGN: An integral decorative or architectural feature of a building
which may include letters or numbers relating to the building.
AWNING SIGN: An awning is any temporary or retractable covering or shelter which is
supported entirely from the exterior wall of a building.
BUILDING: A structure enclosed within exterior walls, built, erected and framed of a
combination of any materials, having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter of persons,
animals or property.
BUSINESS: Activity of some continuity, regularity and permanency, means of material
being and livelihood.
ESTABLISHMENT: A place of business or businesses, under one ownership, occupying a
defined area comprised of a building or a portion thereof, and/or a lot or a portion thereof.
FACADE: Any separate face of a building.
FRONTAGE: A continuous portion of a property line dividing a lot and street line.
FREE-STANDING SIGN: A sign directly or indirectly, connected to the ground and not
attached to any building or other structures. Under free standing sign, insert the words,
"other structure" Any free-standing sign must be located entirely within the property
bounds.
HANGING SIGNS: A sign attached at right angles to a building which has not more than
2 sides, and projects no more than 6 feet from the building.
19
MENU BOXES: A menu box is a weather-tight box constructed of wood with a glass, or
plexiglass front and is used to display signs, bulletins, menus, photos and /or other
information.
MULTIPLE-OCCUPANCY BUILDING: A building with more than one business
establishment occupying the street level.
OFF-PREMISE SIGN: A sign which advertises or announces a use conducted, or goods
that are available elsewhere than within the building or lot on which the sign is located.
For the purposes of this bylaw, a political sign shall not constitute an off-premise sign.
POLITICAL SIGN: A non-premise sign which refers only to the issues or candidates
involved in a political election and is designed to influence the action of voters.
PRE-EXISTING NON-CONFORMING SIGN: A legally erected sign which became
non-conforming as a result of the enactment of or a change to zoning.
PREMISES: Any lot or building, or combination thereof, held under single lease or
ownership of one business establishment.
ROOF SIGN: A sign which is erected, constructed, or maintained on or above the roof of a
building.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign, including its supporting structure, intended to be
maintained for a continuous period of not more than 30 days.
VEHICULAR SIGNS: Any sign on a vehicle which is attached to a structure or accessory
which is not a part of the original design of the vehicle.
WALL SIGN: A sign which is mounted flush to a wall and projects no more than 12
inches from it; or a sign which is painted upon, or applied to, a building.
WINDOW SIGN: A sign painted or posted on an interior translucent surface, including
windows and doors, and which is within 12 inches of such surface.
5.3.3 Applicability. These regulations shall apply to all privately owned signs in Oak Bluffs.
5.3.4 Sign Permits. Except where otherwise exempted, a permit, to be issued by the Building
Commissioner, is required for all signs.
5.3.5 Design Standards and Guidelines.
1. Color. Color should enhance the sign's legibility and compliment the sign's visual
20
setting which may include the materials and styles of nearby buildings and landscape.
Color choices indicated on this by-law's color chart are preferred.
2. Design. Design, including graphics, should be simple, legible, appropriate to the
activity, and compatible with nearby architecture and/or landscape.
3. Material. Materials should be visually compatible with the materials of a buildings
facade, materials recommended; wood, MDO plywood or metal. The use of plastic should
be discouraged.
4. Placement. Placement should respect the basic design of a facade (preferably the
design of the original facade) should relate to the positions of nearby signs, and should not
obscure architectural/visual themes such as views, architectural shapes, spaces and details
which are characteristic of the area.
5.3.6. Prohibited Signs. Signs affixed to poles, public buildings, benches, trees or any other
public place without permission of the Board of Selectmen are prohibited.
5.3.7 Signs Allowed in all Districts. The signs listed below are allowed in all districts. Prior to
the erection of signs, a review by the Advisory Sign Review Board is required.
1. Architectural Signs
2. Awning Signs
3. Directory Signs for Multi-occupancy buildings. A building with multi-occupancy may
have one directory sign with an area not to exceed one square foot per tenant, or a total of
ten square feet, whichever is less. (Amended ATM 4.13.04 Art 11, AG Approved 5.28.04,
Published 6.15.04)
4. Parking and Directional Signs. Signs limited solely to directing on-premise pedestrian
or vehicular traffic or regulating the use of parking areas and not to exceed 1 square foot in
area per sign.
5. Agricultural Sign. If the majority of the produce sold by an establishment is grown on
the premises, an agricultural sign or signs may be maintained, but the total area of such
signs may not exceed 10 square feet for each establishment.
6. Temporary Signs Requiring Review by the Advisory Sign Review Board. A sign which
describes or relates to a special situation or event may be maintained for a continuous
period of not more than 30 days, except if a longer period is specified below. The
temporary signs listed below are allowed provided the following conditions are met:
21
a. Construction Sign. One construction sign may be maintained on the
premises during construction provided its area does not exceed 8 square
feet, and it is removed within 2 days after issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
b. Exterior of Building Sign. All temporary signs attached to the exterior of a
building may not exceed 5% of the two dimensional facade of the building.
c. Oak Bluffs Events Signs. Signs may be displayed in conjunction with
official Oak Bluffs holidays or any events permitted by the Board of
Selectmen, or celebrations. Signs, not to exceed 20 square feet in size, may
be displayed up to 30 days prior to the event and shall be removed within 2
days after the event.
d. Window Signs. A window sign may cover no more than 30% of the area of
the window in which it appears.
e. Theater Signs. Signs announcing a specific film(s).
f. Menu and Announcement Signs. Menu and announcement signs not to
exceed 5 square feet in total area. For the purpose of this bylaw, menus and
announcements shall be considered temporary signs even though
maintained or a period of time to exceed 30 days. These signs shall be
affixed to the building and shall be contained in menu boxes or on a
chalkboard.
g. Vehicular Signs. One sign is permitted for the left and right sides of the
vehicle. Maximum 2 signs per vehicle. Maximum 5 square feet for each
sign.
7. Temporary Signs That Do Not Require A Permit.
a. Political Signs.
b. Real Estate Signs. One real estate sign is allowed which advertises only the
premises on which it is located. Any property located on a dead end road is
allowed one additional "off premises" sign on other than the premises for
sale with the written permission of the landowner on whose land the
additional sign is located. All real estate signs shall be a maximum of three
(3) square feet and shall be removed within two (2) days of the signing of a
purchase and sale agreement.
5.3.8 Regulations for Residential Districts. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a wall,
22
hanging, window, or free-standing sign which is to be erected in a Residential District, the
Building Commissioner shall determine that the following conditions are met:
1. Each establishment may have one sign (wall, hanging, window; or free-standing). If the
frontage of the premise is 100 feet or less on one street, the area of such sign shall not
exceed 3 square feet. For each additional 25 feet of frontage on one street, the area of the
sign may be increased one square foot up to a maximum area of 6 square feet. No free
standing sign shall be within 10 feet of any street line nor extend more than 10 feet above
ground.
2. Signs Requiring Special Permits. In Residential Districts, the Board of Appeals may
allow, by special permit, an off premise free-standing sign to an establishment if the
establishment's premise has access to the street on which the sign is located, and the
distance between the premise and the sign does not exceed 1000 feet. In no event shall
such a free-standing sign exceed 15 square feet in area nor extend more than 15 feet above
ground.
5.3.9 Regulations for Business District. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a wall,
hanging, free standing or window sign which is to be erected in a Business District, the Building
Commissioner shall determine that the following conditions are met:
1. Street Level Establishments. Each establishment may have 2 signs (in addition to
parking, directional and directory signs); any combination of wall and/or window signs or
a wall or window signs or a wall or window sign with either a free standing or hanging
sign; the total area of which shall not exceed 20 square feet, provided that the hanging or
free standing sign does not exceed 8 square feet. A street level establishment in a multioccupancy
building may have one sign (in addition to parking, directional and directory
signs); wall, hanging or window, the area of which is not to exceed 10 square feet.
2. Wall and hanging signs for a street level establishment shall not extend higher than
whichever of the following is lowest:
a. 25 feet above grade
b. The top of the sills of the first level of windows above the ground floor.
c. The lowest point of the roof
2. Above Street Level Establishments. Each above street level establishment may have
one sign (in addition to parking, directory and directional signs); wall, hanging, window or
free standing, the area not to exceed 10 square feet.
3. Establishments with 2 sides abutting a way. If a street level establishment has 2 or
23
more building sides which abut a way which is open to routine public pedestrian or
vehicular passage, then the establishment may have 2 signs (in addition to parking,
directory and directional signs) on each building side with a combination of a wall or
window sign, with either a hanging or free standing sign not to exceed 20 square feet,
provided that the hanging or free standing sign shall not exceed 3 square feet. If the street
level establishment in a multi-occupancy building has 2 or more building sides which abut
a way which is open to routine public pedestrian or vehicular passage, then the
establishment may have one sign (in addition to parking, directory and directional signs);
wall, hanging, or window, not to exceed 10 square feet in area or each building side,
provided that the area of the hanging sign shall not exceed 8 square feet.
4. Multi-occupancy Building Name Signs. Any sign designating a certain building by
name, apart and separate from any business conducted on the premises, shall be permitted.
The size of this sign shall be as follows: 10 square feet in area or a building with a facade
that measures up to 20 linear feet. For each additional 5 linear feet, one more square foot
may be added to the area of the sign.
5.3.10 Signs Requiring Special Permits In Business Districts. The following types of signs
require special permits:
1. Unusual configuration, location or use of a building, the presence on a building of the
maximum number of signs, and or total signage area specified herein. In granting a special
permit, the Board of Appeals may allow an establishment a total area of a sign exceeding
that allowed by right and exceeding the restriction specified herein. Prior to the grant of a
special permit for a sign, the Board of Appeals must find the sign consistent with the Sign
Guidelines.
2. Self-illuminating signs
3. Signs with flashing or moving lights
4. Signs with visibly moving parts, except for signs indicating time or temperature or
barber poles
5. Roof signs
6. Off-premise signs
5.3.11 Pre-existing Non-conforming Signs. A pre-existing, non-conforming sign may continue
to be maintained. Any relocation, redesign, or altering in any way, including repainting in a
different color or re-lettering, must be reviewed by the Advisory Sign Review Board of
conformance to this by-law.
24
5.3.12 Advisory Sign Review Board There shall be an Advisor Sign Review Board whose
purpose is to determine and advise the Building Commissioner and/or the Board of Appeals if the
proposed, sign is in conformance with these Zoning By-laws. The Sign Review Board shall
consist of one member of the Board of Selectmen, one member of the Planning Board, and three
residents of Oak Bluffs appointed by the Board of Selectmen for three years staggered terms. All
such proposals which are subject to the provisions of Section 5.3.7.6 shall be forwarded
immediately by the Building Commissioner or by the Board of Appeals to the Advisory Sign
Review Board. In reviewing applications submitted to it, the Advisory Sign Review Board shall
apply the Sign Design Standards and Guidelines and other applicable provisions of these
regulations. The Advisory Sign Review Board shall make such determination as it deems
appropriate. All such determinations shall be made in writing to the Building Commissioner
within 14 days of the Board's receipt of the application. Recommendations on signs requiring
special permits shall be made to the Board of Appeals within 14 days of receipt.
5.3.13 Penalty. The penalty for the violation of this bylaw shall not exceed twenty dollars for
each offense providing that each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
5.3.14 Owner's Consent. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a sign, written approval
of the owner of the premises upon which the sign is to be located shall be filed with the Building
Commissioner.
5.4 ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
5.4.1 General. No activity shall be permitted in any district unless it shall be in conformity with
the standards for environmental protection included herein. The Building Commissioner may
require an applicant for a building or occupancy permit to supply, at his expense, such technical
evidence as is necessary in support of the application, and may, in connection therewith, and at the
applicant’s expense, obtain expert advice as necessary to review the plans and proposals of the
applicant. After a permit is issued in accordance with this section, continuing compliance is
required. When the Building Commissioner suspects a subsequent violation he may, as necessary
obtain expert advice, which if the violation is established, shall be paid for by the violator,
otherwise, by the town. The following standards are hereby established.
5.4.2 Noise. No use shall be permitted within the town which, by reason of excessive noise
generated there from, would cause nuisance or hazard to persons or property, as set forth in 310
CMR 7.01.
5.4.3 Solid Waste Storage. Any accessory receptacle or structure with holding capacity of at
least one hundred (100) cubic feet for temporary storage or solid or liquid waste materials,
including garbage, rubbish, junk, discarded bulk items and similar waste items shall be located not
less than ten (10) feet from any structure and shall be screened from all adjacent premises and
streets from which it would otherwise be visible in accordance with this by-law. Screening
materials will not be attached to any structure.
25
5.4.4 Miscellaneous Standards.
1. Outdoor lighting, including lighting on the exterior of a building or lighting in parking
areas, shall be arranged to minimize glare and light spilling over to neighboring properties
and into the night sky.
2. Cinders, dust, fumes, gases, odors, smoke, radiation, refuse or other waste materials
shall be effectively confined to the premises and treated or disposed of in accordance with
state, federal, and town laws and regulations.
3. No process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises or causes fluctuations in excess of ten (10) percent in
line voltage off the premises.
4. All activities involving, and all storage of, inflammable and explosive materials shall
be provided with adequate safety devices against hazards from fire and explosion, and
with adequate fire fighting and fire suppression equipment standard in this industry.
Burning of waste materials in the open contrary to state law is prohibited.
5. All materials which may be edible by or attractive to rodents or insects shall, when
stored in or outdoors, be stored in tightly closed containers.
5.4.5 Erosion Control. Site design, materials, and construction processes shall be designed to
avoid erosion damage, sedimentation, or uncontrolled surface water runoff by conformance with
the following:
1. No area or areas totaling 5,000 square feet or more on any parcel or contiguous parcels
in the same ownership shall have existing vegetation clear-stripped or filled to a depth of 6
inches or more so as to destroy existing vegetation unless such activity is done in
conjunction with an exempt agricultural use, or unless necessarily incidental to
construction on the premises under a valid building permit, Special Permit, or endorsed
definitive subdivision plan. The Planning Board may grant a special permit for such work
where the Board ensures that runoff will be controlled so as to avoid soil erosion, and that
the stripped surface will be stabilized immediately and thereafter. No stripped area or
areas which are allowed by special permit shall remain through the winter without a
stabilized surface, except in the case of agricultural activity where such temporary cover
would be infeasible.
2. The Building Commissioner may require the submission of all information from the
building permit applicant or the landowner, in addition to that otherwise specified herein,
necessary to ensure compliance with these requirements, including, if necessary, elevations
of the subject property, description of vegetative cover, and the nature of impoundment
26
basins proposed, if any.
3. In granting a special permit hereunder, the Planning Board may require a performance
bond to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Section.
5.5 GENERAL LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS (New section added 12.2.03 STM Art 17,
AG Approved 3.26.04, Published 4.9.04)
5.5.1 Purpose: This section is designed to accomplish the following objectives: to provide a
suitable boundary or buffer between residential uses and districts and nearby nonresidential
uses; to define the street edge and provide visual connection between nonresidential uses of
different architectural styles; to separate different and otherwise incompatible land uses from
each other in order to partially or completely reduce potential nuisances such as dirt, dust,
litter, noise, glare from motor vehicle headlights, intrusion from artificial light (including
ambient glare) or view of signs, unsightly buildings or parking lots; to provide visual relief
and a source of shade in parking lots and other areas, and protection from wind in open areas;
to preserve or improve the visual and environmental character of the town, as generally
viewed from residential or publicly accessible locations; and to offer property owners
protection against diminution of property values due to adjacent nonresidential use.
5.5.2 Applicability. The requirement of this section shall apply to any nonresidential use and to
multifamily dwellings. By special permit, the Planning Board may authorize a reduction in
the requirements of this section, where such reduction will not result in substantial detriment.
5.5.3 Landscaping Requirements for Certain Property Laws in the B-1 and B-2 Districts
Property line(s) in the B-1 and B-2 Districts on the boundary with any Residence District shall
be screened from the nonresidential uses by means of plantings, fencing or maintenance of
trees of a species common to the area and appropriate for screening, spaced to minimize visual
intrusion and providing a opaque year-round visual buffer between uses. Such plantings shall
be provided and maintained by the owner of the property in B-1 or B-2 Districts used for
nonresidential purpose. No part of any building or structure or paved space intended for or
used as a parking area may be located within the buffer area. Planted buffer areas along
property lines with such residential districts shall be at least five (5) feet in depth.
5.5.4 Coordination with Site Plan Approval. The Planning Board shall require a landscaping
plan as part of the overall site plan for the premises. Such landscaping plan shall be at scale
sufficient to determine compliance with the specifications set forth in this Section.
5.5.5 Maintenance of Landscaped Areas. The owner of the property used for nonresidential
purposes shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscaping
materials installed in accordance with this section and shall have a continuing obligation to
comply with the provisions set forth herein. All plant materials required by this section shall
be maintained in healthful condition. Dead limbs, refuse and debris shall be promptly
removed. Dead plantings shall be replaced with new live plantings at the earliest appropriate
season. Bark mulch and non-plant ground surface materials shall be maintained so as to
control weed growth.
27
SECTION 6.0 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
6.1 - WIND ENERGY GENERATING FACILITY REGULATIONS
6.1.1 Purpose
This section is designed to accomplish the following objectives: to reduce the overall
consumption of fossil fuels through energy conservation; to preserve and protect the
cultural and natural environment; and to minimize the potential adverse effect on the
character of the neighborhood with the construction and use of a wind energy generating
machine.
6.1.2 Applicability
Except in the ocean waters within the corporate bounds of the Town of Oak Bluffs, use of
a wind generating energy facility of any kind, as defined in this by-law, must be accessory
to the primary use on the lot. Communal and Municipal wind energy generating facilities
are exempt from this provision.
6.1.3 Definitions. The following special definitions shall apply in this section 6.1
BLADE – Extensions from the hub, which are designed to catch the wind and turn
the rotor to generate electricity.
BLADE-TIP HEIGHT – The height as measured from the grade of the land below
to the highest extension of the blade.
CUT-OUT WIND SPEED – The high wind speed at which the wind energy
generating facility must shut down and/or turn perpendicular to the wind to protect itself
from being over powered, typically 56 miles per hour.
GROUND BLADE CLEARANCE – The height as measured from the grade of the
land below the wind energy generating facility to the lowest extension of the blade.
HUB – The center of the rotor to which the blades are attached.
HUB HEIGHT – The height as measured from the grade of the land below the
wind energy generating facility to the center of the rotor or hub.
NACELLE – The frame and housing at the top of the tower. It protects the gear
box and generator from weather and helps control the mechanical noise level.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY – The rated output of electric power from the
producing equipment.
ROTOR – A wind energy generating facility’s blades and the hub to which they are
28
attached.
ROTOR DIAMETER – The diameter of the rotor of a wind energy generating
facility rotor measured as twice the length of the longest blade plus the hub width.
TREE LINE BLADE CLEARANCE – The height as measured from the top of the
tallest object within 300 feet to the South and West of the base of the tower to the lowest
extension of the blade.
WIND ENERGY GENERATING FACILITY – All equipment, machinery and
structures, utilized in connection with wind-generated energy production, generation and
sale, including related systems, whether underground, on the surface, or overhead and
other equipment including but not limited to, rotor, electrical generator and tower,
anemometers, transformers, substation, power lines, control and maintenance facilities,
site access and service roads.
WIND MONITORING OR METEOROLOGICAL (“test” or “met”) TOWER – A
temporary tower equipped with devices to measure wind speeds and direction, used to
determine how much wind power a site can be expected to generate.
6.1.4 – LAND BASED WIND ENERGY FACILITIES
CATEGORIES – A wind energy generating facility shall be divided into the following
categories for permitting requirements:
A. Private:
1. Single Owner:
A facility designed to provide on-site electrical needs and not to exceed 150-feet in overall
height.
2. Communal:
A facility designed to provide local residential electrical needs to its owners and not to
exceed 150- feet in overall height. Residents may form associations or other legally
binding forms of cooperative ownership for the purpose of accommodating wind energy
generating facilities, where deeded easements and restrictions can be put on vacant land to
create a common area that can be used for a wind energy generating facility. The
association is to bear all the financial and maintenance responsibilities of a single owner
under this regulation.
B. Municipal:
A publicly owned wind energy generating facility, for the benefit of the Town of Oak
Bluffs.
6.1.5 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE INSTALLATION OF ANY WIND
FACILITY
6.1.5.1 Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations:
The construction and operation of all such proposed wind energy generating facilities shall
29
be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not
limited to all applicable safety, construction, environmental, electrical, communications
and aviation requirements. The safety of the design and the construction of any wind
energy generating facility, including towers and associated equipment and the
compatibility of the tower structure with the rotors and other components, shall be
certified by the manufacturer and by an engineer licensed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts if the manufacturer is out of state or country. The owner/applicant of any
wind energy generating facility shall provide proof of liability insurance for the
installation, use and maintenance of the wind energy generating facility.
6.1.5.2 Technical Requirements:
A wind energy generating facility must meet the current minimum technical requirements
for renewable energy installations funded by the Massachusetts Technology Collaborative
to the extent they apply.
6.1.5.3 Safety Wires:
Safety wires shall be installed on the turnbuckles on guy wires of “Met” towers and guyed
wind energy generating facility towers.
6.1.5.4 Wind Speed Controls:
All wind energy generating facilities should be equipped with manual and automatic cutout
wind speed controls. The rotor and cut-out wind speed control shall be certified by the
manufacturer.
6.1.5.5 Towers:
All towers shall be monopole, guyed poles or guyed tilt ups and if they require external
climbing apparatus, they shall have either tower climbing apparatus located not closer than
twelve (12) feet to the ground or be un-climbable by design for the first twelve (12) feet.
The tower, blades, rotor, hub and nacelle shall be painted a neutral, non reflective color
designed to blend with sky and clouds.
6.1.5.6 Connections:
All utility connections from the wind energy generating facility to the existing grid shall be
underground.
6.1.5.7 Monitoring:
All equipment necessary for monitoring and operation of the wind energy generating
facility shall be contained in the tower. If this is unfeasible, ancillary equipment may be
located outside the tower or behind a year round landscaped or vegetative buffer.
6.1.5.8 Site Clearing:
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the
construction and maintenance of the wind energy generating facility – including roadways
and power interconnects. Night lighting shall be prohibited unless required by state or
federal law and shall be the minimum necessary.
6.1.5.9 Land Clearing:
Land clearing for the purposes of reducing wind turbulence in the vicinity of the turbine is
prohibited unless the applicant can prove it is essential to operational requirements, does
not adversely affect the natural resources in the area and that adequate erosion controls are
proposed.
30
6.1.5.10 Rooftop Systems:
Wind energy generating facilities sited on top of, or attached to and extending above the
ridgeline of, an existing structure shall comply with all applicable provisions of the latest
780 CMR version of the Massachusetts Building Code. Certification by an engineer
licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts shall be required of the existing structure
the facility will be attached to.
6.1.5.11 Efficiency:
The wind energy generating facility should be able to provide the rated nameplate
capacity, as per the manufacturer’s specifications.
6.1.5.12 Interference:
A wind energy generating facility shall create no TV or radio interference.
6.1.6 REGULATIONS
6.1.6.1 – Private Wind Facilities
Private facilities may be allowed anywhere in Town subject to the following requirements:
1. It receives a building permit from the Building Department.
2. Freestanding wind energy generating facilities shall be located at least the blade tip
height of the facility to the nearest property line, except in the case of a communal wind
energy generating facility, the nearest property line of an owner who is not associated with
the facility.
3. Freestanding wind energy generating facilities shall be located where they will not
create or be subject to turbulence from nearby wind energy generating facilities.
4. For a freestanding wind energy generating facility, the Tree Line Blade clearance shall
be at least 30 feet.
5. Rooftop wind energy generating systems shall not extend more than ten feet above the
ridgeline of the structure to which it is attached.
6.1.6.2 – Municipal Wind Energy Generating Facilities
Municipal wind energy generating facilities may be located at least the blade tip height or
300 feet from the nearest dwelling or commercial structure and nearest property line,
except in the case of a communal wind energy generating facility or wind energy
generating facility association, the nearest property line of an owner not associated with
the facility.
6.1.7 SPECIAL PERMIT. The Zoning Board of Appeals may vary, by special permit,
any requirement of Sections 6.1.5.9 and 6.1.6.1.2, 3, 4 & 5 only with an approved siting
plan from the Building Department and upon its written determination that the adverse
effects of the proposed wind energy generating facility will not outweigh its beneficial
impacts to the neighborhood.
31
6.1.8 TERMS OF USE
To ensure that the goals of this by-law are met in the face of evolving technology, wind
energy generating facilities will expire at the end of the useful life of the facility or 20
years, whichever is less. At that time, the facility shall be removed by the applicant or, if
the existing facility is still operable and efficient, the facility may be renewable by the
Building Department for a term of no more than 5 years at a time. A new permit is
required to install a replacement system. Submitting a renewal request shall allow for
continued operation of the wind energy generating system until the Building Department
acts. At the end of that period (including extensions and renewals), the wind energy
generating facility shall be removed as required by this by-law.
6.1.8.1 – Decommissioning
Upon a finding by the Building Inspector that the facility has been abandoned, or has been
left in disrepair, or has not been maintained in accordance with its approved maintenance
plan, the owner of the facility or land on which it is located shall be notified in writing by
certified mail that the facility must be brought up to standard.
If required repairs or maintenance are not accomplished within 45 days from receipt of
certified mailing, the facility may be deemed condemned and may be removed from the
site by the Town within 90 days, at the property owner’s expense. At the request of the
property owner, the Zoning Administrator, with the concurrence of the Building Inspector,
may allow extensions of these time periods.
6.1.8.2 – Removal Requirements
Any wind energy generating facility which has reached the end of its useful life or has
been abandoned must be removed. When the wind energy generating facility is scheduled
to be decommissioned, the owner(s) shall notify the town by certified mail of the proposed
date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
Decommissioning shall consist of physical removal of all wind turbines, towers,
machinery, equipment, security barriers and accessory structures from the site. Disposal
will occur of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with all local and state waste
disposal regulations. The owner may leave existing landscaping or below grade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
6.1.8.3 – Abandonment
A wind energy generating facility shall be considered abandoned if it fails to operate
continuously for 12 months. If the owner fails to remove the facility within 90 days of a
finding of abandonment by the Building Inspector, the town shall have the authority to
enter the property and physically remove the facility, after a Board of Survey is conducted
and a determination made that the structure is unsafe, at the expense of the property owner.
6.1.8.4 – Surety
The Building Inspector may require the applicant to post a bond at the time of construction
to cover costs for removal in the event that the town must remove the facility. The
applicant, if required to include a bond in the permit application, shall submit a fully
inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal prepared by a qualified engineer.
The amount shall include a mechanism for cost of living adjustment. An incentive factor
32
of 1.5 shall be applied to all bonds to ensure compliance and adequate funds for the town’s
removal of the facility.
(Section 6.1 added ATM 4.13.10 Art 26, AG Approved 8.30.10, Published 9.14.10)
6.2 WINDMILLS (Section 6.2 deleted and replaced by Section 6.1)
6.3 UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES
(Section added STM 12.2.03, AG Approved 3.26.04, Published 4.9.04)
No person shall have more than one unregistered car or truck, un-garaged on premises owned by him
or under his control, and under no circumstances shall an unsightly car or truck be stored in a front
yard. This section shall not apply to premises licensed under Chapter 140 of the General Laws
6.4 TRAILERS
(Section added STM 12.2.03, AG Approved 3.26.04, Published 4.9.04)
6.4.1 General. No mobile home, travel trailer or similar facility, however
mounted, shall be occupied as a residence or parked or stored within the
Town.
6.4.2 Exception. Notwithstanding the above, mobile homes, travel trailers and
similar facilities may be:
1. Stored in any enclosed garage provided they are not used as a residence or
a dwelling or for any purpose other than storage or parking.
2. Parked or stored for not more than 14 days provided they are
not used as a residence or a dwelling or for any purpose other
than storage or parking ; or
3. Used as office or storage in connection with a construction project.
6.4.3 Nonconforming Trailers. A nonconforming mobile home, travel trailer, or
similar facility existing at the time of passage of this By-Law may not be
replaced for any reason.
6.4.4 Parking or Storage of Trailers. Owners of travel trailers or
Campers may park or store said travel trailers or campers on their own
property, provided said travel trailers or campers are not used as a residence or
dwelling house or used for a purpose other than storing or parking said travel
trailers or campers.
SECTION 7.0 SPECIAL RESIDENTIAL REGULATIONS
33
7.1 CONVERSION TO DUPLEX
7.1.1 General. The conversion of a single family dwelling existing at the time this by-law was
adopted to accommodate two or more families may be authorized upon the grant of a special
permit by the Board of Appeals.
7.1.2 Conditions. The following conditions shall apply to such conversions:
1. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with at least one off-street parking space.
2. Sanitary sewerage shall be approved by the Board of Health.
4. The lot shall contain not less than 8,000 square feet of usable open
space on the lot, unpaved and unoccupied by any structure.
7.2 CONVERSION OF AN EXISTING BUILDING TO MIXED USE (COMMERCIAL
WITH APARTMENT UNITS)
(Voted STM 11.14.17, Art 6., AG Approved 2.26.18, Posted 2.27.18)
7.2.1 Overall
7.2.1.1 Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to:
? Allow mixed use development in the B-1 zoning district while maintaining the unique
character of Oak Bluffs by encouraging the preservation of existing buildings within the
historic context and setting in which they were established.
? Provide for a variety of housing needs, including reasonable, affordable accommodations
for a fluctuating work force and opportunities to create moderate income and senior
housing units, both of which would promote economic growth and stability in the existing
B-1 district;
? Permit uses that promote rehabilitation and conversion of existing buildings in a manner
that maintains the visual character of surrounding areas and reflects the architectural scale
of existing development within the district;
? Minimize visual and functional conflicts between residential and nonresidential uses
within and abutting the B-1 district; and
? Allow for more compact development than may be permitted in residential zoning districts
to reduce the impact of sprawl and traffic congestion.
7.2.1.2 Mixed-Use Special Permit: This section authorizes the Planning Board to issue a Special
Permit allowing the following: the conversion, reconstruction, restoration or alteration of a
commercial structure to provide for a mix of non-residential (retail, office, municipal, service
establishments) and residential uses in some combination, in structures located on a single lot or
on a parcel formed from combined lots.
34
7.2.1.3 Waivers: When a proposal for a mixed use development does not strictly meet the
standards for a Special Permit set out in Section 7.2.6.1-6.7, the Planning Board may grant
waivers of any of the standards provided it includes a justification for each waived criteria in its
written decision granting the Special Permit
7.2.2 Conversion of Existing One or Two-Story Building: A one or two-story existing building
may be converted to apartment units, subject to the following conditions:
1. Except by a Special Permit from the Planning Board under section 7.2.2, there shall be a
maximum of two (2) apartment units for up to the first 5,000 square feet of lot area, and
one (1) additional apartment unit for each additional 1,000 square feet of lot area.
2. The conversion shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
7.2.3 Conversion of Existing Three-Story Building to Apartment Units: An existing threestory
building may be converted to apartment units, subject to the following conditions:
1. Except by a Special Permit from the Planning Board under section 7.2.3, there shall be a
maximum of three (3) apartment units for up to the first 5,000 square feet of lot area, and
one (1) additional apartment unit for each additional 1,000 square feet of lot area.
2. Each apartment unit shall have one off-street parking space.
3. The conversion shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
7.2.4 Conversion and Expansion or Tear Down and Re-Build with Expansion of Existing
Building to Apartment Units: An existing building other than those set forth in Sections 7.2.2 or
7.2.3 may be converted to apartment units, subject to the following conditions:
1. Except by a Special Permit from the Planning Board under section 7.2.4, there shall be a
maximum of two (2) apartment units for up to the first 5,000 square feet of lot area, and
one (1) additional apartment unit for each additional 1,000 square feet of lot area.
2. Each apartment unit shall have one off-street parking space.
3. The conversion shall comply with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
7.2.5 Mixed Use /Apartments in B-1 District
7.2.5.1 Conditions:
1. In any conversion, reconstruction, restoration or alteration of and to an existing building of
two stories or more in the B-1 District under this section, the ground floors of the
buildings fronting streets, shall be reserved for nonresidential use.
2. Circulation and access to and from dwelling units may be allowed on the ground floor
level.
7.2.5.2 Historic: Buildings or structures that are listed or eligible for inclusion on the National
Register of Historic Places and/or the Massachusetts Register of Historic Places or within a local
historic district as established by M.G.L. Chapter 40C, shall be converted, constructed,
35
reconstructed, restored or altered to maintain or promote the status of the building or structure on,
or eligibility for inclusion on the State or National Register of Historic Places. The design of new
construction shall otherwise be in harmony with the existing neighborhood.
7.2.6 STANDARDS FOR MIXED-USE (MU) SPECIAL PERMIT
7.2.6. 1 General Standards: To be eligible for consideration for a Special Permit under this
Section, the proposed development shall meet the following standards (unless specifically waived
by the Planning Board under Section 7.2.1.3):
1. The commercial structure to be converted, reconstructed, restored or altered shall have
variation in its overall architectural design, and plans depicting building elevations,
building setbacks and exterior details (roofing, siding, glazing), of the proposal, including
abutting structures, shall be included in the applicant’s construction documents in order to
assure compatibility with existing development.
2. No building shall exceed the height currently allowed in the existing district.
3. Size of units – Units shall conform to the provisions of the State Sanitary Code, 105 CMR
410, any other state regulations as may be applicable, and with the rules and regulations of
the Board of Health.
4. Bathroom, kitchen and other facilities – Units are not required to contain facilities and may
share toilet, kitchen, or other facilities. Toilet and shower facilities shall conform to the
provisions of the State Sanitary Code, 105 CMR 410, any other state regulations as may be
applicable and with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
5. All roof mounted mechanical equipment must be enclosed to reduce the noise of operation
and eliminate visibility of such equipment from the equivalent of an adjoining second
floor level. In no case shall roof mounted equipment or the accompanying enclosures
exceed a height of 6 feet above the roof deck, or occupy more than 30% of the area of the
roof surface.
6. Building orientation, layout, and configuration shall be designed to provide adequate light
and air for the proposed and adjoining buildings.
7.2.6.2 Drainage and Stormwater Management: Development proposals under this Section
must have a surface water drainage system, which shall be designed to accommodate 100-year
storm conditions. Drainage must be retained on-site, and shall not be directed to or allowed to
flow off-site.
7.2.6.2 Drainage and Stormwater Management: Development proposals under this section
must have a surface water drainage system which shall be designed to accommodate 100-year
storm conditions. Drainage must be retained on-site and shall not be directed to or allowed to flow
off-site.
7.2.6.3 Internal Roadways, Walkways, Paths and Parking Areas: These shall be designed
where appropriate to provide for and promote safety; visual appeal; separation of vehicular,
bicycle and pedestrian traffic; convenient connectivity within and without the MRD site; and
36
maximum access to the various amenities and facilities on the site and to pathways on adjacent
sites. All internal roadways, walkways, paths and parking areas shall be maintained by the owner
or an association of unit owners, as applicable.
7.2.6.4 Parking: The number of parking spaces required under Section 5 of the Zoning Bylaw
may be reduced pursuant to the parking regulations found in section 5.1.5 of the Oak Bluffs
Zoning Bylaws.
7.2.6.5 Service Access, Including Deliveries and Trash Removal: Provisions shall be made for
service vehicles to access the site and building for delivery and other matters so as not to obstruct
pedestrian and vehicular access by residents, commercial patrons, and emergency providers.
All trash receptacles and areas to be used by service and delivery vehicles shall be visually and, to
the extent reasonably practicable, acoustically buffered from adjoining residences by one or more
of the following: berming, fencing, and/or planting.
7.2.6.6 Wastewater Management: All wastewater treatment and disposal facilities shall conform
to the provisions of the State Sanitary Code, 310 CMR 15.00, any other state regulations as may
be applicable and with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
7.2.6.7 Utilities: All electric, gas, telephone and water distribution lines shall be placed
underground.
7.3 FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT. (Section replaced 12.2.03 STM Art 18, AG Approved 3.26.04,
Published 4.9.04)
7.3.1 Purpose: The purposes of this section, Flexible Development, are
1. to encourage the preservation of open land for its scenic beauty and to enhance
agricultural, open space, forestry and recreational use;
2. to preserve historical and archeological resources; to protect this natural
environment, including varied landscapes and water resources.
3. to protect the value of real property;
4. to promote more sensitive siting of buildings and better overall site planning;
5. to perpetuate the appearance of the Town’s traditional New England landscape;
6. to facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities, and public
services in a more economical and efficient manner;
7. to offer an alternative to standard subdivision development;
8. to promote the development of housing affordable to low, moderate and median
income families, and;
9. to promote the development of housing for persons over the age of fifty-five.
37
7.3.2 Definitions. The following terms shall have the following definition for the purpose of this
section:
1. “Affordable to persons or families qualifying as low income” shall
mean affordable to persons in the Dukes County metropolitan statistical area under
the applicable guidelines of the Commonwealth’s Department of Housing and
Community Development earning less than 50% of the median income.
2. “Affordable to persons or families qualifying as moderate income”
shall mean affordable to persons in the Dukes County metropolitan
statistical area under the applicable guidelines of the Commonwealth’s
Department of Housing and Community Development earning more
than 50% but less than 80% of the median income.
3. “Affordable units” shall mean any combination of dwelling units
restricted in perpetuity as affordable to persons or families qualifying
as low or moderate median income. The affordable restriction shall be
approved as to form by legal counsel to the Planning Board, and a
right of first refusal upon the transfer of such restricted units shall be
granted to the Town or its designee for a period not less than 120
days after notice thereof;
4. “Contiguous open space” shall mean open space suitable, in the
opinion of the Planning Board, for the purposes set forth herein. Such
open space may be separated by the road(s) constructed within the
Flexible Development. Contiguous open space shall not include
required yards, if any.
5. “Housing for persons with disabilities” shall mean a dwelling unit in
compliance with the standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act
and pertinent Massachusetts standards.
6. “Transfer lot” shall mean a parcel of land with not less than 20,000 square feet
used to establish a density bonus in a Flexible Development. Such Transfer lot
shall be (1) determined by the Planning Board to be of special importance because
of its visual prominence or potential vista blockage, ecological significance or
fragility, value as agricultural or recreational land, critical relation or proximity to
the Town’s drinking water supply, or because it is identified in the Town’s open
land space plan; (2) not wetlands, as defined in G.L. c.131, s 40 or not land used
to satisfy dimensional requirements in any other development of land; (3) subject
to a permanent conservation or agricultural restriction pursuant to G.L. 184 ss. 31-
33 or conveyed to the Town, or conveyed to a nonprofit organization, the principal
purpose of which is the conservation of open space or other appropriate purpose.
38
7.3.3 Applicability. In accordance with the following provisions, a Flexible Development project
maybe created, whether a subdivision or not, from any parcel or set of contiguous parcels of
five acres or more held in common ownership and located entirely within the Town.
7.3.4 Procedures. Flexible Development may be authorized upon the issuance of a special permit
by the Planning Board. An application for Flexible Development shall be filed in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Planning Board.
1. Where the Flexible Development is a subdivision of land, a
development plan conforming to the requirements for a preliminary plan as set forth in
the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board, shall be submitted.
Final engineering details regarding Flexible Development may be provided during the
course of definitive plan review. In the event that the Flexible Development does not
involve the subdivision of land, the development plan shall conform to the
requirements for a definitive plan as set forth in such rules and regulations.
2. Where wetland delineation is in doubt or dispute, the Planning Board
may require appropriate documentation, including an Order of Resource Area
Delineation
3. Data on proposed wastewater disposal shall be submitted which shall
be referred to a consulting engineer for review and recommendation.
4. The Planning Board may also require as part of the development
plan any additional information necessary to make the determination and assessments
cited herein.
7.3.5 Design Process. Each development plan shall follow the design process outlined below.
When the development plan is submitted, applicants shall be prepared to demonstrate to the
Planning Board that this Design Process was considered in determining the layout of proposed
streets, house lots and contiguous open space.
1. Understanding the Site. The first step is to inventory existing site features,
taking care to identify sensitive and noteworthy natural, scenic and cultural
resources on the site, and to determine the connection of these important features
to each other.
2. Evaluating Site Context. The second step is to evaluate the site in its
larger context by identifying physical (e.g. stream and/or wildlife corridors,
wetlands) transportation (e.g. road and bicycle networks) and cultural
(e.g. recreational opportunities) connections to surrounding land uses
and activities.
39
3. Designating the Contiguous Open Space. The third step is to identify
the contiguous open space to be preserved on the site. Such open
space should include the most sensitive and noteworthy resources of
the site, and, where appropriate, areas that serve to extend
neighborhood open space networks.
4. Location of Development Areas. The fourth step is to locate building
sites, streets, parking areas, paths and other built features of the
development. The design should include a delineation of private
yards, public streets and other areas, and shared amenities, so as to
reflect an integrated community, with emphasis on consistency with
the Town’s historical development patterns.
5. Lot lines. The final step is simply to draw in the lot lines (if applicable).
7.3.6 Modification of Lot Requirements. The Planning Board encourages applicants for Flexible
Development to modify lot size, shape and other dimensional requirements for lots within a
Flexible Development. Lots having reduced area or frontage shall not have frontage on a
street other than a street created by the Flexible Development; provided, however, that the
Planning Board may waive this requirement where it is determined that such reduced lot(s) are
consistent with existing development patterns in the neighborhood.
7.3.7 Basic Maximum Number of Dwelling Units. The Basic Maximum Number of dwelling
units allowed in a Flexible Development shall not exceed the number of lots which could
reasonably be expected to be developed upon the site under a conventional plan in full
conformance with all zoning subdivision regulations, health regulations, wetland regulations
and other applicable federal, state and local requirements (hereinafter, the Yield Plan). The
Yield Plan shall be prepared in conformance with the requirements for a preliminary plan as
set forth in the Subdivision Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board; provided however,
that in simple cases, such requirements may be waived by the Planning Board. In any event,
the proponent shall have the burden of proof with regard to the design and engineering
specifications shown on such Yield Plan.
1. The required affordable units for developments with more than ten units shall not
count toward the Basic Maximum Number.
7.3.8 Density Bonus The Planning Board may award a density bonus to increase the number of
dwelling units beyond the Basic Maximum Number. All dwelling units awarded as a density
bonus shall be two bedroom units. The density bonus for the Flexible Development shall not,
in the aggregate, exceed forty (40) percent of the Basic Maximum Number. Required
40
Affordable Units shall not be counted in the computation. Computations shall be rounded to
the lowest number. A density bonus may be awarded in the following circumstances.
1. For each additional ten(10) percent of the site set aside as contiguous open
space over and above the required forty (40) percent, a bonus of five (5)
percent of the Basic Maximum Number may be awarded; provided however,
that this density bonus shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the Basic
Maximum Number.
2. For every two (2) dwelling units restricted to occupancy by persons over the
age of fifty-five (55), one (1) dwelling unit may be added as a density bonus;
provided however, that this density bonus shall not exceed ten (10) percent of
the Basic Maximum Number.
3. For each transfer lot, as defined in Section 7.3.2, two (2) dwelling units may
be added as a density bonus; provided however, that this density bonus shall
not exceed twenty (20) percent of the Basic Maximum Number.
7.3.9 Affordable Component As a condition of the grant of any special permit for a Flexible
Development for any development creating more than ten (10) dwelling units, Affordable
Units shall be required as follows:
1. Ten (10) percent of the units shall be affordable to persons or families
qualifying a low income; or
2. Fifteen (15) percent of the units shall be affordable to persons or families
qualifying as moderate income.
In computing this requirement, the total number of dwelling units (i.e. the total of the Basic Maximum
Number and density bonus units) shall be used. Numbers shall be rounded down in the computation
of this requirement.
7.3.10 Types of Buildings The Flexible Development may consist of any combination of single
family, two family and multifamily residential structures. A multifamily structure shall not
contain more than five (5) dwelling units. The architecture of all multifamily buildings shall
be residential in character, particularly providing gabled roofs, predominantly wood siding an
articulated footprint and varied facades Residential structures shall be oriented toward the
street serving the premises and not the required parking area. The Planning Board may
require housing for persons with disabilities in appropriate circumstances.
7.3.11 Roads The principal roadway(s) serving the site shall be designed to conform with the
standards of the Town where the roadway is or may be ultimately intended for dedication and
acceptance by the Town. Private ways shall be adequate for the intended use and vehicular
traffic and shall be maintained by an association of unit owners or by the Applicant.
41
7.3.12 Parking Each dwelling unit shall be served by two (2) off-street parking spaces. Parking
spaces in front of garages may count in this computation.
7.3.13 Contiguous Open Space A minimum of forty (40) percent of the parcel shown on the
development plan shall be contiguous open space. Any proposed contiguous open space,
unless conveyed to the Town or its Conservation Commission, shall be subject to a recorded
restriction pursuant to G.L. c 134 ss 31-33 and enforceable by the Town, providing that such
land shall be perpetually kept in an open state, that it shall be preserved for exclusively
agricultural, horticultural, educational or recreational purposes and that it shall be maintained
in a manner which will ensure its suitability for its intended purposes.
1. The percentage of the contiguous open space which is wetlands shall not normally
exceed the percentage of the tract which is wetlands; provided however, that the
applicant may include a greater percentage of wetlands in such open space upon a
demonstration that such inclusion promotes the purposes set forth, above. In no
case shall the percentage of contiguous open space which is wetlands exceed fifty
(50) percent of the tract.
2. The contiguous open space shall be used for conservation, historic preservation
and education, outdoor education, recreation, park purposes, agriculture,
horticulture, forestry or a combination of these uses, and shall be served by
suitable access for such purposes.
3. The contiguous open space shall remain un-built upon, provided that the Planning
Board may permit up to ten (10) percent of such open space to be paved or built
upon for structures accessory to the dedicated use or uses of such open space,
pedestrian walks and bikepaths.
4. Underground utilities and dranage easements to serve the Flexible Development
site may be located within the contiguous open space.
7.3.14 Ownership of the Contiguous Open Space. The contiguous open space shall at the
Planning Board’s election be conveyed to:
1. the Town or its Conservation Commission
2. a nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the conservation of
open space and any of the purposes for such open space set forth above;
3. a corporation or trust owned jointly or in common by the owners of lots within the
Flexible Development. If such corporation or trust is utilized, ownership thereof
shall pass with conveyance of the lots in perpetuity. Maintenance of such open
space and facilities shall be permanently guaranteed by such corporation or trust
which shall provide for mandatory assessments for maintenance expenses to each
lot. Each such trust or corporation shall be deemed to have assented to allow the
Town to perform maintenance of such open space and facilities, if the trust or
corporation fails to provide adequate maintenance, and shall grant the town an
42
easement for this purpose. In such event, the town shall first provide fourteen (14)
days written notice to the trust or corporation as to the inadequate maintenance
and if the trust or corporation fails to complete such maintenance, the town may
perform it. Each individual deed, and the deed or trust or articles of incorporation,
shall include provisions designed to effect these provisions. Documents creating
such trust or corporation shall be submitted to the Planning Board for approval
and shall thereafter be recorded; (or)
4. In the alternative, a conservation restriction pursuant to G.L. c
184 ss. 31-33 shall be placed on the land.
7.3.15 Buffer Areas. A buffer area of fifty(50) feet shall be provided at the perimeter of the property
where it abuts residentially zoned or occupied properties, except for driveways necessary for access
and egress to and from the site. No vegetation in this buffer area will be disturbed, destroyed or
removed, except for normal maintenance. The Planning Board may waive the buffer requirement
(i) where the land abutting the site is the subject of a permanent restriction for conservation or
recreation; or(ii) where the land abutting the site is held by the Town for conservation or recreation
purposes; or (iii) the Planning Board determines that a smaller buffer will suffice to accomplish the
objectives set forth herein.
7.3.16 Stormwater Management Stormwater management shall be consistent with the requirements
for subdivisions set forth in the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board.
7.3.17 Decision The Planning Board may approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application
for a Flexible Development after determining whether the Flexible Development better promotes the
purposes of the Flexible Development By-Law than would a conventional subdivision development of
the same locus.
7.3.18 Relation to Other Requirements. The submittals and permits of this section shall be in
addition to any other requirements of the Subdivision Control Law or any other provisions of the
Zoning By-Law.
SECTION 8.0 SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Section 8.1: THE TOWN OF OAK BLUFFS FLOODPLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT BY-LAW
8.1.1: Statement of Purpose
The purposes of the Floodplain Overlay District are to:
a)Limit development in areas subject to flooding, particularly high hazard V zones and AO zones
in order to minimize potential loss of life, destruction of property, and environmental damage
inevitably resulting from storms, flooding, erosion and relative sea level rise.
b)Reduce or prevent public health emergencies resulting from surface and ground water
contamination from inundation of or damage to sewage disposal systems and storage areas for
typical household hazardous substances.
c)Enable safe access to and from homes and structures for homeowners and emergency response
personnel, such as police, fire, and rescue departments.
43
d)Minimize monetary loss and public health threats resulting from storm damage to public
facilities (water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges, etc.).
e)Prevent loss or diminution of the beneficial functions of storm and flood damage prevention or
reduction and pollution prevention provided by wetlands, beaches, dunes, barrier beaches, the
floodplain, and coastal banks
f)Protect public access and ensure that areas of high public value remain open to the public.
8.1.2: Floodplain Overlay District Boundaries
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district. The Floodplain Overlay
District (FPOD) includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Oak Bluffs designated
as Zone A, AE, AO, V, or VE on the Dukes County Federal Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP). The map panels of the Dukes County FIRM that are wholly or
partially within the Town of Oak Bluffs are panel numbers 25007C0102J, 25007C0103J,
25007C0104J, 25007C0106J, 25007C0108J, 25007C0111J, 25007C0112J, 25007C0116J, dated
July 20th, 2016. The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by the 100-year base flood
elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Dukes County Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) report dated July 20th, 2016. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference
and are on file with the conservation commission and the zoning administrator.
8.1.3: Scope of Authority
Reference to Existing Regulations
The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other districts and is
superimposed on existing zoning districts. All uses, dimensional requirements, and other
provisions of the bylaw applicable to such underlying districts shall remain in force and effect,
except where the restrictions and requirements of the overlay district are more restrictive, the later
shall prevail.
Reference to Other Applicable Laws and Regulations
In addition, all development in the district, including structural and non-structural activities,
whether permitted by right or by special permit under this section must be in compliance with the
following;
Wetlands Protection Act, G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40;
Massachusetts State Building Code, 780 CMR;
Coastal Wetlands Restriction Act, G.L. Ch.130, s. 105
Title 5 of the State Sanitary Code, 310 CMR 15.00
Title 5 of the State Sanitary Code, 310 CMR 12.00
8.1.3.1: Notification of Watercourse Alteration
In a riverine situation, the Conservation Agent shall notify the following of any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse:
Adjacent communities
NFIP Coordinator
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
44
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
NFIP Program Specialist
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region 1
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
8.1.3.2: Other Use Regulations
All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
Such proposals minimize flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards
8.1.4: Permitted Uses
Notwithstanding any other provision of this bylaw the following uses and activities are permitted
by right within the entire FPOD:
Public access activities; however the structures in connection with these activities may be
regulated as stipulated below.
Repair of existing foundations, unless the work replaces the foundation in total or repairs the
foundation so as to constitute new construction or a substantial repair of a foundation.
Repair of existing structures, provided that the repair does not constitute a substantial
improvement or a reconstruction.
8.1.5: Permitted Uses by Special Permit
8.1.5.1: Notwithstanding any other provision of this bylaw, and upon issuance of a Special Permit
by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and subject to such special conditions and safeguards as are
deemed necessary to fulfill the purpose of this bylaw, the following uses and activities can be
permitted in the entire FPOD:
Substantial repair to a foundation.
Restoration and construction of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the
official State Inventory of Historic Places.
Construction of water dependent structures as determined by MassDEP Chapter 91 (Waterways)
Regulations.
Beach or dune nourishment and restoration of coastal resource areas as defined in the MA
Wetlands Protection Act and Oak Bluffs Wetlands Bylaw
The repair or replacement of an existing septic system.
Replacement or repair of existing impervious surfaces, including, but not limited to, swimming
pools, tennis/basketball courts, pavement, pavers, concrete slabs at grade, curbing, and retaining
walls.
45
8.1.5.2: Notwithstanding any other provision of this bylaw, and upon issuance of a Special Permit
by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and subject to such special conditions and safeguards as are
deemed necessary to fulfill the purpose of this bylaw, the following uses and activities can be
permitted in the A and AE Zone of the FPOD:
New construction of residential structures.
The construction of an addition or other alterations to an existing structure that results in an
increase in floor area or intensity of use, or constitutes a substantial improvement.
Repair of a substantially damaged structure or reconstruction of an existing structure.
New construction of non-residential structures.
The following activities are allowed by Special Permit, provided a registered professional
engineer certifies in writing that the activity will not cause an increase in wave runup, a deflection
or channelization of flood waters, or an increase in the velocity of flow:
An increase in impervious surface, which may include, but is not limited to, swimming pools,
tennis/basketball courts, pavers, concrete slabs at grade, curbing, and retaining walls.
The storage or disposal of any soil, loam, peat, sand, gravel, rock, or other mineral substance,
refuse, trash, rubbish, debris, or dredged spoil.
The excavation, dredging, removal, or relocation of loam, peat, sand, gravel, soil, rock, or other
mineral substance.
8.1.5.3: Notwithstanding any other provision of this bylaw, and upon issuance of a Special Permit
by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and subject to such special conditions and safeguards as are
deemed necessary to fulfill the purpose of this bylaw, the following uses and activities can be
permitted in the V and AO Zones of the FPOD:
Repair of a substantially damaged structure or reconstruction of an existing structure provided the
work shall not increase floor area.
All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.
8.1.6: Prohibited Uses
8.1.6.1: The following uses are prohibited within the entire FPOD:
The installation of a basement.
8.1.6.2: The following uses are prohibited within the V, VE and AO Zones of the FPOD:
New construction of residential structures.
The construction of an addition or other alterations to an existing structure that results in an
increase in floor area.
Repair of substantially damaged structure or reconstruction of an existing structure that results in
an increase in floor area.
New construction of non-residential structures, with the exception of water dependent structures.
Any increase in impervious surface on a residential lot. This may include, but is not limited to,
swimming pools, tennis/basketball courts, pavers, concrete slabs at grade, curbing, and retaining
46
walls. For water dependent projects allowed in the V, VE, and AO Zones, impervious surfaces
accessory to the use is allowed provided a registered professional engineer certifies in writing that
the impervious surface will not cause an increase in wave runup, a deflection or channelization of
flood waters, or an increase in the velocity of flow.
With the exception of beach nourishment and raised septic systems, which must receive a Special
Permit (see above), the following uses are specifically prohibited and may not be allowed by
Special Permit:
The storage or disposal of any soil, loam, peat, sand, gravel, rock, or other mineral substance,
refuse, trash, rubbish, debris, or dredged spoil, with the exception of landscaping fill that is
permitted, provided a registered professional engineer certifies in writing that the fill will not
cause an increase in wave runup, a deflection or channelization of flood waters, or an increase in
the velocity of flow;
Draining, excavation, or dredging, or removal or relocation of loam, peat, sand, gravel, soil, rock,
or other mineral substance.
The use of fill for structural support of buildings
Man made alterations to sand dunes
8.1.7 General Administration.
This bylaw hereby establishes a plan review committee, which shall consist of representatives
from the Zoning Board of Appeals, Conservation Commission, Board of Health, Planning Board,
and the Cottage City Historic District Commission and Copeland Plan District Review Board
when the site is within their jurisdiction. The purpose of this committee is to advise the zoning
enforcement officer on building permit decisions for properties in the FPOD.
Before rendering a building permit decision, the building inspector shall receive written comments
from the plan review committee, particularly on the following:
Determination of any project’s flood zone status, and
Determination of whether a proposed construction or alteration of the landform within the FPOD
has received all necessary permits from those government agencies from which approval is
required by federal, state, or town law.
The building inspector shall:
Obtain and maintain records of the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor,
including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; maintain records as to
whether or not such structures contain a basement.
Make a determination of substantial improvement or substantial damage (as defined) using the
official records of the Tax Assessor.
8.1.8 Special Permit Administration
All special permits in the FPOD will be granted by The Board of Appeals and shall be
administered as follows:
47
Before granting a special permit, The Board of Appeals shall file applications forms and plans to
receive written comments from the plan review committee.
The special permit granting authority shall impose conditions and requirements as deemed
necessary to fulfill the purpose of this bylaw and as set forth in the regulations promulgated in
accordance with MGL Chapter 40A section 9.
The special permit granting authority may require such additional information and impose
conditions as it finds necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public or the
occupants of the proposed use, or of the floodplain district.
The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit only upon:
A determination that the granting of the special permit will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or conflict with existing local bylaws;
and
Determination that the special permit is the minimum necessary to afford relief, considering the
flood hazard.
8.1.9 Regulations
The Board of Appeals may adopt, and periodically amend, rules and regulations relating to the
terms, conditions, definitions, enforcement, fees (including application, inspection, and/or
consultant fees), procedures, and administration of this district by majority vote after conducting a
public hearing to receive comments on any proposed revisions.
8.1.10 Fees
The Board of Appeals shall obtain with each submission an Application Fee established by the
Board to cover expenses connected with the review of the special permit and a technical review
fee sufficient to cover professional review services for the project. The Board is authorized to
retain a Registered Professional Engineer or other professional consultant to advise the Board on
any or all aspects of these plans. Applicants must pay review fees before the review process may
begin.
8.1.11 Severability
If any provision of this bylaw is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
the bylaw shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections or parts of any
section or sections of this bylaw shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this bylaw.
8.1.12: Definitions
Definitions in this bylaw shall be consistent with the Massachusetts State Building Code, 780
CMR, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP) 59.1, and with Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (MassDEP)
Chapter 91 (Waterways) Regulations.
ADDITION means an extension or increase in floor area or height of a building or structure.
48
ALTERATION means any Construction or Renovation to an Existing Structure other than
Repair or Addition.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD is the land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be
designated as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, V1-30, VE, or V.
BASE FLOOD means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASEMENT means that portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade (see
“Story above grade plan”) and 780 CMR 502.1 and 1612.2).
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA means an area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and any other area
subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic sources. The area is designated on a
FIRM as Zone V, V1-30, VE.
DEVELOPMENT means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including
but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations.
DISTRICT means floodplain district.
EXISTING STRUCTURE means a structure erected prior to the date of adoption of the
appropriate code, or one for which a legal building permit has been issued.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) administers the National
Flood Insurance Program. FEMA provides a nationwide flood hazard area mapping study
program for communities as well as regulatory standards for development in the flood hazard
areas.
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP means an official map of a community issued
by FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analyses, the boundaries of the 100-year and 500 year
floods and the 100-year floodway. (For maps done in 1987 and later, the floodway designation is
included on the FIRM.)
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM) means an official map of a community issued
by FEMA where the boundaries of the flood and related erosion areas having special hazards have
been designated as Zone A or E.
49
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) means an official map of a community on which
FEMA has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY means an examination, evaluation, and determination of flood
hazards, and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation
and determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
FLOODWAY means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation.
LOWEST FLOOR means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement or
cellar). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor,
PROVIDED that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of NFIP Regulations 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes the term "manufactured
home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term "manufactured home" does
not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION means a parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION means, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, NEW
CONSTRUCTION means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after
the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD - see BASE FLOOD.
PERMIT means an official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction,
which authorizes performance of a specific activity.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY - see FLOODWAY
REPAIR means the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building for the purpose
of its maintenance.
50
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA means an area having special flood and/or flood-related
erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, V,
V1-30, VE.
STRUCTURE means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home. STRUCTURE, for insurance coverage purposes, means a walled and roofed building,
other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground and affixed to a permanent
site, as well as a manufactured home on foundation. For the latter purpose, the term includes a
building while in the course of construction, alteration, or repair, but does not include building
materials or supplies intended for use in such construction, alteration, or repair, unless such
materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent
of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either
(a) before the improvement or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other
structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the structure.
WATER-DEPENDENT USE means a use that requires direct access to or location in tidal or
inland waters, and therefore cannot be located away from said waters. It is any use that complies
with or is specified in the DEP regulations at 310 CMR 9.12(2)
ZONE A means the 100-year floodplain area where the base flood elevation (BFE) has not been
determined. To determine the BFE, use the best available federal, state, local, or other data.
ZONE A1-30 and ZONE AE (for new and revised maps) means the 100-year floodplain where
the base flood elevation has been determined.
ZONE AH and ZONE AO means the 100-year floodplain with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet, where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
ZONE A99 means areas to be protected from the 100-year flood by federal flood protection
system under construction. Base flood elevations have not been determined.
51
ZONES B, C, AND X are areas identified in the community Flood Insurance Study as areas of
moderate or minimal flood hazard. Zone X replaces Zones B and C on new and revised maps.
ZONE V means a special flood hazard area along a coast subject to inundation by the 100-year
flood with the additional hazards associated with storm waves. Base flood elevations have not
been determined.
ZONE V1-30 and ZONE VE (for new and revised maps) means a special flood hazard area along
a coast subject to inundation by the 100-year flood with additional hazards due to velocity (wave
action). Base flood elevations have been determined.
(Section 8.1 Replaced ATM 4.13.10 Art.24, AG Approved 8.30.10, Published 9.14.0)
(Section 8.1 Amended ATM 4.12/2016 Art. 31 AG Approved April 6, 2016, Published May 18,
2016)
8.2 WATER RESOURCE PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT (WRPOD)
8.2.1 Legislative Findings and Purpose. The groundwater underlying this Town is the only
source of its existing and future drinking water supply. The groundwater aquifer is integrally
connected with, and flows into, the surface waters, lakes, streams and coastal estuaries which
constitute significant recreational and economic resources of the town used for bathing and other
water related recreation, shellfish and fishing. Accidental spills and discharge of petroleum
products and other toxic and hazardous materials have repeatedly threatened the quality of such
groundwater supplies and other related water resources on Martha's Vineyard and in other
Massachusetts towns, posing potential public health and safety hazards and threatening economic
losses to the affected communities. Unless preventive measures are adopted to prohibit discharge
of toxic and hazardous materials and to control their storage within the town, further spills and
discharge of such materials will predictably occur, and with greater construction, commercial and
industrial development, population, and vehicular traffic in the Town of Oak Bluffs and on
Martha's Vineyard. The foregoing conclusions are confirmed by findings set forth in the "Water
Quality Management Plan for Martha's Vineyard", April 1978, prepared by the Martha's Vineyard
Commission pursuant to Section 208 of the Federal Clean Waters Act; by the report entitled
"Edgartown Water Resource Protection Plan", February 1983, prepared for the Edgartown Board
of Health by Anderson-Nichols and Co., Inc. and "Public Drinking Water Resource Protection
Plan", May 1985, by the Martha's Vineyard Commission. Therefore, it is the purpose of the
WRPOD to protect the public health by preventing contamination of the groundwater resources
providing water supply for the Town.
8.2.2 Definitions.
SEWERAGE FLOW: All flow estimates shall be determined using procedures given in
the Massachusetts State Environmental Code, Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface
52
Disposal Sanitary Sewerage.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or mixture of such physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics as to pose a significant, actual potential hazard to
water supplies, or other hazard to human health, if such substance or mixture were
discharged to land or waters of this zone of contribution. Toxic or hazardous materials
include, without limitations, organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive
or infectious wastes, acids, and alkalies, and include products such as pesticides,
herbicides, solvents and thinners. Wastes generated by the following activities, without
limitation, are presumed to be toxic or hazardous, unless and except to the extent that
anyone engaging in such an activity can demonstrate the contrary to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board: Airplane, boat and motor vehicles service and repair or storage; chemical
and bacteriological laboratory operation; cabinet making; dry cleaning; electronic circuit
assembly; metal plating, finishing and polishing; motor and machinery service and
assembly; painting, wood preserving and furniture stripping; pesticide and herbicide
application; photographic processing; printing; dye; car washes; landfills; mining
lands; animal feed-outs; parking lots over 3,500 square feet which are not designed and
constructed using impervious surfaces and oil retention catch basins.
8.2.3 Location. The WRPODs are shown on the Oak Bluffs Water Resource Protection Map
dated January, 2006. Such Map is an official part of the town zoning map and shall be on file for
public inspection with the Town Clerk and the Planning Board. The area delineated shows the
zone of contribution for each municipal well, which is the area from which each well draws its
drinking water. The WRPOD is an overlay district. To the extent that the regulations of the
WRPOD are more strict that the regulations of the underlying district, the WRPOD shall control.
8.2.4 Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited in the WRPOD:
1. New Underground fuel tanks
2. Chemical treatment of septic systems
3. Outside storage of road salt, fertilizers and pesticides
8.2.5 The following uses are permitted in the WRPOD: (Section replaced 4.12.05 Art. 15, AG
Approved 7.13.05, Published 7.26.05)
1. Commercial or residential development with on-site subsurface sewerage disposal
systems, provided that the wastewater flow estimates for new lots shall not exceed the
standards of 310 CMR 15.00 for nitrogen sensitive areas.
8.2.6 Uses by Special Permit. The following uses are permitted in the WRPOD by special
53
permit:
1. Any use established after the date of adoption of this by-law which involves the
generation, use of storage of any toxic or hazardous materials in greater quantities than
that associated with a normal household use.
2. Parking lots greater than 3,500 square feet, unless the lot shall have an impervious
surface and shall be constructed with oil retention catch basins.
8.2.7 Special Permit Granting Authority. The Special Permit Granting Authority for the
WRPOD shall be the Planning Board.
1. Submittals. In applying for a Special Permit under this section, the information listed
below shall be submitted.
a. A complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, fuels, and other potentially
toxic or hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises in
quantities greater than those associated with the normal household use,
accompanied by a description of measures proposed to protect all storage
containers/facilities from vandalism, corrosion, and leakage, and to provide
for control of spills.
b. A description of potentially toxic or hazardous wastes to be generated,
indication storage and disposal methods.
c. Evidence of approval by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) of any industrial waste treatment or wastewater system
over 15,000 gallons per day capacity.
d. For underground storage of toxic or hazardous materials, evidence of
qualified professional supervision of system design and installation.
e. Analysis certifying compliance if required by the Planning Board, which
shall be done by a technically qualified expert, at the expense of the
applicant.
2. Review by other town agencies. Upon receipt of the Special Permit Application by the
Planning Board, the Planning Board shall transmit one copy each to the Highway
Department, the Board of Health, and the Water Department, for their written
recommendations. Failure to respond in writing within 45 days shall indicate approval by
said agencies. Five copies of the application shall be furnished by the applicant.
3. Special Permit Criteria. Special Permits shall be granted only where the Planning
54
Board determines, in conjunction with the other town agencies as specified herein, that
a. groundwater quality resulting from on-site waste disposal and other on-site
operations will not fall below federal or state standards, if existing
groundwater quality is already below those standards on-site disposal will
result in no further deterioration.
b. the intent of this by-law, as well as the criteria, has been satisfied, after
consideration of the simplicity, reliability, and the feasibility of the control
measures proposed and the degree of the threat to water quality which
would result if the control measures failed.
c. The Planning Board shall explain any departures from the
recommendations of the other town agencies in its decision.
8.2.8 Non-conforming Uses. Any lawful use of land or building or part thereof at the adoption
of this ordinance may be continued, with normal repairs and maintenance permitted, although
such use does not conform to the provisions of this by-law, provided that:
1. A non-conforming use shall not be changed to another non-conforming use.
2. A non-conforming use shall not be expanded or enlarged.
3. A non-conforming use which has been discontinued shall not be resumed.
4. Any non-conforming building or land use damaged or destroyed by fire or other natural
disaster may be repaired or replaced if the extent of damage is less than 50% of its fair
market value prior to damage.
8.2.9 Violations. Written notice of any violation of this Section 8.2 shall be provided by the
Building Commissioner and/or Zoning Enforcement Officer to the owner of the premises and to
the Planning Board, specifying the nature of the violations and a schedule of compliance,
including cleanup of any spilled materials. This compliance schedule must be reasonable in
relation to the public health hazard involved and the difficulty or compliance. In no event shall
more than 30 days be allowed for either compliance or finalization of a plan for longer term
compliance.
55
8.3 WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS OVERLAY DISTRICT (WCOD)
8.3.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish areas in which wireless
communications facilities may be provided while protecting the Town's unique community
character. The WCOD has been created (a) to provide for safe and appropriate siting of wireless
communications facilities consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996; and (b) to
minimize visual impacts from such facilities on residential districts and scenic areas within the
Town.
8.3.2 Location. The WCOD is composed of the following parcels, as set forth on the maps of the
Town Board of Assessors:
Map 8, Parcel 139
Map 9, Parcel 36
Map 11, Parcel 164
Map 11, Parcel 292
Map 16, Parcel 147
Map 16, Parcel 180
Map 16, Parcel 181
Map 17, Parcel 110.10
Map 22, Parcel 5
Map 29, Parcel 155
Map 29, Parcel 156
Map 50, Parcel 29 *
Map 50, Parcel 30 *
Map 50, Parcel 31 *
Map 55, Parcel 2
Map 55, Parcel 4
*(Amended ATM 4/10/07, Art 19)(AG Approved 5/14/07)(Posted 5/21/07)
8.3.3 Applicability. The WCF District shall be construed as an overlay district with regard to
said locations. All requirements of the underlying zoning shall remain in full force and effect,
except as may be specifically superseded or added to herein.
8.3.4 Uses Available by Special Permit. A wireless communications facility (WCF) may be
erected in the WCOD upon the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board if the Board
determines that the proposed facility will not cause substantial detriment to the town or the
neighborhood, in view of the particular characteristics of the site, and of the proposal in relation to
that site. The determination shall include consideration of each of the following:
1. Communications needs served by the WCF;
56
2. Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading;
3. Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
4. Impact on neighborhood character, including aesthetics;
5. Impacts on the natural environment, including visual impacts;
6. Potential fiscal impact, including impact on town services, tax base, and employment;
and
7. New monopoles shall be considered only upon a finding that existing or approved
monopoles or facilities cannot accommodate the equipment planned for the proposed
monopole.
8.3.5 Conditions. All WCFs shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. To the extent feasible, service providers shall co-locate on a single facility. Monopoles
shall be designed to structurally accommodate other potential users (within a ten year
period) where technically practicable.
2. New free-standing WCFs shall be limited to monopoles; no lattice towers shall be
permitted. Monopole height shall not exceed 100 feet above mean finished ground
elevation at the base of the mounting structure, provided, however, that a monopole may
be erected higher than 100 feet where co-location is approved or proposed, not to exceed a
height of 140 feet above mean finished ground elevation at the base of the mounting
structure. No variance shall be issued for a monopole higher than 140 feet.
3. All structures associated with WCFs shall be removed within one year of cessation of
use. The Board may require a performance guarantee to affect this result.
4. Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
5. The WCF shall minimize, to the extent feasible, adverse visual effects on the
environment. The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions to ensure this result,
including painting, lighting standards, landscaping, and screening.
6. Traffic associated with the WCF shall not adversely affect public ways.
7. Fencing may be required to control unauthorized entry to a WCF.
8.3.6 Submittal Requirements. As part of any application for a special permit, applicants shall
submit, at a minimum, the following information.
57
1. A site plan consistent with the requirements for major site plan approval, as set forth
herein at Section 10.4.
2. A narrative report describing the capacity of the WCF, including the number and types
of antennas that it can accommodate and the basis for the calculation of capacity.
1. Copies of required federal and state permits, or a list of such permits to be acquired prior
to construction.
8.4 Registered Marijuana Dispensary OVERLAY DISTRICT (RMDOD) (Section 8.0
Amended STM 11/12/13, Article 13,(AG approved Dec. 16, 2013) (Posted 12/20/13)
8.4.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish areas in which a Registered Marijuana
Dispensary (RMD) may be located, while protecting the Town’s unique community character and
while minimizing any adverse impact on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, elderly
housing facilities, schools, and other places where children congregate, as well as other land uses
potentially incompatible with an RMD. Since an RMD will serve both Oak Bluffs and the
surrounding communities, the location of the RMDOD is designed to allow for ease of access by
both private vehicles and public transportation, to provide sufficient parking, and to protect the
confidentiality of customers served.
8.4.2 Locations. The RMDOD is composed of the following areas.
The following parcels, as set forth on the maps of the Town Board of Assessors:
Map 6 Parcel 43
Map 6 Parcel 46
Map 6 Parcel 46.1
Map 6 Parcel 9
Map 7 Parcel 1
Map 24 Parcel 7
Map 24 Parcel 8
Map 24 Parcel 9
58
Map 24 Parcel 10
Map 24 Parcel 11
Map 24 Parcel 12
Map 40 Parcel 10
Map 40 Parcel 11
Map 40 Parcel 11.1
8.4.3 Applicability. The RMDOD shall be construed as an overlay district regarding the
locations identified in Section 8.4.2. All requirements of the underlying zoning districts shall
remain in full force and effect. Any as-of-right uses shall remain as-of-right uses in the RMDOD,
except these uses may be specifically superseded or added to by this Section. In addition, this
Section provides that:
1. The cultivation, production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale,
trade, distribution or dispensing of Marijuana for Medical Use is prohibited, unless
permitted as a RMD under this Section.
2. No RMD shall be established except in compliance with the provisions of this Section.
3. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to supersede federal and state laws governing
the possession, sale, and distribution of narcotic drugs.
4. If any provision of this Section or the application of any such provision to any person or
circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this Section, to the extent it can be
given effect, or the application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other than
those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected.
8.4.4 Definitions.
1. Registered Marijuana Dispensary – A facility for the cultivation, production,
processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade, distribution or dispensing
of Marijuana for Medical Use, whether located inside a structure or building or not.
59
2. Marijuana for Medical Use – Marijuana that is designated and restricted for use by, and
for the benefit of, Qualifying Patients in the treatment of Debilitating Medical Conditions.
3. Marijuana – The same substance defined as “marijuana” under Chapter 94C of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
8.4.5 General Requirements and Conditions for all Registered Marijuana Dispensary.
1. All RMDs shall be contained within a building or structure.
2. The hours of operation of a RMD shall be set by the Board of Appeals, but in no event
shall a RMD be open and/or operating between the hours of 6:00 PM and 8:00 AM.
3. No special permit for a RMD shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of a
felony or a violation of a state or federal statute prohibiting the unlawful possession, sale
or distribution of narcotic drugs or prescription drugs. Further, no special permit for an
RMD shall be issued to a non-profit corporation in which an owner, shareholder, member,
officer, manager, or employee has been convicted of a violation of a felony or a state or
federal statute prohibiting the unlawful possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs or
prescription drugs.
4. No special permit for a RMD shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of a
violation of Massachusetts General Law Chapter 119, Section 63 or Massachusetts
General Law Chapter 272, Section 28. Further, no special permit for a RMD shall be
issued to a non-profit corporation in which an owner, shareholder, member, officer,
manager, or employee has been convicted of a violation of Massachusetts General Law
Chapter 119, Section 63 or Massachusetts General Law Chapter 272, Section 28.
5. No RMD shall be located within 500 feet of any of the following structures or uses:
(a) any school attended by children under the age of 18;
(b) any licensed child care facility;
(c) any correctional facility, half-way house, or similar facility; or
(d) any other RMD.
60
6. No RMD shall be located within 500 feet of any playground, public park, public athletic
field, or similar public recreational facility.
7. No smoking or burning of marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on
the premises of a RMD.
8. No RMD shall be located inside a building containing residential units, including transient
housing, or inside a movable or mobile structure such as a van or truck.
9. RMDs shall only sell, distribute or dispense in accordance with 105 CMR 725.
10. Signage for a RMD shall conform to the Oak Bluffs Zoning By-law Sign Regulations or
105 CMR 726, whichever is more limiting.
11. RMDs shall provide the Board of Appeals, Board of Selectmen and Police Department the
with the name, phone number and email address of an on-site community relations staff
person to whom one can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the
establishment.
12. No person who is not at least 21 years of age shall be permitted on the premises of a RMD
during hours of operation unless that person is a qualified patient or accompanied by a
caregiver or patient with a valid registration card.
13. All special permits issued under this Section will contain a condition that the RMD may
not operate, and the special permit will not be valid, until the applicant has obtained all
licenses and permits issued by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of its
agencies for the Facility.
8.4.6 Special Permit Requirements.
1. A RMD may only be allowed by special permit from the Board of Appeals in accordance
with G.L. c. 40A, § 9, and Section 10.3 of the Zoning By-law, subject to the following
statements, regulations, requirements, conditions and limitations.
2. A special permit for a RMD shall be limited to one or more of the following uses that shall
be prescribed by the Board of Appeals:
61
(a) cultivation of Marijuana for Medical Use (horticulture);
(b) processing and packaging of Marijuana for Medical Use, including Marijuana that
is in the form of smoking materials, food products, oils, aerosols, ointments, and
other products;
(c) retail sale or distribution of Marijuana for Medical Use to Qualified Patients; or
(d) wholesale sale of Marijuana for Medical Use to other RMDs located in Oak Bluffs
or in another municipality but only in accordance with state regulations.
3. In addition to the application requirements set forth in Sections 8.4.6(1) and (2), of this
Section, a special permit application for a RMD shall include the following:
(a) a statement from the Applicant under oath, setting forth the following information:
(i) the name and address of each owner, manager, member, partner and
employee of the Facility, and a statement indicating whether the application
conforms to Sections 8.4.6(1) and 8.4.6(2) above;
(ii) the source of all marijuana that will be sold or distributed at the Facility, if
applicable;
(iii) the source of all marijuana that will be cultivated, processed, and/or
packaged at the Facility, if applicable; and
(iv) the quantity of marijuana that will be cultivated, processed, packaged, sold
and/or distributed at the Facility.
(b) a copy of its Articles of Organization, a current Certificate of Legal Existence from
the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and the most recent annual report.
62
(c ) evidence of the Applicant’s right to use the site of the Facility, such as a
deed, lease, purchase and sale agreement or other legally-binding
document;
(d) a certified list of all parties in interest entitled to notice of the hearing for the
special permit application, taken from the most recent tax list of the town and
certified by the Town Assessor;
(e) proposed security measures for the RMD, including lighting and alarms, to ensure
the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.
4. Outside Consultants and Review Fees. An outside consultant review escrow deposit
shall accompany the Application for special permit. The escrow for review fees is
intended to cover the Board’s potential cost of hiring consultants to review the
Applicant’s compliance with the special permit requirements under this Bylaw, and may
include the anticipated costs of legal counsel. The initial escrow deposit amount shall be
set by the Board of Appeals on a case-by-case basis, when such consultants or counsel are
deemed necessary. Any unexpended monies in the escrow account will be returned to the
applicant only after all obligations are satisfied. Failure to fulfill escrow requirements may
render an Application incomplete and be considered sufficient grounds for its denial.
(a) The Applicant may appeal the selection of a consultant(s) whose fees are to be paid
from the escrow deposit to the Board of Selectmen. The grounds for such an appeal shall
be limited to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not
possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist of
either an educational degree in or related to the field at issue or three or more years of
practice in the field at issue or a related field. Pursuant to G.L. c. 44, § 53G, the required
time limits for action upon the Application by the Board of Appeals shall be extended by
the duration of the appeal. If no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen within one
month following the filing of the appeal, the Board of Appeals selection shall stand.
(b). The escrow deposit shall be deposited in a special account established by the
Town Treasurer pursuant to G.L. c. 44, § 53G. Funds from the special account
only for the purposes described above.
5. Mandatory Findings. The Board of Appeals shall not issue a special permit for an RMD
unless it finds that:
(a) the RMD is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic impacts on
abutters and other parties in interest, as defined in G.L. c. 40A, §11;
63
(b) the applicant has not provided materially false documents or testimony; and
(c) the applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements of Section 8.4.6.
6. Annual Reporting. Each RMD permitted under this Section shall, as a condition of its
special permit, file a copy the Annual Report submitted to the state with Board of Appeals
and the Town Clerk no later than January 31st
7. If required by the Board of Appeals, a full transcription or recording of the oral hearings
shall be made at the Applicant’s expense.
8. A special permit granted under this Section shall have a term limited to the duration of the
applicant’s ownership and use of the premises as a RMD. A special permit may be
transferred only with the approval of the Board of Appeals in the form of an amendment to
the special permit.
9. Any violation of this Section shall be grounds for revocation of a special permit issued
under this Section.
10. Any revocation of the RMD's license by the state shall be grounds for revocation of the
Special Permit.
8.5 MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT (MEOD)
(Voted STM 11.14.17, Art 7, AG Approved 2.26.18, Posted 2.27.18)
8.5.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish areas in which a Marijuana
Establishment may be located, while protecting the Town’s unique community character, while
minimizing any adverse impact on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, elderly housing
facilities, schools, and other places where children congregate, as well as other land uses
potentially incompatible with a Marijuana Establishment. Since a Marijuana Establishment will
serve both Oak Bluffs and the surrounding communities, the location of the MEOD is designed to
allow for ease of access by both private vehicles and public transportation, and to provide
sufficient parking from all Island locations.
8.5.2 Locations. The MEOD is composed of the following areas, which is identical to the
overlay district providing for Registered Marijuana Dispensaries in Section 8.4 of this By-law.
The following parcels, as set forth on the maps of the Town Board of Assessors:
64
Map 6 Parcel 43
Map 6 Parcel 46
Map 6 Parcel 46.1
Map 6 Parcel 9
Map 7 Parcel 1
Map 24 Parcel 7
Map 24 Parcel 8
Map 24 Parcel 9
Map 24 Parcel 10
Map 24 Parcel 11
Map 24 Parcel 12
Map 40 Parcel 10
Map 40 Parcel 11
Map 40 Parcel 11.1
8.5.3 Applicability. The MEOD shall be construed as an overlay district regarding the locations
identified in Section 8.5.2. All requirements of the underlying zoning districts shall remain in full
force and effect. Any as-of-right uses shall remain as-of-right uses in the MEOD, except these
uses may be specifically superseded or added to by this Section. In addition, this Section provides
that:
1. The cultivation, production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale,
trade, distribution or dispensing of Marijuana is prohibited, unless permitted as a Marijuana
Establishment under this Section.
2. No Marijuana Establishment shall be established except in compliance with the provisions
of this Section.
3. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to supersede federal and state laws governing
the possession, sale, and distribution of narcotic drugs.
4. If any provision of this Section or the application of any such provision to any person or
circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this Section, to the extent it can be given
effect, or the application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which
it is held invalid, shall not be affected.
8.5.4 Definitions.
1. Hemp - the plant of the genus Cannabis or any part of the plant, whether growing or not,
with a delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does not exceed 0.3 per cent on a dry
weight basis of any part of the plant of the genus Cannabis, or per volume or weight of marijuana
65
product, or the combined per cent of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and tetrahydrocannabinolic acid
in any part of the plant of the genus Cannabis regardless of moisture content.
2. Manufacture - to compound, blend, extract, infuse or otherwise make or prepare a
marijuana product.
3. Marijuana or Marihuana - all parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, not excepted below
and whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; and resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or
resin including tetrahydrocannabinol as defined in section 1 of chapter 94C of the General Laws;
provided that "Marijuana" shall not include:
a. The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of
the mature stalks, fiber, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant or the sterilized seed of the
plant that is incapable of germination;
b. Hemp; or
c. The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to prepare topical or oral
administrations, food, drink or other products.
4. Marijuana accessories - equipment, products, devices or materials of any kind that are
intended or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing
marijuana into the human body.
5. Marijuana cultivator - an entity licensed to cultivate, process and package marijuana, to
deliver marijuana to marijuana establishments and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
6. Marijuana establishment - a marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing facility, marijuana
product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business.
7. Marijuana product manufacturer - an entity licensed to obtain, manufacture, process and
package marijuana and marijuana products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to
marijuana establishments and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.
8. Marijuana products - products that have been manufactured and contain marijuana or an
extract from marijuana, including concentrated forms of marijuana and products composed of
marijuana and other ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including edible
products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures.
66
9. Marijuana testing facility - an entity licensed to test marijuana and marijuana products,
including certification for potency and the presence of contaminants.
10. Marijuana retailer - an entity licensed to purchase and deliver marijuana and marijuana
products from marijuana establishments and to deliver, sell or otherwise transfer marijuana and
marijuana products to marijuana establishments and to consumers.
11. Process or processing - to harvest, dry, cure, trim and separate parts of the marijuana plant
by manual or mechanical means, except it shall not include manufacture as defined in subsection
(2) of this Section.
8.5.5 General Requirements and Conditions for all Marijuana Establishments.
1. All Marijuana Establishments shall be contained within a building or structure.
2. The hours of operation of a Marijuana Establishment shall be set by the Board of Appeals,
but in no event shall a Marijuana Establishments be open and/or operating between the hours of
6:00 PM and 8:00 AM.
3. No special permit for a Marijuana Establishment shall be issued to a person who has been
convicted of a felony or a violation of a state or federal statute prohibiting the unlawful
possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs or prescription drugs. Further, no special permit
for a Marijuana Establishment shall be issued to a corporation in which an owner, shareholder,
member, officer, manager, or employee has been convicted of a violation of a felony or a state or
federal statute prohibiting the unlawful possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs or
prescription drugs.
4. No special permit for a Marijuana Establishment shall be issued to a person who has been
convicted of a violation of Massachusetts General Law Chapter 119, Section 63 or Massachusetts
General Law Chapter 272, Section 28. Further, no special permit for a Marijuana Establishment
shall be issued to a corporation in which an owner, shareholder, member, officer, manager, or
employee has been convicted of a violation of Massachusetts General Law Chapter 119, Section
63 or Massachusetts General Law Chapter 272, Section 28.
5. No Marijuana Establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any of the following
structures or uses:
(a) any school attended by children under the age of 18;
(b) any licensed child care facility;
(c) any correctional facility, half-way house, or similar facility; or
(d) any other Marijuana Establishment.
67
6. No Marijuana Establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any playground, public
park, public athletic field, or similar public recreational facility.
7. No Marijuana Establishment shall be located inside a building containing residential units,
including transient housing, or inside a movable or mobile structure such as a van or truck.
8. Marijuana Establishments shall only sell, distribute or dispense in accordance with an act
of the Legislature entitled “Regulation of the use and distribution of Marijuana not medically
prescribed,” which has been inserted in the General Laws as Chapter 94G through St. 2016, c.334,
s. 5, as amended (the “Act”).
9. Signage for a Marijuana Establishment shall conform to the Oak Bluffs Zoning By-law
Sign Regulations or the Act, whichever is more limiting.
10. Marijuana Establishments shall provide the Board of Appeals, Board of Selectmen and
Police Department with the name, phone number and email address of an on-site community
relations staff person to whom one can provide notice if there are operating problems associated
with the establishment.
11. No person who is not at least 21 years of age shall be permitted on the premises of a
Marijuana Establishment during hours of operation.
12. All special permits issued under this Section will contain a condition that the Marijuana
Establishment may not operate, and the special permit will not be valid, until the applicant has
obtained all licenses and permits issued by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of its
agencies for the Facility.
8.5.6 Special Permit Requirements.
1. A Marijuana Establishment may only be allowed by special permit from the Board of
Appeals in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, § 9, and Section 10.3 of the Zoning By-law, subject to
the following statements, regulations, requirements, conditions and limitations:
2. A special permit for a Marijuana Establishment shall be limited to one or more of the
following uses that shall be prescribed by the Board of Appeals:
(a) cultivation of Marijuana;
(b) processing and packaging of Marijuana, including Marijuana that is in the form of
smoking materials, food products, oils, aerosols, ointments, and other products;
(c) retail sale or distribution of Marijuana; or
68
(d) wholesale sale of Marijuana to other Marijuana Establishments located in Oak Bluffs or in
another municipality but only in accordance with State regulations.
3. In addition to the application requirements set forth in Sections 8.5.6(1) and (2), of this
Section, a special permit application for a Marijuana Establishment shall include the following:
(a) A statement from the Applicant under oath, setting forth the following information:
(i) the name and address of each owner, manager, member, partner and employee of the
Facility, and a statement indicating whether the application conforms to Sections 8.5.6(1) and
8.5.6(2) above;
(ii) the source of all marijuana that will be sold or distributed at the Facility, if applicable;
(iii) the source of all marijuana that will be cultivated, processed, and/or packaged at the
Facility, if applicable; and
(iv) the quantity of marijuana that will be cultivated, processed, packaged, sold and/or
distributed at the Facility.
(b) a copy of its Articles of Organization, a current Certificate of Legal Existence from the
Secretary of the Commonwealth, and the most recent annual report.
(c) evidence of the Applicant’s right to use the site of the Facility, such as a deed, lease,
purchase and sale agreement or other legally-binding document.
(d) a certified list of all parties in interest entitled to notice of the hearing for the special
permit application, taken from the most recent tax list of the town and certified by the Town
Assessor;
(e) proposed security measures for the Marijuana Establishment, including lighting and
alarms, to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.
4. Outside Consultants and Review Fees. An outside consultant review escrow deposit shall
accompany the Application for special permit. The escrow for review fee is intended to
cover the Board’s potential cost of hiring consultants to review the Applicant’s compliance
with the special permit requirements under this Bylaw, and may include the anticipated
costs of legal counsel. The initial escrow deposit amount shall be set by the Board of
Appeals on a case-by-case basis, when such consultants or counsel are deemed necessary.
Any unexpended monies in the escrow account will be returned to the applicant only after
all obligations are satisfied. Failure to fulfill escrow requirements may render an
Application incomplete and be considered sufficient grounds for its denial.
69
(a) The Applicant may appeal the selection of a consultant(s) whose fees are to be paid from
the escrow deposit to the Board of Selectmen. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to
claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum
required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist of either an educational degree
in or related to the field at issue or three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related
field. Pursuant to G.L. c. 44, § 53G, the required time limits for action upon the Application by
the Board of Appeals shall be extended by the duration of the appeal. If no decision is made by the
Board of Selectmen within one month following the filing of the appeal, the Board of Appeals
selection shall stand.
(b) The escrow deposit shall be deposited in a special account established by the Town
Treasurer pursuant to G.L. c. 44, § 53G. Funds from the special account are only for the purposes
described above.
5. Mandatory Findings. The Board of Appeals shall not issue a special permit for a Marijuana
Establishment unless it finds that:
(a) the Marijuana Establishment is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic
impacts on abutters and other parties in interest, as defined in G.L. c. 40A, §11;
(b) the applicant has not provided materially false documents or testimony; and
(c) the applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements of Section 8.5.6.
6. Annual Reporting. Each Marijuana Establishment permitted under this Section shall, as a
condition of its special permit, file a copy of the Annual Report submitted to the state with Board
of Appeals and the Town Clerk no later than January 31st
7. If required by the Board of Appeals, a full transcription or recording of the oral hearings
shall be made at the Applicant’s expense.
8. A special permit granted under this Section shall have a term limited to the duration of the
applicant’s ownership and use of the premises as a Marijuana Establishment. A special permit
may be transferred only with the approval of the Board of Appeals in the form of an amendment
to the special permit.
9. Any violation of this Section shall be grounds for revocation of a special permit issued
under this Section.
10. Any revocation of the Marijuana Establishments license by the state shall be grounds for
revocation of the Special Permit,
or take any other action related thereto.
70
SECTION 9.0 DISTRICTS OF CRITICAL PLANNING CONCERN
These Districts are subject to the Martha’s Vineyard Commission Rules and Regulations.
(These sections (XIII and XVIII) have not yet been renumbered, but are herein combined and
considered the new Section 9.0)
SECTION XIII Coastal Regulations
The following shall be complied with for construction or any new principal structure in a
Residential District, unless a Special Permit for an exception is granted by the Board of Appeals,
upon their determination that special site or development circumstances eliminate any hazard to
health or safety. “Elevation” in this Section shall be measured from U.S.G.S. datum.
1. Floor level of any structure used for human occupancy shall be not less than 10 feet
elevation above mean sea level.
2. Individual sewage disposal systems shall not be subject to inundation in the event of coastal
flooding to 10 feet elevation above mean sea level. Leach field drain tiles shall be not less than 50
horizontal feet inland from elevation above mean sea level, irrespective of groundwater elevation
3. Water supplies shall not be subject to interruption or contamination in the event of coastal
flooding to 10 feet elevation above mean sea level.
4. (This section was disapproved by the Office of the Attorney General)
5. Setbacks required by Section VII, where abutting ocean front shall be measured from mean
high water or the top of coastal bluffs if they exceed 15 feet vertical height. In determining the
horizontal location of mean high water, top of coastal bluffs or the 10 feet elevation for the
application of this Section, allowance shall be made for 10 years erosion continued at the
historical rates indicated on “Map MF534 showing changes in the shoreline of Martha’s
Vineyard”, by Clifford A. Kay, U.S.G.S., 1973.
6. Where he judges compliance with this Section to be questionable, the Inspector of Buildings
may require certification of compliance by a registered land surveyor or qualified professional
engineer retained at the expense of the applicant.
7. The non-conformance provision of Section VI-1 shall not apply, but those of VI-2 shall do so.
71
Section XVIII Districts of Critical Planning Concern Regulations
for the Town of Oak Bluffs—Adopted by the Martha’s Vineyard Commission (12/21/76)
1. Overlay Districts
These regulations are overlay regulations. Overlay regulations are separate regulations which are
superimposed over existing zoning districts, zoning regulations, health regulations, conservation
regulations and other land use regulations affecting the town. These overlay regulations are
supplementary to such existing regulations. Where there is a conflict the more limiting regulations
shall prevail. These regulations apply to all land, all development, all uses and all permits and
approvals within the following districts: Coastal District, Island Road District, Special Places
District, Copeland Plan District, Oak Bluffs Harbor District and the Southern Woodlands District.
A. Coastal District
(1.) Purpose
To prevent flood damage, maintain water quality, assure adequate water supply,
prevent pollution, promote wildlife habitats, assure the maintenance of cultural and
historic sites and values, preserve and enhance the character of views, prevent
damage to structures, land and water as a result of erosion, promote economic
development of fisheries and related industries, and maintain and enhance the
overall economy of the island.
(2.) Definition
The Coastal District includes the land, streams and wetlands of Oak Bluffs which
lie below ten (10) foot elevation above mean sea level, or within 500 feet of mean
high water of a coastal water body exceeding ten (10) acres, or the ocean; and all
land within 100 feet of streams and wetlands flowing into coastal water body;
except that around East Chop it includes only the land lying less than ten (10) feet
above mean sea level and the faces of the bluffs greater than 15 feet in height in the
area bounded on the south by the junction of Commercial Avenue and Highland
Drive, and thence around East Chop by the intersection of of Eastville Avenue
extended to Vineyard Haven Harbor. The land bounded on the north by Highland
Drive and on the south by Canonicus Avenue shall not be included within the
Coastal District.
(3.) Coastal Regulations
Section XIII “Coastal Regulations” of the Oak Bluffs Zoning By-Laws is
applicable within the District. No special permit for exception to the Coastal
Regulations may be granted unless it is consistent with the regulations, restrictions
and allowable uses established herein for the Coastal District. Likewise, no permit
72
granting authority shall construe that compliance with the regulations herein
exempts an applicant from the regulations and procedures of Section XIII of the
Zoning By-Law.
(4.) Establishment of Zones within the Coastal District Shore Zone
Consisting of the land from mean low water to 100 feet inland of the island edge of
any dune grass, wetland indicator species or stream flowing into a coastal water
body and land 100 feet inland of the crest of any bluff exceeding a height of 15
feet.
(5.) Uses Permitted
Only those uses permitted in the respective Zoning District which are consistent
with the fragile nature of the area, such as outdoor recreation, conservation
purposes and agricultural purposes.
Within the Inland Zone, permitted uses also include detached single family
dwelling and non-habitable, minor accessory structures normally used for personal,
family and household purposes which are subject to the regulations and restrictions
of Section XVIII 1A (7).
In addition, within the Inland Zone, permitted uses shall also include existing
health care related uses, including, but not limited to, the following: hospitals,
physician offices, nursing and convalescent homes, long term care facilities,
laboratories, elder care and child care services establishments, substance abuse
services and other uses associated with the maintenance and restoration of the
physical and well-being of the residents of and visitors to Martha’s Vineyard and
other uses ancillary thereto.
(6.) Uses Requiring Special Permit from the Board of Appeals (Amended 4.9.13
ATM Art.18 AG approved 7.3.13)
(a.) Within the Shore Zone, the Board of Appeals may grant a Special
Permit for any of the following:
(i.) Alterations to buildings and additions to existing residential
structures, provided that such additions or alterations shall not result
in additional sewage flow or sewage capacity if said building or
structure is served by onsite sewage disposal facilities.
(ii.) Fish processing facilities requiring or not requiring on site
sanitary disposal systems.
(iii.) Minor dredging, filling or alteration of a wetland or beach
required for one of the above approved structures or uses.
(iv.) Repair or replacement of on site sanitary disposal or sewage
treatment facilities, including any structures, devices and
appurtenances to be used in connection therewith, provided
however, that such repair or replacement constitutes an
improvement to the existing disposal or treatment facilities and has
been approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection or the Oak Bluffs Board of Health, as appropriate.
(v) A structure partially located in the shore zone shall be
considered as entirely in the shore zone.
73
(7.) Other Regulations and Restrictions
(a.) Unless a Special Permit is granted allowing a greater height, the height
of structures, as measured vertically from mean natural ground level to the
highest point of the roof is restricted to:
(i.) twenty four (24)feet for a pitched roof
(ii.) thirteen (13) feet for a flat or shed roof.
(b.) Any ground water well shall require a permit from the Board of Health
before installation, and shall be located at least two hundred (200) feet from
any salt water body.
(c.) Any sanitary disposal facility shall be located a minimum of two
hundred (200) feet from any salt water body.
(d.) There shall be a minimum separation of three hundred (300) feet
between sanitary disposal facilities. However, in cases where lots have at
least sixty thousand (60,000) square feet of area and were created after
December 21, 1976, the Board of Health may modify the three hundred
(300) foot separation required between sanitary disposal facilities if the
Board finds such modification will not jeopardize water quality.
(e.) No portion of a sanitary disposal facility shall be located less than five
(5) feet from any domestic water supply well.
(f.) No sanitary disposal facility shall be located less than six hundred (600)
feet from a public water supply well nor less than two hundred (200) feet
from any domestic water supply well.
(g.) Where compliance with these regulations is not possible, due to the
dimensions of a lot existing in separate ownership from adjoining lots
before December 22, 1976, the requirements (b through g) may be modified
by the Board of Health.
B. Island Road Districts
(1.) Purpose
To allow for safe access and travel along the roads; and to protect the visual
character, diversity of landscape and historic features of the journey along the
roads. And to protect historic places and retain specials ways open primarily for
uses such as walking and horseback riding.
(2.) Major Roads
Consisting of the area lying within 200 feet of the right of way of the following
roads:
(a.) Barnes Road south of the intersection of Barnes and County Roads.
(b.) The Edgartown – Vineyard Haven Road.
(c.) The Beach Road from Canonicus Road south to the Town Boundary.
(3.) Special Ways
Special Ways have not yet been designed in Oak Bluffs.
(4.) Uses Permitted
Any residential, recreational, agricultural or open space use as permitted in the
74
respective Zoning Districts, subject to the regulations and restrictions set forth
below.
(5.) Regulations and Restrictions
(a.) No stone wall shall be moved, removed or otherwise altered, except for
repair, except by Special Permit from the Board of Appeals.
(b.) Any additional vehicular access to the public road must be at least
1,000 feet, measured on the same side of the road from any other vehicular
access, except that if this requirement would prevent at least one (1) access
to a public road from each lot held in separate ownership from the lots
contiguous thereto as of December 22, 1976, each such lot shall be located
as far as practicable from all other ways located on either side of the road,
No land shall hereafter be divided, or sold, if such lot or lots would not be
entitled to a way to provide vehicular access to a public way as provided
herein. Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit to allow access(es) at
a closer interval than provided herein.
(c.) Structures erected within the District shall not, except by Special
Permit, exceed the following heights:
(i.) in a wooded area, 24 feet maximum for a pitched roof
(ii.) 13 feet for a flat roof.
(d.) Fencing: Any fence, wall, planting, shrubbery or foliage more than
thirty-six inches in height, which could materially obstruct the view
between the road and the nearest public waterway shall require a Special
Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Island Road
District DCPC Regulations, Section XVIII 1-B-6.
(6) Special Permit(s)
Special Permits required within these regulations for the Island Road District shall
be the responsibility of the Board of Appeals.
C. Special Places District
(1.) Purpose
To physically protect the place or resource; to protect visual or other access; to
buffer these places with a greenbelt which is natural or landscaped; to protect the
quality of the ponds and wildlife habitats; to keep development in the immediate
vicinity that is compatible and does not cause, or is not adversely affected by
erosion.
(2.) Designated Special Places
Duarte Pond: Consisting of the land and waters lying within 100 feet of the
extreme high-water mark
(3.) Uses Permitted
Any uses permitted within the respective Zoning Districts which do not require the
construction, erection, installation or placement of any structure, sanitary disposal
facility, road or way or fence; such as uses for outdoor recreation, conservation
purposes and agricultural purposes.
75
(4.) Uses Requiring Special Permit from the Board of Appeals
Any use permitted under the respective Zoning Districts, may be allowed by
Special Permit provided that there is no other location upon the lot on which the
structure or uses may be located.
(5.) Regulations and Restrictions
No on site sanitary disposal facility may be installed, placed or located in a Special
Place District for an inland pond.
D. Copeland Plan District
Regulations within the Copeland Plan District shall apply to all privately owned
property.
(1.) Definitions exclusive to this Section.
(a.) Building
A combination of materials forming shelter for persons, animals or
property.
(b.) Exterior Architectural Feature
Such portion of the exterior of a building or structure as is open to view
from a public street, public way, public park or public body of water.
(c.) Structure
A combination of materials other than a building, including any fence, wall,
light, sign, terrace, walk or driveway.
(2.) Boundaries
(a.) (Section I) Beginning at the intersection of the centerline of Lake
Avenue and the B-1 zoning district boundary as of August 8, 1991
southerly along said zoning district boundary to the intersection of the
centerline of Samoset Avenue and said zoning district boundary and hence
easterly along the centerline of Samoset Avenue to a point where the
extended centerline of said avenue meets the mean low waterline and hence
northerly along mean low waterline to a point where the mean low
waterline meets the extended centerline of Lake Avenue and hence westerly
along the centerline of Lake Avenue to the point of origin.
(b.) (Section II) Beginning at the juncture of the centerline of Sea View
Avenue and Samoset Avenue and running westerly then northwesterly then
southwesterly along the centerline of Samoset Avenue to the juncture of the
centerline of Circuit Avenue and Samoset Avenue and hence southwesterly
along the centerline of Circuit Avenue to the juncture of the centerline of
Circuit Avenue and a line drawn through the northern boundary of Lot135,
Map 11 and hence easterly along the rear lot lines of Lots 135, 136,137,
122, 123, 124, 110, 110.1, 111, 112, 113, 114, 98, 97, map 11 and Lot 136,
Map 10 to the intersection of Naumkeag Avenue and Tuckernuck Avenue
and hence northerly along the centerline of Naumkeag Avenue to a point
some 70 plus or minus feet north of said intersection and hence easterly to
76
the centerline of Sea View Avenue at a point some 70 plus or minus feet
north of the centerline of Tuckernuck Avenue and hence northerly along the
centerline Sea View Avenue to the point beginning, exclusive of any
properties currently zoned for business use.
(c.) (Section III) Beginning at the juncture of the centerline of East Circuit
Avenue and Naumkeag Avenue and running southeasterly along the
centerline of Naumkeag Avenue for 113 plus or minus feet then easterly to
the southwestern corner of Lot 147, Map 10 and hence east northeasterly
along the rear lot line of Lots 147, 148, 149, 150, Map 10 to the centerline
of Sea View Avenue and hence northerly along said centerline to a point
70 plus or minus feet north of the centerline of Tuckernuck Avenue and
hence westerly to a point some 70 plus or minus feet north of the
intersection of Naumkeag Avenue and Tuckernuck Avenue and hence
southerly along the centerline of Naumkeag Avenue to said intersection and
hence westerly along the rear lot line of Lot 136, Map 10, Lots 97, 98, 114,
113, 112, 111, 110.1, 110, 124, 123, 122, 137, 136, 135, Map 11 to
intersect the centerline of Circuit Avenue and hence southerly along said
centerline to a point where the extension of the rear lot line of Lot 27, Map
17 meets said centerline and hence east northeasterly along the rear lot lines
of Lot 27, Map 17, Lots 133, 132, 131, 126, 127, 128, 105, 106, 107, 108,
99, Map 11, Lots 139, 138, 137, Map 10 to intersect the westerly lot line of
Lot 142, Map 10 and hence southerly along said lot line 75 plus or minus
feet and hence easterly along the southerly lot line of Lot 142, Map 10 to
intersect the centerline of Naumkeag Avenue and hence southerly along
said centerline to the point of beginning. Included also is the prominent
feature exposed a t low tide and easterly of the beach to the east of Sea
View Avenue known as Lover’s Rock.
(d.) (Section IV) Beginning at the juncture of the centerline of South
Circuit Avenue and Circuit Avenue and running northeasterly along the
centerline of Circuit venue to a point where the extension of the rear lot line
of Lot 27, Map 17 meets said centerline and hence northeasterly along the
rear lot lines of Lot 27, Map17, Lots 133, 132, 131, 126, 127, 128, 105,
106, 107, 108, 99, Map 11 Lots 139, 138, 137, Map 10 to intersect the
westerly lot line of Lot 142, Map 10 and hence southerly along said lot line
75 plus or minus feet and hence easterly along the southerly lot line of Lot
142, Map 10 to intersect the centerline of Naumkeag Avenue and hence
southerly along said centerline to the juncture of the centerline of East
Circuit Avenue and Naumkeag Avenue and running southeasterly along the
centerline of Naumkeag Avenue for 113 plus or minus feet then easterly to
the southwestern corner of Lot 147, Map 10 and hence east northeasterly
along the rear lot lines of Lots 147, 148, 149, 150, Map 10 to the centerline
77
of Sea View Avenue and hence southerly along the centerline of Sea View
Ave. to the juncture of the centerline of Sea View Avenue and South
Circuit Avenue and hence westerly along South Circuit Avenue to the point
of beginning.
(e) (Section V) to consist of the area within the following boundary
beginning at the intersection of Dukes County Avenue and New York
Avenue northwesterly along the centerline of New York Avenue to its
intersection with East Chop Drive and thence northerly along the centerline
of East Chop Drive to its intersection with Plymouth Avenue and thence
along with centerline of the southerly loop of said Plymouth Avenue to its
intersection with Laurel Avenue and thence southwesterly along the
centerline of Laurel Avenue to its intersection with Moss Avenue and
thence southeasterly and easterly along the centerline of said Moss Avenue
to the western boundary of Parcel 67 on Assessors' Map 8 and thence
southerly along the western boundaries of Parcels 67 and 66 on Map 8 to
New York Avenue and thence westerly along the centerline of said New
York Avenue to its intersection with the eastern end of Chestnut Avenue
and thence southwesterly along the centerline of Chestnut Avenue to its
intersection with Pacific Avenue and thence southwesterly along the
centerline of Pacific Avenue to its intersection with Simpson Avenue and
thence southeasterly along the centerline of Simpson Avenue to its
intersection with Brunswick Avenue and thence southwesterly along the
centerline of said Brunswick Avenue to its conclusion and thence
southwesterly along the centerline of Truman Avenue to its intersection
with Graham Avenue and then southeasterly along the centerline of
Graham Avenue to its intersection with Rowland Avenue and thence
northeasterly along the centerline of Rowland Avenue to its intersection
with Huntington Avenue and thence easterly along the centerline of
Huntington Avenue to its intersection with the western boundary of Parcel
337 on Assessors' Map 11 and thence southerly and easterly along the
boundary of said Parcel 337 to Dukes County Avenue and thence northerly
along the centerline of said Dukes County Avenue to the point of origin;
exclusive of properties of the Town of Oak Bluffs identified as Parcels 76,
123, 134, 140, 141.1 and 259 on Assessor's Map 8.
(Added ATM 4/13/04, Art. 14)
(f) (Section VI) Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Oak
Bluffs Avenue and Sea View Avenue Extension, thence northwesterly
along the centerline of Sea View Avenue Extension to its intersection with
Circuit Avenue Extension and thence southwesterly, southerly and
southeasterly along the centerline of Circuit Avenue Extension to its
78
intersection with Oak Bluffs Avenue and thence northeasterly along the
centerline of Oak Bluffs Avenue to the point of origin.
(3.) Uses: Any use permitted in Section III 1 and 2 of these By-Laws is also
permitted in the Copeland Plan District.
(4.) Appropriateness
(a.) General
Any change to the exterior of an existing structure, addition to an existing
structure or new construction shall be limited to the Victorian Style
architecture prevalent within the district at the turn of the century (1900).
No change to an exterior architectural feature shall radically alter the
exterior appearance of the building or structure in such a way as to damage
the visual integrity of the surrounding viewscape. The asymmetrical skyline
of the district is to be preserved and enhanced. The physical character of the
landscape shall enhance rather than detract from the prevalent Victorian
architecture and shall enhance the inviting and open “village green” of the
park. Variety is to be maintained as a key element in the fabric of the
overall park presentation. Views from abutting properties shall be
preserved.
(b.) Height
The maximum height of building and structure elements shall be 50 feet.
The roofline shall be asymmetrical in keeping with the Victorian
architecture prevalent in Oak Bluffs at the turn of the century (1900) and
shall allow sufficient passage of air and light.
(c.) Demolition
This sub-section shall apply only to elective demolition, not to demolition
ordered by appropriate authority for health or safety reasons.
(i.) Demolition shall be allowed only when the existing building or
structure is determined to have no relationship to the district or
when its retention would result in significant economic hardship and
when all the requirements below have been satisfied.
(ii.) If an applicant’s request for permission to demolish a building
or structure is based upon structural inability or advanced
deterioration, a technical report prepared by an architect or
engineered registered in Massachusetts shall be submitted, detailing
the nature and extent of the specific problems, and providing
reasonably accurate cost estimates for their correction.
(iii.) Applications for permission to demolish existing structures
shall be accompanied by complete plans for the new development
proposed on the site. There shall be submitted a timetable and a
budget for both the demolition and the reconstruction as well as
satisfactory evidence that adequate financing is available. The Town
may require the posting of a performance bond or the establishment
79
of an escrow account to guarantee the completion of any such
project.
(d.) Window and Door Coverings
No building or structure in the Copeland Plan District shall use unfinished
or unpainted plywood or other material to cover window or door areas
except in case of emergency, and in an emergency, the covering shall be
removed within 14 days. Permanent off-season window or door coverings
shall not extend beyond the existing window or door areas.
(5.) No building or structure shall be constructed seaward of Sea View Avenue
which would be of such a height as to break the view of Ocean Park from
Nantucket Sound and Vice Versa. Lover’s Rock shall be protected.
(6.) Administration
(a.) This section shall be administered by the Building Official in
accordance with Section VIII.
(b.) Proposed new construction, additions to existing structures or changes
to the exterior architectural features shall be reviewed by the Copeland Plan
District Review Board for appropriateness. Said Board shall determine that
a proposed change is appropriate before any other permits may commence.
Said Board may alternatively determine that a proposed change is
appropriate before any other Town permits may be issued, or before work
not requiring other permits may commence. Said Board may alternatively
determine that a proposed change is inapplicable to the By-Law or that
adherence to the By-Law would cause significant economic hardship.
Failure of such Board to make written response to the applicant and the
Building Official within thirty (30) days to a request for review shall
constitute approval. The Building Official may alternatively determine that
a proposed change is inapplicable to the By-Law or that adherence to the
By-Law would cause significant economic hardship.
(c.) The applicant shall provide sketches, diagrams, narrative description
and/or plans sufficient for review under Section XVIII D
(d.) The Copeland Plan District Review Board shall consist of membership
as follows: One member of the Park Commission or their designee, one
member of the Planning Board or their designee, the Building Official, one
member of the Cottage City Historic District Commission*, one
member of the Board of Selectmen or their designee and two (2) owners of
property within the Section of the District being reviewed to be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen. Vote of the Board shall be by majority vote.
Five (5) members shall constitute a quorum. (*Amended STM 1/18/05 Art.
12)
E. Oak Bluffs Harbor District
(1.) Purpose
80
To maintain an effective visual and physical connection between Oak Bluffs
Harbor and surrounding lands; to achieve architectural consistency; to protect Oak
Bluffs Harbor environmentally; to protect the economic, recreational and
residential viability thereof and strive to maintain its uniqueness for future
generations.
(2.) Boundary
All that land and water contained within a line beginning at the intersection of East
Chop Drive (a.k.a. Commercial Avenue) and Lake Avenue, thence easterly along
the centerline of Lake Avenue for a distance of 1,485+ feet to the intersection of
Lake Avenue and Oak Bluffs Avenue, thence easterly along the centerline of Oak
Bluffs Avenue for a distance of 100+ feet to its intersection with Circuit Avenue
Extension, thence northerly along the centerline of Circuit Avenue Extension for a
distance of 915+ feet to its intersection with the centerline of Sea View Avenue
Extension, thence northeasterly for a distance of 100+ feet from said intersection
perpendicular to the mean low water mark of the shore of Nantucket Sound, thence
northwesterly and northeasterly along the mean low water mark of Nantucket
Sound to the northeasterly most point of the rock jetty on the southern side of the
mouth of Oak Bluffs Harbor (a.k.a. Lake Anthony), thence across the mouth of
Oak Bluffs Harbor to the northeasterly most point of the rock jetty on the northern
side of the mouth of Oak Bluffs Harbor, thence southwesterly and northwesterly
along the mean low water mark of the Nantucket Sound for a distance of 3,200+
feet to its intersection with the centerline of East Chop Drive (a.k.a. Commercial
Drive), thence southerly along the centerline of East Chop Drive for a distance of
1,400+ feet to the point of origin.
(3.) Site Plan Review
The Plan Review Committee shall review all permit applications for structures
proposed to be visible from Oak Bluffs Harbor or from the nearest public way.
The Permit Granting Authority (Building Inspector, Conservation Commission,
e.g.) or the Special Permit Granting Authority (Zoning Board of Appeals, e.g.)
shall refer applications to the Committee for this purpose, in accordance with
Districts of Critical Planning Concern Regulations, Section 5.2. Generally,
structures shall be sited so as to maximize pedestrian views between Oak Bluffs
Harbor and the nearest public way, and exterior architectural style and features
shall be compatible with surrounding structures and shall be consistent with the
Oak Bluffs Harbor District Design Guidelines. The Plan Review Committee shall
also review all applications for Special Permits in Section 7.6, in accordance with
the Districts of Critical Planning Concern Regulations, Section 5.2.
(4.) Dimensional Requirements
(a) General
To the degree reasonably possible, structures shall be sited so as to preserve
views between Oak Bluffs Harbor and the nearest public way. Scale, bulk
and proportions of structures shall be compatible with the surrounding area
and consistent with the Oak Bluffs Harbor District Design Guidelines.
81
(b.) Minimum Setbacks:
R1 R2 B1
(i.) between any structure and any street 20’ 25’ 5’
(ii.) between any structure, including an 20’ 25’ 5’
accessory building, and a side lot line
(iii.) between any structure associated with 25’ 25’
a non water-dependent use and the Mean
Low Water line of Oak Bluffs Harbor
(iv.) between any structure associated with a 3’
non-water dependent use and the landward
edge of the Town bulkhead walk
(v.) between any structure associated with a 0’ 0’ 0’
water dependent use and Oak Bluffs Harbor
(c ) Fencing
Any fence, wall, planting, shrubbery or foliage more than thirty-six inches
in height, which could materially obstruct the view between Oak Bluffs
Harbor and the nearest public way, shall require a Special Permit from the
Zoning Board of Appeals, following review by the Plan Review Committee
in accordance with Districts of Critical Planning Concern Regulations,
Sections XVIII 1 E-(3) and 2.
(d)Height
Permitted heights for structures in the Oak Bluffs Harbor District shall be
the same as those in the underlying B1, R1 and R2 Districts, as in Section
VII of the Zoning By-Laws.
(e.) Permitted Uses
--all uses permitted in the underlying B1, R1, and R2 Districts, as in
Sections III and V-1 of the Zoning By-Laws.
(f.) Specially Permitted Uses
(i.) for which Special Permits may be granted by the Board of
Appeals, as in Section VII 5-D of the Zoning By-Laws, following
review by the Plan Review Committee in accordance with Districts
of Critical Planning Concern Regulations, Sections XVIII 2B and
XVIII E3
(ii.) in the B-1 District; all uses for which Special Permits may be
granted by the Board of Appeals in the underlying B-1District, as in
Section V-1 of the Zoning By-Laws, and a privately owned marina;
(iii.) in the R-2 District; all uses for which Special Permits may be
granted by the Board of Appeals in the underlying R-2 District, as in
82
Section III of the Zoning By-Laws, except the following uses which
are prohibited: boat yards and boat services, conversion of a onefamily
house to accommodate more than two families, hotels,
rooming and boarding houses, semi-detached two-family dwellings;
(iv.) in the R-1 District; all uses for which Special Permits may be
granted by the Board of Appeals in the underlying R-1 District, as in
Section III of the Zoning By-Laws.
F. Southern Woodlands District
The Southern Woodlands District of Critical Planning Concern (“the District”) is an
overlay district, and the regulations set forth herein are separate regulations which are
superimposed over existing zoning regulations and non-zoning regulations. Where there is
a conflict between these overlay regulations and other regulations, the regulations more
restrictive to land or other developments shall prevail. These regulations apply to all uses
of land and buildings or structures on land within this overlay district.
The boundaries of the District are as follows:
All land and water included within and bordered by a line beginning at the southeasterly
corner of the lands of the Town of Oak Bluffs located approximately 1,945 + feet from
the intersection of County Road and the Edgartown-Vineyard Haven Road; thence
northerly 2,293.4 + feet to the northeasterly corner of Lot 53, Map 43; thence westerly
along the property line of said lot 1,340 + feet to the northwesterly corner of said Lot 53;
and thence southerly 59 + feet; and thence northwesterly along the bounds of Lot 2, Map
42, 2,597.23 + feet; and thence southwesterly 729.53 + feet along the westerly bound of
Lot 2, Map 42; and thence westerly along the southerly bound of Lot 7.7, Map 36, some
213 + feet; and thence southerly along the westerly bound of Lot 10, Map 36 some 436 +
feet; thence westerly along the northerly bound of Lot 2, Map 41 some 1,357 + feet; and
thence southerly 240.16 +or- feet along the easterly bound of Lot 13, Map 36; and thence
southwesterly along the bound of said Lot 13 some 131.96 + or – feet; and thence westerly
along the southerly bound of said Lot 13 some 242.76 + or – feet to an intersection with
the easterly bound of the R.O.W. of Barnes Road; thence southerly 2,996 . + feet along
the easterly bound of said R.O.W. to the southwesterly bound of Lot 5, Map 41; and
thence easterly along the southerly bound of said Lot 5 some 215 + feet to a juncture of
said bound with Old Holmes Hole Road, so called; and thence easterly along said Old
Holmes Hole Road, so called, to the intersection of the westerly bound of Lot 15, Map 49;
and thence northeasterly along the northwesterly bound of Lot 15, Map 49 some 1,092.61
+ feet, and thence southeasterly along the southwesterly bound of the lands of the Town of
Oak Bluffs to the point of origin. (Lot and Map refer to Assessors Maps 1998, Town of
Oak Bluffs)
(1.) Purpose Of These Regulations
The purpose of these regulations is to protect and preserve the special
characteristics and values of the District, while providing for appropriate
development. These special characteristics and values include, but are not limited
to: quality and quantity of water supply; wildlife habitat; a network of trails, roads
83
and ancient ways; archaeological sites; extensive woodlands. The regulations shall
maintain and enhance the recreational uses of the District.
(2.) Permitted Uses
In the District, the following uses and activities are permitted as of right: Any
residential, recreational, agricultural, open space or municipal use allowed in their
respective underlying zoning districts subject to Site Plan Review.
(3.) Uses Allowed By Special Permit
The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority (SPGA) for
special permits required under this bylaw. In reviewing Special Permit
applications, the Planning Board shall apply the general special permit criteria set
forth in Section VIII-5-D of the Zoning Bylaw, the standards set forth below, and
the standards set forth in Section 6.0 of the District of Critical Planning Concern
Regulations of the Oak Bluffs Zoning bylaw. The Planning Board shall request
and receive comments from the Oak Bluffs Historical Committee, the Site Plan
Review Committee and any other Town Boards as it deems necessary in order to
carry out its responsibilities. The following applications for development shall
require a special permit from the Planning Board:
(a.) Any residential, recreational, agricultural, open space or municipal use
allowed by special permit in their respective underlying zoning districts
subject to regulations and restrictions as set forth below.
(b.) Enlargement or alteration of any pre-existing, non-conforming uses, but
not including a change in the nature of the pre-existing, non-conforming
use.
(c.) Any use allowed as of right or by special permit that involves handling
or storage of toxic or hazardous materials in quantities greater than those
associated with normal household use.
(d.) Any use allowed as of right or by special permit that will render
impervious more than 15% or 2,500 square feet, whichever is greater, of
any lot or project area if project area exceeds one lot.
(e.) Developments involving five or more residential units or fifteen or
more acres.
(f.) Any use allowed as of right or by special permit that would require land
clearing/grading activities in the District of an area greater than one third
(1/3) the lot size.
(g.) Uses allowed as of right or by special permit that involve developments
on slopes greater than twelve (12) percent.
(h.) Uses allowed as of right or by special permit involving parking lots
designed to accommodate twenty (20) or more vehicles, or larger than four
thousand (4,000) square feet.
(i.) Any use allowed as of right or by special permit that would require a
new road to intersect with a “special way” as defined below.
(j.) Any use allowed as of right or by special permit which has been
reviewed under Sect. 5.9 Preservation of Archaeological sites and has been
84
found to be of archaeological significance, or is listed in the Massachusetts
Historical Commission’s Inventory of Historic and Archaeological Assets
of the Commonwealth.
(k.) Any antenna or tower except for non-commercial radio and television
antennas with a maximum overall height of 45 feet.
(l.) Any municipal use not allowed as of right which is owned by or
operated by the town.
(m.) Relocation of Special Ways within the District for the purpose of
preserving continuity of the designated Special Way, creating connections
and/or public access to a trail system throughout the District or for the
safety of trail users. The Planning Board does not have legal jurisdiction to
grant or extinguish public right-of-way.
(n.) Any removal of trees on slopes steeper than or equal to twelve (12)
percent.
(4.) Referral Uses
Any use allowed as of right or by special permit that would require withdrawal, on
average, more than 100,000 gallons/day of water for any period of three
consecutive months, as stated in the Mass. Water Management Act (M.G.L. c21G)
effective March 1986, shall require a referral to the MVC as a DRI.
(5.) Prohibited Uses
Any use not expressly listed above as allowable either as of right or by special
permit is hereby prohibited.
(6.) Site Plan Committee
(a) Authorization
The Southern Woodlands DCPC Site Plan Review Committee (SPRC) is
hereby designated in order to comply with the Martha’s Vineyard
Commission Decision which requires the Town to establish a Site Plan
Review Committee.
(b.) Composition
The Site Plan Review Committee is established by order of the Selectmen
and shall consist of one sitting member of and appointed by each of the
following: Board of Selectmen, Planning Board, Conservation
Commission, Trails and Byways Committee, Building Department, Water
District, Oak Bluffs Historical Commission, Board of Health, and one
member of the public at large appointed by the Board of Selectmen. The
Building Official shall coordinate the activities of the Committee.
Members of the Committee shall serve one year terms. Until the committee
is established, the Board of selectmen shall serve as the Site Plan Review
Committee. If a member should resign or be unable to serve, the board or
committee from which he/she comes shall appoint a new member to
complete his/her term.
(c.) Duties and Responsibilities
The Site Plan Review Committee shall review all applications for special
85
permits and/or site plan approval required under this bylaw. It shall hold
meetings with an applicant and with the SPGA. The Committee shall
submit its recommendations in a written report to the Planning Board, with
a copy to the Town Clerk, within thirty (30) business days of receipt of an
application, except that this time may be extended for up to fifteen (15)
business days by written request to the SPGA, provided that the SPGA
agrees. The SPGA will make no final determination on an application until
such report is received and reviewed. Unless extended, failure of the
Committee to issue its recommendations within thirty (30) business days of
receipt shall be construed as a recommendation of approval of the
application.
(7.) Site Plan Review/Special Permit Standards
(a.) Any use allowed either as of right or by special permit shall
require a site plan approval from the Planning Board. However, upon
application of the landowner or developer, the Planning Board may exempt
particular uses allowed as of right from all or part of the site plan review
upon a finding that requiring a site plan review for the particular project in
question is not necessary to protect the interests of this bylaw or may permit
site data collection necessary to support an application for a Site Plan
and/or Special Permit. Before making such a finding, the Planning Board
shall notify and receive the recommendations of the Oak Bluffs Historical
Commission, the Site Plan Review Committee and any other Town boards
as it deems necessary in order to determine whether such a finding is
appropriate. The SPGA shall notify all boards represented on the Site Plan
Review Committee of each application undergoing site plan review to give
them an opportunity to comment.
(b.) Where it deems it appropriate in order to facilitate the purpose of this
bylaw, the Planning Board may require the applicant to submit an Open
Space Development Plan as set forth in Section 12 of the Oak Bluffs zoning
bylaw.
(c.) Unless extended, failure of the SPGA to issue its decision within 120
business days of receipt of the application shall be construed as an approval
of the application.
(8.) Site Plan Review Regulations For Stormwater Management
Land uses and developments within the District that require a site plan review shall
conform to Section 44 of the Oak Bluffs Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
(9.) Site Plan Review Regulations For Preservation Of Archaeological Sites
There will be no disturbance within the District, and no special permit or site plan
approval will be issued, until the following are completed:
(a.) Subject to Sect 5.7 Site Plan Review/Special Permit Standards, any
application for site plan review shall require the submission of an
archaeological assessment of the area of the site to be disturbed. The
findings of this assessment shall be forwarded to the Massachusetts
86
Historic Commission (MHC) for review. Results of the MHC review shall
be forwarded to the OBHC and the SPGA within 30 business days. Should
there be evidence of significant finds, further assessment of part or all of
the remainder of the site shall be conducted by the applicant. Any
assessments may be reviewed by the SPGA’s consultant, the cost of such
consultant shall be paid by the applicant. The OBHC and MHC shall
submit their final comments no later then 90 business days from the time
the application was received.
(b.) The SPGA, as a result of the archaeological assessment, may require
the applicant to have an archaeologist on site during project.
(c.) To the maximum extent feasible, land uses or developments shall avoid
causing any adverse effect on areas determined by the OBHC to be sites of
archaeological significance, and/or on areas listed in the Massachusetts
Historical Commission’s Inventory of Historic and Archaeological Assets
of the Commonwealth. The term adverse effect includes, but is not limited
to, the destruction or alteration of such sites or areas, the isolation of such
sites or areas, the isolation of such sites or areas from their surrounding
environment, and the introduction of visual, audible, or atmospheric
elements that are out of character with, or alter the setting of such sites or
areas.
(10.) Site Plan Review Regulations For Preservation Of “Special Ways”
(a.) Certain trails, roads and ancient ways within the District contain many
of the characteristics of “Special Ways” as set forth in the MVC Decision
designating the Island Road District as a District of Critical Planning
Concern, December 22, 1975. The purpose of the special way regulation is
to protect the ancient way resource in a way that protects historic values,
the visual character, diversity of landscape and recreational uses, while
preserving the integrity and qualities of the trails, roads and ancient ways.
It is necessary in order to preserve the use of these ways for alternative
forms of transportation.
(b.) Roads, trails and ancient ways considered as Special Ways currently
include: Chaise Road, Old Back Road to Oak Bluffs, Back Road
Connector, Road to Farm Neck and Old Holmes Hole Road, as portrayed
on a map prepared by the Trails and Byways Committee for the Town,
dated November 1998.
(c.) Any development subject to site plan approval, including removal of
vegetation, other than for historical preservation, shall be prohibited within
50 feet of either side of the center line of a Special Way, except for access
where rights of way exist. The 50 foot buffer shall in general be a naturally
vegetated buffer, but may on approval by the Planning Board have
vegetation added to it to complete the allowed width and to provide
adequate protection. Reduction of buffer width may only be allowed upon
a finding by the Planning Board that mitigation measures, whether by
87
replacement landscaping, building orientation or other site specific
consideration, benefit trail users and the general public and do not
compromise the purpose of the District.
(d.) No fences, walls, structures or obstructions shall be erected, placed or
constructed within the Special Way except for gates, bars or stiles designed
to allow passage of non-vehicular travel or for vehicular travel where such
rights-of-way exist.
(e.) No Special Way shall be widened, paved or hard-surfaced. No grading
or maintenance of Special Ways may occur without a site plan review and
approval.
(f.) In areas where an existing or proposed right of way crosses a Special
Way, the trail crossing shall be marked at both sides of the right of way
crossing by an appropriate small sign, to be determined by the SPRC,
indicating the crossing, and the right of way surface as it passes over the
Special Way shall be made of non-impervious surface only (gravel, etc).
(g.) Except for vehicles necessary for maintenance of the ways or where
rights of way exist, no motorized vehicles shall be permitted to operate on
Special Ways within the District.
(11.) Site Plan Review Regulations For Preservation Of Woodland And Habitat
There will be no disturbance within the District and no special permit or site plan
review initiated until the following are completed:
(a.) Subject to Section XVIII F 7 Site Plan Review/Special Permit
Standards, any application for a site plan review shall require the
submission to the SPGA and the Site Plan Review Committee of a natural
resources inventory and management plan for the site. The SPGA may
require an additional natural resources inventory and management plan to
further evaluate the site to be conducted at the applicant’s expense. The
SPGA may hire its consultant, at the applicant’s expense, to review the
natural resource inventory and management plan. The Site Plan Review
Committee shall forward its written comments to the SPGA within 30
business days of receipt of the plan(s).
(b.) Use of a site shall, to the maximum extent feasible, maintain large
contiguous woodlands within the District in order to support the needs of
wildlife for breeding, feeding and normal movement.
(c.) Except for areas surrounding single family dwellings, fences and other
structural barriers shall be placed so as not to interfere with the movement
of wildlife within the District.
(d.) Natural, indigenous vegetation shall be encouraged or enhanced, as
shown in plans for application for a permit. Disturbed areas shall be
revegetated as rapidly as possible within a time required by the Planning
Board.
(12.) Site Plan Review Regulations For Landscape And Topography
(a.) Existing natural vegetation shall be retained inside the District, within
88
100 feet of Barnes and County Roads; and within 50 feet of all other
boundaries of the District.
(b.) Within the District, no structure may be located within 150 feet of
Barnes and County Roads, and within 100 feet of all other boundaries of
the District.
(c.) To the maximum extent possible, structures shall not be built on ridges
or hilltops, and developments shall avoid impairing views of hill tops and
ridge lines from the surrounding areas. The SPGA may require an analysis
of impacts on views, and this may include, but is not limited to, requiring
the applicant to submit pre-development and computer-generated postdevelopment
photographs showing the impact of a proposed development
on the view.
(d.) Activities which involve filling, grading, excavation or similar
activities shall require a written soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.
In order to create the least potential for erosion, development shall be
designed to fit the topography and soils of the site. Areas of steep slopes
where high cuts and fills may be required shall be avoided, and natural
contours shall be followed as closely as possible. An erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall accompany such applications.
(e.) All land uses shall be located on soils in or upon which the proposed
uses or structures can be established or maintained without causing adverse
environmental impacts, including erosion, mass soil movement, improper
drainage, or water pollution, during and after construction. A soils report,
prepared by state-certified professionals, shall accompany the application.
(f.) To the maximum extent feasible, development projects shall retain
mature stands of trees, rare types of trees, trees at site perimeter, and
contiguous vegetation with adjacent sites.
(g.) To the maximum extent feasible, understory vegetation beneath the
dripline of preserved trees shall also be retained in an undisturbed state.
(h.) Revegetation plans should avoid the planting of non-native trees and
grasses to the maximum extent possible.
(13.) Site Plan Review Regulations For Nitrogen Management
(a.) The following shall be preliminary and temporary standards for
nitrogen loading in the District and in Lagoon Pond and Sengekontacket
Pond. They shall be used until such time as the Board of Health (BOH)
promulgates regulations to replace them. The BOH regulations will be
consistent with the intent of the temporary standards, which will be used as
guidelines. The BOH will also develop regulations to monitor nitrogen
levels in the above areas. These data shall be used to establish a current
baseline of nitrogen levels and to determine trends in the future.
(b.) Land uses and developments within the District shall conform to the
following performance standards for nitrogen management:
(i.) No land use or development in the District shall result in a
89
cumulative nitrogen concentration of 3mg/1 or more in
groundwater.
(ii.) No land use or development in the District shall result in a
cumulative nitrogen concentration of 1 mg/1 or more in Lagoon
Pond and Sengekontacket Pond.
(iii.) Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) document
“Nitrogen Loading Computer Model Instruction Manual Version
1.0”, dated 1996, or later shall be used for methodology. Appendix
A of that document contains default values for several sources of
nitrogen.
(14.) Miscellaneous
(a.) Should an provision or provisions of this bylaw be deemed invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such provision or provisions shall be
severed and the remaining, valid provisions of the bylaw shall remain in
full force and effect.
(b.) The bylaw shall be interpreted and implemented so as to be consistent
with federal and state constitutional provisions, laws, and regulations
governing the use and development of private property. To that end, the
Planning Board is hereby authorized to grant variances from the provisions
of this bylaw if the Planning Board finds that literal enforcement of the
bylaw would cause a taking of property without compensation within the
meaning of the federal and state constitutions, as interpreted by the courts.
The Planning Board may also grant a variance if it specifically finds that
owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape, or topography
of such land or structures and especially affecting such land or structures
but not affecting generally the District a literal enforcement of this bylaw
would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the general
permit applicant, and that desirable relief may be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or
substantially derogating from the intent of purpose of the bylaw.
(c.) The Planning Board may require a performance guarantee in a form
acceptable to the town to cover the costs associated with compliance with
any special permit and/or site plan approval issued under this bylaw.
Within ninety days of the effective date of this bylaw, the Planning Board
shall adopt regulations pursuant to General Laws Chapter 44, Section 53G
which shall authorize the Planning Board to impose, in its discretion, an
application fee for special permits or site plan approvals under this bylaw to
fund the employment of outside consultants to assist the Planning Board in
reviewing any such applications.
2. Special Permits
A. In granting Special Permits for development allowed within the Overlay Districts the
Special Permit Granting Authority shall consider the purposes of the appropriate District
90
and find that the proposal assures protection against adverse environmental impact
including the following where applicable:
(1.) Pollution of surface or groundwater or of water bodies.
(2.) Salt intrusion of public and private domestic water supply wells.
(3.) Inadequate water supply to meet the anticipated demand of the proposed
activity or use or reduction of water supply available to other properties.
(4.) Noise and air pollution.
(5.) Destruction of wildlife habitats and damage to wetlands or littoral ecology.
(6.) Damage to marine fisheries and shellfish.
(7.) Unnecessary interruption of the visual amenities of the site.
(8.) Unnecessary decrease in agricultural use or potential. productivity of land.
(9.) Construction not in harmony with landscape type.
(10.) Erosion resulting from or caused by development.
B. All Special Permits applicable within the Special Places District, Coastal District and
Oak Bluffs Harbor District shall be reviewed by the Plan Review Committee
The Special Permit Granting Authority shall refer applications to the Committee for this
purpose. The Plan Review Committee’s report to the Special Permit Granting Authority
shall be in writing and comment on how the application conforms to the goals of the
District and the guidelines for decision which the Special Permit Granting Authority must
consider.
Failure of the Plan Review Committee to report to the Special Permit Granting Authority
within 15 days after receipt of the application shall be construed as a recommendation of
approval. The Plan Review Committee is established by order of the Selectmen and
consists of a member from and appointed by at least two of the following organizations or
individuals; Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Building and Zoning Inspector,
Board of Selectmen, Planning Board and the Martha’s Vineyard Commission. Until the
Plan Review Committee is so established, the Board of Selectmen is the Plan Review
Committee.
3. Definitions
A. Beach
That area of land adjoining any pond, lake stream, creak, ocean, sea or water which is
subject to tidal or wave action.
B. Bluff
That land adjacent to a beach or coastal wetland which shows the effect of wave erosion or
other down slope erosion causing it to be steeper than the otherwise natural slope of land.
C. Flat Roof
Any roof other than a pitched roof.
D. Pitched Roof
Any roof which has a rise of at least one inch for every 4 inches of
run.
E. Marina
A facility, which provides dockage or berthing for more than five (5) vessels and may also
91
provide vessel services.
F. Water Dependent Use
A use requiring direct access to or location in tidal waters.
G. Non-water Dependent Use
A use which does not require direct access to or location in tidal waters.
SECTION 10.0 ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
10.1 ADMINISTRATION
10.1.1 Permits. This By-Law shall be administered by the Building Commissioner. Pursuant to
the State Building Code, the Building Commissioner may require such plans and specifications as
may be necessary to determine compliance with all pertinent laws of the Commonwealth.
Buildings, structures or signs may not be erected, substantially altered, moved, or changed in use
and land may not be substantially altered or changed in principal use unless in compliance with
then-applicable zoning, and after all necessary permits have been received under federal, state, or
local law. Issuance of a Building Permit or Certificate of Use and Occupancy, where required
under the Commonwealth's State Building Code, may serve as such certification.
10.1.2 Enforcement. The Building Commissioner shall institute and take any and all such action
as may be necessary to enforce full compliance with any and all of the provisions of this By-Law
and of permits and variances issued thereunder, including notification of noncompliance and
request for legal action through the Selectmen to Town Counsel.
10.1.3 Penalties. The penalty for violation of any provision of this By-Law, of any of the
conditions under which a permit is issued, or of any decision rendered by the Board of Appeals
shall be Three Hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense. Each day that each violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
10.2 BOARD OF APPEALS.
10.2.1 Establishment. There is hereby established a Board of Appeals of five (5) members and
two associate members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. (Amended 4/12/06 ATM Art 13, AG
approved and published 7.17.06)
10.2.2 Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have and exercise all the powers granted to it by
Chapters 40A, 40B, and 41 of the General Laws and by this By-Law. The Board's powers are as
92
follows:
1. To hear and decide applications for special permits. Unless otherwise specified herein,
the Board of Appeals shall serve as the special permit granting authority, to act in all
matters in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.3, or as otherwise specified.
2. To hear and decide appeals or petitions for variances from the terms of this By-Law,
with respect to particular land or structures, as set forth in G.L. c. 40A, s. 10. The Board
of Appeals shall not grant use variances.
3. To hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved by reason of his inability to
obtain a permit or enforcement action from any administrative officer under the provisions
of G.L. c. 40A, ss. 8 and 15.
4. To hear and decide comprehensive permits for construction of low or moderate income
housing by a public agency or limited dividend or nonprofit corporation, as set forth in
G.L. c. 40B, ss. 20-23.
10.2.3 Regulations. The Board of Appeals or other Special Permit Granting Authority may
adopt rules and regulations for the administration of its powers. (Amended ATM 4.13.04 Art 13,
AG Approved 5.28.04, Published 6.15.04)
10.2.4 Fees. The Board of Appeals or other Special Permit Granting Authority may adopt
reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees for petitions for variances, administrative
appeals, and applications for comprehensive permits. (Amended ATM 4.13.04 Art 13, AG
Approved 5.28.04, Published 6.15.04)
10.3 SPECIAL PERMITS.
10.3.1 Special Permit Granting Authority. Unless specifically designated otherwise, the Board
of Appeals shall act as the Special Permit Granting Authority.
10.3.2 Criteria. Special permits shall be granted by the Special Permit Granting Authority,
unless otherwise specified herein, only upon its written determination that the adverse effects of
the proposed use will not outweigh its beneficial impacts to the town or the neighborhood, in view
of the particular characteristics of the site, and of the proposal in relation to that site. In addition
to any specific factors that may be set forth in this By-Law, the determination shall include
consideration of each of the following:
1. Social, economic, or community needs which are served by the proposal;
93
2. Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading;
3. Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
4. Neighborhood character and social structures;
5. Impacts on the natural environment; and
6. Potential fiscal impact, including impact on town services, tax base, and
employment.
10.3.3 Procedures. Special permit applications shall be governed by the rules and regulations of
the special permit granting authority. Whenever an application for a special permit is filed with a
special permit granting authority, the applicant shall also file, within five (5) working days of the
filing of the completed application with said authority, copies of the application, accompanying
site plan, and other documentation, to the Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Building
Commissioner, Director of Public Works, Police Chief, Fire Chief, Sewer Commission, and water
department for their consideration, review, and report. The copies necessary to fulfill this
requirement shall be furnished by the applicant.
10.3.4 Conditions. Special permits may be granted with such reasonable conditions, safeguards,
or limitations on time or use, including performance guarantees, as the Special Permit Granting
Authority may deem necessary to serve the purposes of this By-Law.
10.3.5 Plans. An applicant for a special permit shall submit a plan in substantial conformance
with the requirements of Section 10.4, herein.
1. The provisions of this Section 10.3.5 shall not apply to applications for special permits
to reconstruct, extend, alter, or structurally change a nonconforming single or two family
structure. The Board of Appeals may establish procedures governing such applications by
regulation.
10.3.6 Regulations. The special permit granting authority may adopt rules and regulations for
the administration of this section.
10.3.7 Fees. The special permit granting authority may adopt reasonable administrative fees and
technical review fees for applications for special permits.
10.3.8 Lapse. Special permits shall lapse if a substantial use thereof or construction thereunder
has not begun, except for good cause, within 24 months following the filing of the special permit
approval (plus such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal referred to in
G.L. c. 40A, s. 17, from the grant thereof) with the Town Clerk.
94
10.4 SITE PLAN REVIEW
10.4.1 Applicability. The following types of activities and uses require site plan review by the
Planning Board:
1. Construction, exterior alteration or exterior expansion of, or change of use within, a
municipal, institutional, commercial, industrial, or multi-family structure involving more
than 500 square feet;
2. Construction or expansion of a parking lot for a municipal, institutional, commercial,
industrial, or multi-family structure or purpose;
3. Grading or clearing more than ten percent (10%) of a lot, or 5,000 square feet, which
ever is smaller, except for the following: landscaping on a lot with an existing structure or
a proposed single or two family dwelling; clearing necessary for percolation and other site
tests, work incidental to agricultural activity, work in conjunction with a approved
subdivision plan, or work pursuant to an earth removal permit.
10.4.2 Exemptions
1. A building wholly or partially destroyed may be rebuilt without recourse to this section
if rebuilt without change to the building footprint or the square footage of usable space.
(Amended ATM 4.9.19 Art. 30, AG Approved 5.6.19, Published 5.7.19)
10.4.3 Procedures.
1. Use, Structure, or Activity Available As of Right. An application for a building permit
to perform work as set forth herein available as of right shall be accompanied by an
approved Site Plan. Prior to the commencement of any activity set forth herein
available as of right, the project proponent shall obtain site plan approval from the
Planning Board. Applicants for site plan approval shall submit five (5) copies of the
site plan to the Planning Board for review, and within three (3) days thereafter shall
also submit a copy of the site plan to the Sewer Commission, applicable water district,
Board of Health, Director of Public Works, Police Chief, Fire Chief, the Building
Commissioner, and the Conservation Commission for their advisory review and
comments. The Planning Board shall review and act upon the site plan, with such
conditions as may be deemed appropriate, within sixty (60) days of its receipt, and
notify the applicant of its decision. The decision of the Planning Board shall be upon a
majority of the Board as constituted and shall be in writing. No building permit shall
95
be issued by the Building Commissioner without the written approval of the site plan by
the Planning Board, or unless 60 days lapse from the date of the submittal of the site plan
without action by the Planning Board.
2. Use or Structure Available by Special Permit or Variance. An application for a special
permit or a variance to perform work as set forth herein shall be accompanied by an
approved Site Plan. Applicants for site plan approval shall submit five (5) copies of the
site plan to the Planning Board for review, and within three (3) days thereafter shall also
submit a copy of the site plan to the Sewer Commission, applicable water district, Board
of Health, Director of Public Works, Police Chief, Fire Chief, the Building Commissioner,
and the Conservation Commission for their advisory review and comments. The Planning
Board shall review and act upon the site plan, with such conditions as may be deemed
appropriate, within sixty (60) days of its receipt, and notify the applicant of its decision.
The decision of the Planning Board shall be upon a majority of the Board as constituted
and shall be in writing. No special permit or variance shall be issued by the Board of
Appeals without the written approval of the site plan by the Planning Board, or unless 60
days lapse from the date of the submittal of the site plan without action by the Planning
Board. Where the Planning Board approves a site plan "with conditions", and said site
plan accompanies a special permit or variance application to the Board of Appeals, the
conditions imposed by the Planning Board shall be incorporated into the issuance, if any,
of a special permit or variance by the Board of Appeals.
3. Where the Planning Board serves as the special permit granting authority, it shall
consolidate its site plan review and special permit procedures.
4. The applicant may request, and the Planning Board may grant by majority vote, an
extension of the time limits set forth herein.
5. No deviation from an approved site plan shall be permitted without modification
thereof.
10.4.4 Preparation of Plans. Applicants are invited to submit a pre-application sketch of the
proposed project to the Planning Board and to schedule a comment period at a regular meeting of
the board. Site Plans shall be submitted on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. Plans shall be prepared by
a Registered Professional Engineer, Registered Land Surveyor, Architect, or Landscape Architect,
as appropriate. Dimensions and scales shall be adequate to determine that all requirements are
met and to make a complete analysis and evaluation of the proposal. All plans shall have a
minimum scale of 1"=20'.
10.4.5 Contents of Plan. The contents of the site plan are as follows:
1. Five (5) separate plans prepared at a scale of one (1) inch equals twenty (20) feet or
96
such other scale as may be approved by the planning board. The plans are as follows:
A. Site layout, which shall contain the boundaries of the lot(s) in the proposed
development, proposed structures, drives, parking, fences, walls, walks, outdoor
lighting, loading facilities, and areas for snow storage after plowing. The first
sheet in this plan shall be a locus plan, at a scale of one (1) inch equals one
hundred (100) feet, showing the entire project and its relation to existing areas,
buildings and roads for a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from the project
boundaries or such other distance as may be approved or required by the planning
board.
B. Topography and drainage plan, which shall contain the existing and proposed
final topography at two-foot intervals and plans for handling storm water drainage.
C. Utility and landscaping plan, which shall include all facilities for refuse and
sewerage disposal or storage of all wastes, the location of all hydrants, fire alarm
and firefighting facilities on and adjacent to the site, all proposed recreational
facilities and open space areas, and all wetlands including floodplain areas.
D. Architectural plan, which shall include the ground floor plan and architectural
elevations of all proposed buildings and a color rendering.
E. Landscaping plan, showing the limits of work, existing tree lines, and all
proposed landscape features and improvements including screening, planting areas
with size and type of stock for each shrub or tree, and including proposed erosion
control measures.
2. The site plan shall be accompanied by a written statement indicating the estimated time
required to complete the proposed project and any and all phases thereof. There shall be
submitted a written estimate, showing in detail the costs of all site improvements planned.
3. A written summary of the contemplated projects shall be submitted with the site plan
indicating, where appropriate, the number of dwelling units to be built and the acreage in
residential use, the evidence of compliance with parking and off-street loading
requirements, the forms of ownership contemplated for the property and a summary of the
provisions of any ownership or maintenance thereof, identification of all land that will
become common or public land, and any other evidence necessary to indicate compliance
with this by-law.
4. The site plan shall be accompanied by drainage calculations by a registered professional
engineer. Storm drainage design must conform to Town’s subdivision regulations.
5. The Planning Board may require narrative assessments of the on-site and off-site
97
impacts of the proposed project, including traffic, drainage, noise, and other environmental
factors. The Planning Board may require that such narrative assessments be prepared by
qualified experts.
6. Certification that the proposal is fully compliant with the provisions, if applicable, of
the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Massachusetts Architectural Barriers Board.
10.4.6 Waiver of Technical Compliance. The Planning Board may, upon written request of the
applicant, waive any of the technical requirements of Section 10.4.5 where the project involves
relatively simple development plans or constitutes a minor site plan.
10.4.7 Minor Site Plan. Applications for permits to build, alter or expand any nonresidential
building, structure or use in any district where such construction will exceed a total gross floor
area of 500 square feet but not exceed a total gross floor area of 2000 square feet, or will not
generate the need for more than 10 parking spaces, shall be deemed a minor site plan. For the
purposes of computing the total gross floor area of a minor site plan, the Planning Board shall
aggregate all such applications made within the five (5) previous calendar years. Minor site plans
shall set forth all of the information required by Section 10.4.5; provided, however, that the scale
of the site plan may be 1' = 80', and the plan may depict topographical contours at intervals
available on maps provided by the United States Geological Survey.
10.4.8 Approval. Site Plan approval shall be granted upon determination by the Planning Board
that the plan meets the following objectives. The Planning Board may impose reasonable
conditions at the expense of the applicant, including performance guarantees, to promote these
objectives. Any new building construction or other site alteration shall provide adequate access to
each structure for fire and service equipment and adequate provision for utilities and storm water
drainage consistent with the functional requirements of the Planning Board’s Subdivision Rules
and Regulations. New building construction or other site alteration shall be designed in the Site
Plan, after considering the qualities of the specific location, the proposed land use, the design of
building form, grading, egress points, and other aspects of the development, so as to:
1. Minimize the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed trees 6" caliper or larger,
the length of removed stone walls, the area of wetland vegetation displaced, the extent of
storm water flow increase from the site, soil erosion, and threat of air and water pollution;
2. Maximize pedestrian and vehicular safety both on the site and egress from it;
3. Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations;
4. Minimize visual intrusion by controlling the visibility of parking, storage, or other
outdoor service areas viewed from public ways or premises residentially used or zoned;
5. Minimize glare from headlights and lighting intrusion;
98
6. Minimize unreasonable departure from the character, materials, and scale of buildings
in the vicinity, as viewed from public ways and places;
7. Minimize contamination of groundwater from on-site waste-water disposal systems or
operations on the premises involving the use, storage, handling, or containment of
hazardous substances; and
8. Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Zoning By-Law, including parking,
signage, landscaping and environmental performance standards.
10.4.9 Lapse. Site plan approval shall lapse after one year from the grant thereof if a substantial
use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause. Such approval may, for good
cause, be extended in writing by the Planning Board upon the written request of the applicant.
10.4.10 Regulations. The Planning Board may adopt reasonable regulations for the
administration of site plan review.
10.4.11 Fee. The Planning Board may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review
fees for site plan review.
10.4.12 Appeal. Any decision of the Planning Board pursuant to this Section shall be appealed
in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, s. 17 to a court of competent jurisdiction.
SECTION 11.0 DEFINITIONS
In this by-law, the following terms and constructions shall apply unless a contrary meaning is
required by the context or is specifically prescribed in the text of the by-law. Words used in the
present tense include the future. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive or discretionary. The word
"and" includes "or" unless the contrary is evident from the text. The word "includes" or
"including" shall not limit a term to specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to
all other instances, circumstances, or items of like character or kind. The word "lot" includes
"plot"; the word "used" or "occupied" shall be considered as though followed by the words "or
intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied". The words "building," "structure," "lot,"
or "parcel," shall be construed as being followed by the words "or any portion thereof." The word
"person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, company, or corporation, as well
as an individual. Terms and words defined or not defined herein but defined in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts state building code shall have the meaning given therein unless
a contrary intention is clearly evident in this by-law.
Accessory building or structure: A subordinate building or structure located on the same lot as the
99
main, or principal building or structure or principal use, the use of which is customarily incidental
to that of the principal building or structure or use of the land.
Accessory use: A use customarily incidental to that of the main or principal building or use of the
land.
Adult day care facility: A social day care or adult day health facility as those terms are defined by
the Commonwealth's Department of Elder Affairs.
Agricultural use, nonexempt: Agricultural use of property not exempted by G.L. c. 40A, s. 3, but
excluding the raising of swine or fur bearing animals.
Alterations: As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural
parts or in the exit facilities, or an enlargement whether by extending on a side or by increasing in
height, or the moving from one (1) location or position to another.
Animal clinic or hospital: A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment
and the boarding of animals is limited to short term care incidental to the clinic or hospital use.
Assisted Living Residence: A facility as defined in the Code of Massachusetts Regulations.
Bed and breakfast Establishment: Accommodations with not more than four (4) bedrooms
occupied by bed and breakfast guests in which the owner of the establishment resides. Bed and
breakfasts are intended for guest on intermittent visits, and shall not be used as long-term rental
units or apartments. All parking for residents and guests shall be off-street.
Boarding or Lodging House: A dwelling or part thereof in which lodging is provided by the
owner or operator to more than four (4) boarders. Where four (4) or more unrelated individuals
rent a dwelling, it shall be considered a boarding house.
Boat yard or boat service: Facility servicing marine vessels.
Building: A structure enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, built, erected, and framed of a
combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the
shelter of persons, animals, or property. For the purposes of this definition, "roof" shall include an
awning or any similar covering, whether or not permanent in nature.
Building Commissioner: The Building Inspector/Zoning Officer of the Town.
Building Coverage: That percentage of the lot or plot area covered by the roof area of a building
or buildings.
Building Height: The vertical distance from the grade plane to the average height of the highest
100
roof surface. When a building faces more than one street, the height shall be measured from the
average of the grade at the center line of each street front. Not included are spires, cupolas,
antennae, or similar parts of structures which do not enclose potentially habitable floor space.
Building, Principal: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on
which said building is situated.
Business or Professional Office: A building or part thereof, for the transaction of business or the
provision of services exclusive of the receipt, sale, storage, or processing of merchandise.
Campground: An area or tract of land on which accommodations for temporary occupancy are
located or may be placed, including cabins, tents, and major recreational equipment, which is
primarily used for recreational purposes and retains on open air or natural character.
Child Care Facility: A day care center or school age child care program, as those terms are
defined in G.L. c. 28A, s. 9.
Club or Lodge, Private: Buildings, structures and premises used by a nonprofit social or civic
organization, or by an organization, whether non-profit or for profit catering exclusively to
members and their guests and the public where authorized by a Special Permit of the Planning
Board for social, civic, recreational, or athletic purposes which are not conducted primarily for
gain and provided there are no vending stands, merchandising, or commercial activities except as
may be required generally for the membership and purposes of such organization.
Commercial Recreation, Indoor: A structure for recreational, social or amusement purposes,
which may include as an accessory use the consumption of food and drink, including all
connected rooms or space with a common means of egress and entrance. Places of assembly shall
include theatres, concert halls, dance halls, skating rinks, bowling alleys, health clubs, dance
studios, or other commercial recreational centers conducted for or not for profit.
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor: Drive-in theatre, Golf Course, Driving Range, bathing beach,
sports club, horseback riding stable, boathouse, game preserve, marina or other commercial
recreation, with accessory uses carried on in whole or in part outdoors, except those activities
more specifically designated in this By-Law.
Contractor's Yard: Premises used by a building contractor or subcontractor for storage of
equipment and supplies, fabrication of subassemblies, and parking of wheeled equipment.
Craft or Artisan Shop: A shop selling the goods, wares, or products of a craftsperson, artisan, or
artist.
Dwelling: A building designed and occupied as the living quarters of one (1) or more families.
Single- and two-family dwellings shall be designed for and occupied by not more than one (1) or
101
two (2) families, respectively. A multifamily dwelling shall be one designed for and occupied by
three (3) or more families.
Earth Removal: Extraction of sand, gravel, top soil, or other earth for sale or for use at a site
removed from the place of extraction exclusive of the grading of a lot preparatory to the
construction of a building for which a building permit has been issued, or the grading of streets in
accordance with an approved definitive plan, and exclusive of granite operations.
Educational Use, Non-exempt: Educational facilities not exempted from regulation by G.L. c.
40A, s. 3.
Erect: To build, construct, reconstruct, move upon, or conduct any physical development of the
premises required for a building; to excavate, fill, drain, and the like preparation for building shall
also be considered to erect.
Essential Services: Services provided by a public service corporation or by governmental
agencies through erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of gas, electrical, steam, or
water transmission or distribution systems and collection, communication, supply, or disposal
systems whether underground or overhand, but not including wireless communications facilities.
Facilities necessary for the provision of essential services include poles, wires, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other
similar equipment in connection therewith.
Family: Any number of related individuals, or not more than four (4) unrelated individuals, living
and cooking together on the premises as a single housekeeping unit.
Family Day Care Home: Any private residence operating a facility as defined in G.L. c. 28A, s. 9.
Farm Stand, non-exempt: Facility for the sale of produce, wine and dairy products on property
not exempted by G.L. c. 40A, s. 3.
Floor Area, Gross: The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a
building including each floor level, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of
walls, columns, or other features.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR): A mathematical expression determined by dividing total floor area of a
building by the area of the lot on which it is located. For example, a one acre lot with a FAR of
.75 could contain 32,670 square feet of gross floor area (43,560 X .75 = 32,670).
Funeral Home: Facility for the conducting of funerals and related activities such as embalming.
General Service Establishment: A facility providing general services such as small appliance or
equipment repair, shoe repair, tailor, upholsterer, and the like.
102
Hazardous Material: Any substance which is listed in, but not limited to, the EPA priority
pollutants as described in section 307(a) of the Clean Water Act, as amended.
Health Care Facility: Facility as defined in the HC District, herein.
Home Business: The use of a room or rooms in a dwelling for customary home occupations by
resident occupants, including craft, trades, professional, or office use.
Impervious: Any area impenetrable by surface water.
Junk: Any article or material or collection thereof which is worn out, cast off or discarded and
which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion. Any
article or material which, unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning can be used
for its original purpose as readily as when new shall be considered junk.
Junkyard or Automobile Graveyard: The use of any area or any lot, whether inside or outside of a
building, for the storage, keeping, or abandonment of junk, scrap or discarded materials, or the
dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery, or parts
thereof.
Kennel, Commercial: A commercial establishment in which more than three (3) dogs or
domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold located on at least five
(5) acres of land.
Light Manufacturing: Fabrication, assembly, processing, finishing work or packaging.
Lot: A continuous parcel of land with legally definable boundaries.
Lot Area: The horizontal area of the lot exclusive of any area in a street or recorded way open to
public use.
Lot, Corner: A lot with two (2) adjacent sides abutting upon streets or other public spaces.
Lot, Depth of: The mean distance from the street line of the lot to its opposite rear line measured
in the general direction of the side lines of the lot.
Lot, Frontage of: A lot line coinciding with the sideline of a street which provides both legal
rights of vehicular access and physical vehicular access to the lot, said line to be measured
continuously along a single street or along two (2) intersecting streets if their angle of intersection
is greater than one hundred and twenty (120) degrees. Vehicular access to a building site on the
lot shall be exclusively through the frontage of the lot unless otherwise authorized by Special
Permit by the Planning Board.
103
Lot Line: A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or any public place.
Lot, Width of: The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured parallel to the lot
frontage at the front yard setback line.
Manufacturing: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials, or the
manufacture from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution
of such products.
Medical Center or Clinic: A building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of human
patients that does not include overnight care facilities.
Mobile Home: A dwelling built upon a chassis, containing complete electrical, plumbing and
sanitary facilities, and designed without necessity of a permanent foundation for year-round living,
irrespective of whether actually attached to a foundation or otherwise permanently located.
Motel or Hotel: A building or buildings intended and designed for transient, overnight or
extended occupancy, divided into separate units within the same building with or without a public
dining facility. If such hotel or motel has independent cooking facilities, such unit shall not be
occupied by any guest for more than four (4) continuous months, nor may the guest reoccupy any
unit within thirty (30) days of a continuous four-month stay, nor may the guest stay more than six
(6) months in any calendar year. No occupant of such hotel or motel may claim residency at such
location.
Motor Vehicle Body Repair: An establishment, garage or work area enclosed within a building
where repairs are made or caused to be made to motor vehicle bodies, including fenders, bumpers
and similar components of motor vehicle bodies, but does not include the storage vehicles for the
cannibalization of parts.
Motor Vehicle General Repairs: Premises for the servicing and repair of autos, but not to include
fuel sales.
Motor Vehicle Light Service: Premises for the supplying of fuel, oil, lubrication, washing, or
minor repair services, but not to include body work, painting, or major repairs.
Municipal Facilities: Facilities owned or operated by the Town.
Nonconforming Structure: A lawfully preexisting structure, which, because of an amendment to
the Zoning By-law, no longer conforms to the dimensional requirements set forth therein.
Nonconforming Use: A lawfully pre-existing use, which, because of an amendment to the Zoning
104
By-law, no longer conforms to the use regulations set forth therein.
Nursing or Convalescent Home: Any building with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or
lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire.
Parking Garage: A structure which is accessory to a commercial or industrial establishment and is
primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles operated by the customers, visitors and
employees of such an establishment.
Personal Service Establishment: A facility providing personal services such as hair salon, barber
shop, tanning beds, dry cleaning, print shop, photography studio, and the like.
Restaurant: A building, or portion thereof, containing tables and/or booths for at least two-thirds
(2/3) of its legal capacity, which is designed, intended and used for the indoor sales and
consumption of food prepared on the premises, except that food may be consumed outdoors in
landscaped terraces, designed for dining purposes, which are adjuncts to the main indoor
restaurant facility. The term "restaurant" shall not include "fast food establishments."
Restaurant, Fast-food: An establishment whose principal business is the sale of pre-prepared or
rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready to consume state for consumption either
within the restaurant building or off premises and usually requires ordering food at a counter.
Retail: A facility selling goods but not specifically listed in the Table of Use Regulations.
Retail Food Shop: Shop selling food at retail, including bakery, sandwich shop, etc.
Rotor: The blades plus the hub to which the blades of a Windmill tower are attached.
Sign: Any privately owned permanent or temporary structure, device, billboard, letter, word,
banner, pennant, insignia or representation which is used as, or which is in the nature of, an
advertisement, announcement, or direction, and which is within public view. The following shall
not be considered signs: a) Flags and insignia of any government; b) Legal notices,
identification, informational or directional signs erected, required or endorsed by governmental
bodies; c) Signs indicating only the names of the owner or occupant, street number, cottage name
and/or date of construction of a building not to exceed 1 square foot in area. Specific sign types
and other definitions are set forth in Section 5.3.
Sign Area: In the case of free-standing signs and where a sign has a background color, surface, or
finish material which is different from the building or window face, the area shall include that
surface on which all the message, symbols, or designs are displayed, but not including supporting
frame-work. Where individual letters, symbols, message or designs are attached to or painted on a
building face or window, the area shall be the smallest imaginary rectangle which encompasses
and fully contains the extremities of all copy and graphics. Only one side shall be included in
105
computing the area of a double-faced sign.
Solid Waste Disposal Facility: Refuse transfer station, composting plant, solid waste recycling
operation and any other works or use approved by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
and the Board of Health for processing, handling, treating, and disposing of solid or liquid waste
materials, including garbage, rubbish, junk, discarded bulk items, and sludge but not raw sewage,
and similar waste items.
Street: An accepted town way, or a way established by or maintained under county, state, or
federal authority, or a way established by a subdivision plan approved in accordance with the
subdivision control law, or a way determined by the planning board to have sufficient width,
suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation
to the proposed use of the land, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land
and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon.
Structure: A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support or shelter,
such as a building, framework, retaining wall, tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign,
flagpole, recreational tramway, mast for radio antenna or the like. * For the purposes of this
bylaw, a fence six (6) feet or less in height, or a wall four (4) feet or less in height shall not be
considered a structure.
*Amended ATM 4/8/2008 Art 25. AG Approved 5/14/08, Posted 6/6/08.
Temporary Structure: A structure without any foundation or footings to be removed within a
twelve-month time period. Said structure shall conform to the requirements of the Table of
Dimensional Requirements and shall receive a permit from the Building Commissioner.
Town: The Town of Oak Bluffs.
Toxic Materials: A combination of pollutants including disease-carrying agents, which after
discharge and upon exposure, ingestion, inhalation, and assimilation into any organism can cause
death, disease, mutations, deficiencies, or malfunctions in such organisms or their offspring.
Warehouse: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials, for distribution, but
not for sale on the premises.
Windmill: A device which converts wind energy to mechanical or electrical energy.
Yard: A space open to the sky, located between a building or structure and a lot line, unoccupied
except by fences, walls, poles, paving, and other customary yard accessories.
Yard, Front: A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line and the
nearest point of the building.
106
Yard, Rear: A yard the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the
nearest part of the main building projected to the side line of the lot.
Yard, Side: A yard situated between the nearest point of the building and the side line of the lot
and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall
be deemed a side line.
Article 17. A motion was made, seconded and voted by 2/3 vote to amend Section 12 of its
Zoning Bylaw by adopting the following:
(Voted ATM April 14, 2015 Art. 17, approved by AG August 4, 2015 and published June 10,
2015)
Section 12.0 Solar Energy Systems.
12.1 Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw is to promote the use of solar energy by providing
standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and
removal of such installations that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and
historic resources and to provide adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning
of such installations.
12.2 General requirements. The following are common to all solar energy systems:
A. Compliance with Law and Regulations: The construction and operation of all proposed solar
energy systems shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements,
including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, communications and
aviation requirements.
B. Expiration: A permit issued pursuant to this by-law shall expire if the solar energy system is
not installed and functioning within 24 months from the date the permit is issued or the solar
energy system is abandoned.
C. System conditions: Owners of solar energy systems shall be responsible for maintaining them
in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, structural repairs and
integrity of security measures.
D. Access to the site shall be maintained at a level acceptable to the local Fire Chief and
Emergency Services. The project owner shall be responsible for the costs of maintaining the solar
energy system and any access road(s), and the cost of repairing any damage occurring as a result
of operation and construction.
E. A Solar Energy System shall not be used to display advertising, including signage, streamers,
pennants, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners or similar materials.
F. The manufacturer and equipment information, warning, or indication of ownership shall be
allowed on any equipment of the Solar Energy System provided that they comply with the
prevailing sign regulations.
G. Reasonable efforts shall be made to place all utility connections from solar energy installations
underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any
requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be
above ground if required by the utility provider.
107
H. Modifications: Any material modifications or expansions to a solar energy system not
permitted as-of-right, or of design that exceeds or will exceed the limits defining as-of-right
systems under this bylaw, shall require a Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals as
provided for here, except for routine maintenance and replacement of components.
I. Violations: It is unlawful for any person to construct, install, or operate a solar energy system
that is not in compliance with this bylaw or with any condition contained in an approval or permit
issued pursuant to this bylaw.
J. Use: All Solar Energy Systems shall be permitted solely as an accessory use, incidental to the
primary use of the property, unless otherwise permitted under the provisions of M.G. L. c. 40A, §
3.
12.3 Solar Energy Systems Permitted by Right.
12.3.1. Building-Mounted and/or Integrated Solar Energy System.
A. A Solar Energy System shall be considered to be building mounted and/or integrated if it is
designed to be permanently mounted on a building or other structure. This definition applies to
Solar Energy Systems of any capacity that are designed to be in direct contact with a building or
structure.
B. No building-mounted and/or integrated Solar Energy System shall exceed the building or
structure height limits of the underlying district, unless the Building Inspector determines that that
proposed facility complies with M.G. L. c. 40A, § 3.
C. A building-mounted and/or integrated Solar Energy System shall not overhang more than
twelve (12) inches beyond the existing roof.
D. No building-mounted and/or integrated Solar Energy System shall be erected, constructed,
installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit.
E. Building-mounted and/or integrated Solar Energy Systems may be located in any zoning
district.
12.3.2. Ground-Mounted and/or Pole-Mounted Solar Energy System.
A. Ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall be considered permitted by
right if said system:
1. has a gross panel area of less than 1,000 square feet;
2. is less than twelve feet in height;
3. is not located in within the front yard, defined as the area between the front façade of the
dwelling extended to the side property lines and extending to the street line (corner lots have two
(2) front facades).
Ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy Systems not meeting any one of these criteria
shall require a Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals, as provided for under Zoning
Bylaw Section 12.4.
B. Setbacks. For ground- and pole-mounted Solar Energy Systems, setbacks shall be as follows:
R1: Twenty (20) ft., front, side and rear
R2: Twenty-five (25) ft., front; twenty (20) ft., side and rear
108
R3 and R4: Fifty (50) ft., front, side and rear
B1: Ten (10) ft., front, five (5) ft., side and rear
B2: Twenty (20) ft., front, side and rear
Healthcare: Ten (10) ft., front, five (5) ft., side and rear.
C. The design, location and screening shall minimize the impacts on surrounding properties,
maintain safe accessibility, and limit storm water runoff.
D. The inclusion of on-equipment safety and security features shall be favored over fencing and
other visible, perimeter safety and security measures.
E. No ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy System shall be erected, constructed,
installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit.
F. Ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy Systems may be located in any zoning
district, subject to the provisions of Zoning Bylaw Section 12.3.2 (H).
G. Appurtenant Structures: All appurtenant structures to ground-mounted and pole-mounted
Solar Energy Systems shall be subject to Zoning Bylaw dimensional and density regulations,
concerning the bulk and height of structures, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building
coverage requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to, equipment
shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with
each other. Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded from view by vegetation or other
means and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
H. Ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall not be located within the
Cottage City Historic District, Harbor District, within the Shore Zone or Island Roads District.
12.4 Solar Energy Systems Allowed by Special Permit.
12.4.1. Special Permits. Ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy Systems not
specifically permitted by right shall require a Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
In granting a Special Permit, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the following:
Effects on special habitats or endangered species
Impact on the character of the surrounding neighborhood
Efficacy of existing natural screening, and remedies to meet any deficiencies
Erosion, drainage and storm-water runoff
Solar access and clearing.
12.4.2. Required documents. The following documents shall be provided to the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The ZBA may waive any of these requirements or impose other conditions as necessary.
A. A Site Plan showing:
1. Property lines and physical features, including roads, for the project site;
2. Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing and planting,
exterior lighting, vegetative or other screening of structures;
109
B. Blueprints or drawings of the solar energy system showing the proposed layout of the system
and any potential shading from nearby structures;
C. Documentation of the major system components to be used, including panels, mounting
system, and inverter;
D. Name, address, and contact information for proposed system installer;
E. Name, address, phone number and signature of the project proponent, as well as all coproponents
or property owners, if any;
F. The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the project proponent;
G. Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site.
12.5 Further requirements for large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems.
12.5.1 Large-scale systems. Ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy Systems
having a gross panel area of more than 10,000 square feet shall require a Site Plan Review prior to
consideration of a Special Permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Site Plan Review
Committee shall consist of at least one but no more than two members each of the Town Planning
Board, the Zoning Board of Appeals, the Energy Committee and Conservation Commission. In
reviewing the Site Plan, the Committee will consider:
The impact on open space
Visual impact, particularly from public roads, contiguous open spaces, protected natural areas,
scenic views and ancient ways
Extent of any grading and vegetative clearing, if required
Consistency with the planning objectives of the Town’s Local Comprehensive Plan, and other
adopted planning objectives, for open space, development, and other parameters;
Integration and consistency with the Town’s initiatives for renewable energy
12.5. 2 Design Standards. The following shall be considered design standards for large-scale
Solar Energy Systems.
A. Lighting: lighting of large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall be consistent
with local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant
structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be
shielded down to protect abutting properties, per Zoning Bylaw Section 5.4.4.1. Lighting of the
Solar Energy System shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to
reduce light pollution.
B. Signage: Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar Energy Systems shall comply with Zoning
Bylaw Section 5.3 (Sign Regulations). A sign consistent with the Town’s sign bylaw shall be
required to identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number. This sign
shall be visibly displayed at the entrance to the installation. Solar photovoltaic installations shall
110
not be used for displaying any advertising and may be used for the identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the Solar Energy System only.
12.5.3 Safety and Environmental Standards.
A. Emergency Services: The large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy System owner or operator
shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Town’s Fire
Chief. The owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an
emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the Solar Energy System shall be clearly
marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout
the life of the installation.
B. Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts: Clearing of natural vegetation shall be
limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale
ground-mounted Solar Energy System or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations,
and bylaws.
12.5.4 Monitoring and Maintenance.
A. Solar Energy Systems Installation Conditions: The large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy
System owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include,
but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access
shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the Fire Chief and other emergency services providers.
The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic
installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
B. Abandonment or Decommissioning
1. Removal Requirements: Any large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy System which has
reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with Zoning Bylaw Section
12.5.4.B.2, below, shall be removed. The owner shall physically remove the installation no more
than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the
ZBA by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
Decommissioning shall consist of:
a. Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, structures,
equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from the site;
b. Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state and federal waste
disposal regulations;
c. Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The ZBA may allow
the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order to
minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
111
2. Abandonment: Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of
extenuating circumstances, the Solar Energy System shall be considered abandoned
when it fails to operate for more than one year without the written consent of the ZBA. If the
owner of the large-scale ground-mounted Solar Energy System fails to remove the installation in
accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed
date of decommissioning, the Town may enter the property and physically remove the installation
either with the owner’s explicit consent or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
12.6 Special districts and uses
12.6.1. Agricultural land. On parcels of a minimum of five-acres area actively devoted to
agricultural use, as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 61A, or which otherwise enjoys protection as
agricultural land under M.G.L. c. 40A, § 3, ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy
Systems may be permitted subject to all applicable provisions of this and any other town bylaw,
and:
The reduction (if any) of land in agricultural use shall not cause the total remaining land in
agriculture use to fall below the minimum acreage requirements under M.G.L. 61A.
Design of the ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy System shall favor concurrent
use of the land for livestock grazing or similar sustainable use.
12.6.2. Contiguous open spaces. Ground-mounted and/or pole-mounted Solar Energy Systems
may be located on contiguous open space, as created and defined under Zoning Bylaw 7.3.13
(Flexible Development) or its predecessor by-law. Said systems shall be allowed under the
agricultural use exemption of Section 7.3.13, provided that:
A. The portion of open space dedicated to a Solar Energy System shall not exceed twenty-five
(25) percent of the contiguous open space parcel which it occupies.
B. Alternatively, if a subdivision contains multiple open spaces, a ground-based Solar Energy
System may be consolidated to a single parcel of contiguous open space, and use no greater than
twenty five (25) percent of the sum of the area of all its contiguous open space parcels.
C. A Solar Energy System created under Zoning Bylaw 12.6.2 shall be exempt from the
requirements of 12.2 (J).
12.6.3. Community-shared solar energy system. A community-shared solar energy system is
defined as a solar energy system that provides net metering credits to three or more utility
accounts, whose participants have an interest in the production of the system or the entity that
owns the system, in the form of formal ownership, a lease agreement or net metering contract. No
more than two participants shall receive net metering credits in excess of those produced annually
by 25kW of nameplate DC capacity, and the combined share of said participants’ capacity shall
not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total capacity of the system. A community-shared solar
energy system shall be exempt from the requirements of 12.2 (J).
Planning Board
2/3 vote required
Executive Summary: This by-law provides owners of residential and commercial properties the
right to construct and operate building-mounted and small-scale ground mounted solar energy
112
systems that are incidental to the primary use of the property. The by-law also provides a protocol
for review of large-scale solar energy systems, exemptions for community-shared systems, certain
safety and technical requirements, and guidelines for conversion of existing agricultural land.
Vision Statement:
Encourage the creation of greater housing options to balance the needs of year-round and
seasonal residents in a more equitably manner. This will include the investigation of
intergenerational apartment complexes, accessory apartments, year-round affordable rental units,
townhouses, condominiums, converted larger single-family houses or other buildings to multifamily,
smaller homes (including tiny houses), cohousing, and mixed-use “top-of-the-shop”
buildings in commercial areas.
The purpose of a B-1 zoning proposal:
Align town zoning By-laws with the intent to encourage mixed-use “top-of-the-shop” buildings
in commercial areas. The results of this type of zoning proposal are as follows.
1. Will provide incentive to private property owners to develop more affordable housing
alternatives in the downtown area; Will help to implement the Town’s Housing
Production Plan
2. Will help to stimulate private investment in the downtown.
3. By attracting year-round housing, the downtown will be more economically sound during
the off-season months.
4. Will help to “unlock private capital” in the short-term for two currently proposed housing
developments that will support the Town’s Streetscape Improvement efforts by making a
more compelling case for grant funds to improve public infrastructure to support housing
and business in the downtown.
Process:
1. Public outreach.
Private citizens, Building Commissioner, Town Counsel, Selectmen and the MVC will
been asked to submit ideas for shaping the zoning Amendment.
2. Structure.
A subcommittee of the Planning Board will analyze the ideas and conduct a public
process to draft a proposed zoning amendment.
3. Format.
The subcommittee will hold a public forum with the Board of Selectmen to present the
bylaw and solicit public feedback.
4. Timing.
The Selectmen will schedule a Town Meeting date for the Fall of 2017
5. Timing.
The Planning Board will schedule a Public Hearing a minimum of 21 days prior to Town
Meeting to enable Town Meeting to vote on the amendment without a recommendation
from the Planning Board because a majority of the Planning Board cannot act on the
proposal due to conflict of interest rules.
6. How.
The Chairman of the Planning Board and Chairman of the Selectmen will report on the
Article at Town Meeting.
Ewell Hopkins
Oak Bluffs Planning Board - Chairperson
Telephone: (508) 560 -7227
http://www.oakbluffsma.gov/182/Planning-Board
Robert L. Whritenour, Jr.,
Town Administrator
Town of Oak Bluffs
PO Box 1327
Oak Bluffs, MA 02557
Email: rwhritenour@oakbluffsma.gov
Telephone: (508) 693-3554

'· ·
..
r \
RULES AND REGULATIONS
Governing the Subdivision of Land
Town of Oak Bluffs, Massachusetts
Adopted February 22, 1974
Effective March 1, 197 4
Updated: 11/90
Please see 2001 Fee Schedule for.
Current Fees and Fee Regulations
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
SECTION I ADMINISTRATION. • . • • • • • • • • • • . . • • . • . • • . • • • • .. • • • • 1
11 Adoption. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
12 Applicab.ili ty. . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . 1
SECTION II DEFINITIONS.. • • • • . • • . • • • • • • • • • • • • . • • • • • • .. • • • • 2
SECTION I I I PLAN PROCEDURES ••••••••••••••••••••.•••• ~ • • • 3
31
32
33
34
35
36
General ............................. ............ .
Plan BeJieved Not to Involve Subdivision ...•... :
Small Project Procedures ........................ .
Pre-Submission Review .......................... .
Preliminary Plan of a Subdivision .............. .
Definitive Plan ................................ .
3
3
4
4
4
6
SECTION IV DESIGN STANDARDS~ .••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 14
41 General. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
42 Streets and Paths ............................... 14
43 Easements. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . 16
44 Storm Water Management. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
45 Water Supply .................................... 17
46 Other Requirements .............................. 18
SECTION V REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS ••.••••.•••••••.••••••..• 19
51 Preparation and Surfacing of Roadway .......•.... 19
5 2 Berms . . . . . . . ~ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . 2 0
53 Paths .. .......................................... 20
54 Utilities ....................................... 21
55 Other Requirements .............................. 22
56 Small Project Requirements ...................... 23
- i -
SECTION VI ADMINISTRATION.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
61 Schedule of Work ................................ 24
62 Variation ...... ................................. 24
63 One Dwelling Per Lot. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
64 References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
APPENDIX A DEVELOP~..ENT GUIDELINES BY LANDSCAPE TYPE ..... A-1
. TYPICAL CROSS .SECTION
FORMS A - H
- ii -
SECTION I INTRODUCTION
11 Adoption
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of
Oak Bluffs by Sec. 81-Q, Ch. 41, G.L., said Board hereby adopts
these Regulations governing the subdivision of land, in order to
guide its orderly development consistent with the purposes of the
Subdivision Control Law, Sec. 81-K to 81-GG, Ch. 41, G.L. The;e
regulations shall be effective on and after the first day of
March, 1974.
12 Applicability·
No person shall make a subdivision of any land within the Town,
or proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or
the construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services
therein, unless and until a definitive plan of such subdivision has
been submitted to and approved by the Planning Board as hereinafter
provided.
No person shall erect more than one dwelling on a lot except
as provided herein (Section 63).
SECTION II DEFINITIONS
Collector Street shall mean a street which carries traffic equivalent
to that generated by 50 dwelling units or more, or which
serves commercial or industrial abutting land.
Minor Street shall mean a street that carries traffic equivalent to
that generated by fewer than 50 dwelling units, and having no
abutting commercial or industrial property, and is not a lane.
Lane shall mean a street that carries traffic equivalent to that
generated by 10 or fewer dwelling units and having no abutting
commercial or industrial property, and is not capable of
e;:tension.
Board shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of Cak Bluffs.
Subdivision shall mean the division of a tract of land into two or
more lots and shall include resubdivision, and when appropriate
to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision of
the l and or territory subdivided; provided, however, that the
division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall not be
deemed to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the
Subdivision Control Law if, at the time when it is made, every
lot within the tract so divided has frontage on (a) a public
v.ray or a way v1hich the Clerk of the Town of Oak Bluffs certifies
is maintained and used as a public way, or (b) a way shown
on a plan theretofore approved in accordance with the Subdivision
Control Law, or (c) a way in existence October 16, 1972,
having in the opinion of the Planning Board sufficient width,
suitable grades, and adequate construction to provide fon the
needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use
of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the
installation of municipal services to serve such land and the
buildings erected or to be erected thereon. Such frontage
shall be of at least such distance as is then required by the
Oak Bluffs Zoning Bylaw for erection of a bui l ding on such lot.
Conv eyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from,
or changing the size and shape of lots in such a manner as not
to leave any lot so affected with6ut:the frontage above set
forth, or the d i vision of a tract of land on whkh t wo or more
buildings were standing on October 16, 1972, into separate
lots, on each of which one of such bui l dings remains standi ng,
shall not constitute a subdivision.
- 2 -
SECTION III PLAN PRCCEDURES
31 General
311 Only those plans which constitute "subdivisions" as that term
is defined in Section II require the approval of the Planning
Board. However, all plans, whether "subdivisions" within the
meaning of the law or not, must have either approval as a subdivision,
or endorsement that they do not require approval,
before they will be accepted for recording at the Registry of
Deeds or registration at the Land Court.
312 Plans . intended for review at any meeting of the Planning Board
should be forwarded to the office of the Town Clerk not later
than 4:00 P.M. two working days prior to the Planning Board
meeting. The day of the next regular Board meeting shall be
considered to be the date of submission for all plans, except
that the date of mailing shall be the date of submission for
Definitive Plans sent by registered mail to the Planning
Board, care of the Town Clerk.
32 Plan Believed Not to Involve Subdivision
321 Submission. Anyone may submit a plan seeking endorsement that
the plan doesn't require approval under the Subdivision Control
Law. The plan and two prints (to be retained) plus Form A and
(Amended a $100.00 filing fee should be submitted to the Planning Board,
2/2/90) and a copy of Form A should be filed (by delivery or registered
mail) with the Town Clerk. If the Board determines that the
plan does not show a subdivision, it shall endorse the plan
"Approval under the Subdivision Control Law Not Required".
The Board will return the original of the plan to the applicant
notifyin~ both him and the Town Clerk of its action.
322 Time Limit. If the Planning Board takes no action within 14
days of submission, the plan is automatically deemed not a
subdivision plan, and the Town Cl~rk may so certify.
323 Ways in Existence. Existing ways will normally be determined
by the Board-to provide adequate access to qualify a plan as
not constituting a subdivision only when the layout, design,
and construction of ~uch ways raee~ the standa~ds of this
regulation as applicable to ways ~ithin a subdivision.
- 3 -
'
·1
33 Small Project Procedures
331 Applicability. If he chooses, a developer may request to submit
his plan under Small Project Procedures, which are less
demanding than those for a Standard Project. To qualify, the
subdivision must create frontage potentially serving six or
fewer lots; must not be contiguous with property subdivided ; ~
within the past five years and now or previously in ownership
common with this land; must not be served by access previously
developed under Small Project Procedures, unless standard
project construction requirements for that access have been
met, and mus:t be approved for such procedures by the Planning
Board at the time of pre-submission review.
332 Limiting Agreements. Any plan approved under Small Projects
Procedures must contain or refer to covenants that ho additional
lots will be created on land in the same ownership for five
years from the date of approval if such land is contiguous or
reached via the roads in the Small Project, unless standzrd
project construction requirements for that access have been
met. The Plan must be annotated to the effect that lots on
that plan are subject to possible betterments for street improvements
if the street is accepted by the town. Steps in
processing such plans are the same as for standard projects.
34 Pre-Submission Review
Prior to investing in extensive professional design efforts for
subdivision plans, it will often prove useful to review the proposed
development of a parcel of land with the Planning Board, in order
that general approaches, possible use of cluster development, and
potential problems can be freely explored. Pencil sketches, which
need not be professionally prepared, will assist the discussion, and
might show some but not all of the information shown on a Preliminary
Plan. In some cases, especially Small Projects, this pre-submission
review may eliminate need for such a Preliminary Plan.
35 Preliminary Plan of a Subdivision
3§1 Gener.al. A Preliminary Plan of a subdivision may be submitted
Hy the applicant to the Planning Board and to the Board of
Health for discussion and approval, modification, or disapproval
by each Board. The submission of such a Preliminary Plan will
enable the subdivider, the P~nning Board, the Board of Health,
other municipal agencies, and owners of property abutting the
- 4 -
subdivision to discuss and clarify the problems of such subdivision
before costly engineering drawings for a Definitive
Plan are. prepared. Therefore, it is strongly recommended
that a Preliminary Plan be filed in each case except those
where pre-submission review has adequateiy clarified all
issues.
352 Application Procedure. The applicant shall file by delivery
or registered mail a notice with the Town Clerk stating the
date of submission for such approval of a Preliminary Plan to
the Planning Board, accompanied by a copy of the completed
application (Form B). A properly executed Form B (see
Appendix) shall be filed with the Planning Board, along with
six copies of the Preliminary Plan, and a filing fee of $10.00
plus $1.00 per lot in excess of six. The Board shall distribute
copies to the Highway Superintendent, Fire Depart~ent,
Conservation Commission, and Board of Selectmen for their
comments and suggestions.
353 Contents. The Preliminary Plan shall be drawn on tracing paper
or cloth at a scale of 100 feet to one inch or other scale
approved by the Planning Board, and shall be identified as a
Preliminary Plan. A Preliminary Plan shall have contents as
defined in Sec. 81-L of Ch. 41, G.L.
In addition, to promote better understanding, it is suggested
but not required that the following be submitted:
353.a A locus plan of the subdivision, showing its street
configuration in relation to the surrounding area, at a scale
Of 1 11 = 500 I •
353.b In the case of a subdivision covering less than all
of the land owned by the subdivider in the area of the subdivision,
a plan showing in a general manner the proposed
overall development of all of said land.
353.c Preliminary findi ngs, i n a general way, of the
Environmental Impact Analysis req~ired at Section 364.
- 5 -
354 Approval or Disapproval of Preliminary Plan. Within sixty
days after submission of a Preliminary Plan, the Planning Board
shall approve such plan with or without modifications suggested
by it or agreed upon by the person submitting the plan, or the
Board shall disapprove such Preliminary Plan, an~ in the case
of. disapproval, shall state its reasons therefore. Failure of
the Planning Board to approve or disapprove the Preliminary
Plan within sixty days shall be construed as approval.
355 Relation of Preliminary Plan to Definitive Plan and Zoning
Provisions. Approval of a Preliminary Plan does not constitute
approval of a subdivision, and a Preliminary Plan may not be
recorded in the Registry of Deeds. Provided that a Definitive
Plan is duly submitted within seven months from the date of
submission of the Preliminary Plan, the subdivision rules and
regulations in effect at the time of submission of the Preliminary
Plan shall govern the Definitive Plan, and if the
Definitive Plan is ultimately approved, the zoning provisions
in effect at the time of submission of the Preliminary Plan
shall govern the land shown fdr seven years from the date of
approval of the subdivision plan (Sec. 7-A, Ch. 40-A, G.L.).
36 Definitive Plan
361 Application Procedure. Any person who submits a Definitive
Plan of a subdivision to the Planning Board for approval shall
file with the Board the following:
a)
b)
(Amended C)
2/2/90
d)
Four contact prints of the Definitive Plan and other
required drawings, dark line on white background.
Two copies of properly executed application Form C.
A filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per lot or dwelling unit to be created by
subdivision or open space plan.
The applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail
a notice v:i th th·e Tovm Clerk stating the date of submission
for such approval, plus a copy of the completed
application Form C.
,...
- IO -
362 Standard Definitive Plan Contents. Th~ Definitive Plan shall
be clearly a~d legibly drawn in black India ink upon tracing
cloth. Sheet size shall not exceed 24" x 36". The Plan shall
be at the scale of one inch equals 100 feet, or such other
scale as the Board may accept to show details clearly and
adequately. If multiple sheets are used, they shall be
accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision.
The Definitive Plan shall contain the following:
a)
b)
(Amended c)
212/89)
Subdivision name, boundaries, north point, legend, date,
and scale;
Name and address of record owner, subdivider, surveyor,
and other professionals engaged in the design.
A list, certified by the Oak Bluffs Assessors' office, of the names and location of all lot
owners within 300 feet of proposed subdivision
d) Existing and proposed lines of stre~ts, ways (including
ancient ways), path9, lots, easements and public or common
areas within the subdivision. (The proposed names of
proposed streets shall be shown in pencil until they have
been approved by the Selectmen.)
e) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, direction,
and length of every street and way line, easements,
lot line and boundary line, and to establish those lines
on the ground. If any part of the subdivision is within
500 feet of a Massachusetts Co-Ordinate System Island
Zone Survey Monument, the subdivision shall be tied to
said system.
f) iload centerline station~ng, referenced to the Street Plans
and profiles.
g) Lot numbers.
h) Location of all permanent monuments, properly identified
as to whether existing or proposetj.
i) Location, names and present widths of street bounding,
approaching or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
j) Existing and proposed watercourses, ponds, and wetlands.
k) Suitable space to record the action of the Board and the
Town Clerk's certification, as defined in Sec. 81-V,
Ch. 41, G.L.
- 7 -
I i
(Amended
6/ 10/80)
362 (L) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development shall be reviewed to
determine whether such proposals will be reasonably safe from flooding. If any part
of a subdivision proposal or other new development is located within the Flood Plain
District established under the Zoning Bylaw it shall be reviewed to assure that base
flood elevation (the level of the 100-year flood) data shall be provided for proposals
greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, for that portion within the
Flood Plain District.
363 Street Plans and Profiles. For every street in a Standard Project, there shall be a separate
plan at 1" = 40', and profile at 1" = 40' , horizontal, 1" = 4' vertical, showing the
following data:
a) Exterior lines of the way, with sufficient data to determine their location, direction and
length.
b) Existing centerline profile to be shown as a fine full line. Existing centerline profile for
intersecting streets to be shown for at least 100 feet each side of the intersection of street
centerlines. When required by the Board, existing right sideline shall be shown as a
dashed black line, left sideline as black dots. Elevations shall be based on the
U.S.C.G.S. bench marks if such exist within 1000 feet of the-subdivision.
c) Finished, designed profile to be heavy full line, with elevations shown every 50 feet (25
feet on vertical curves).
d) Existing and proposed water courses, ponds, and wetlands .
e) All drainage facilities to be shown on the plan and profiles in red, showing sizes, invert
elevations, and slopes.
f) Location and size of existing and proposed water mains, hydrants , and main gate valves.
g) Location of existing and proposed cable utilities and their appurtenances.
h) Location of the following , unless waived by the Board: existing and proposed street
paving, sidewalks, street lighting, curbs , gutters .
364 Environmental Analysis . Any subdivision creating frontage potentially allowing thirty or
more lots shall be based upon an Environmental Analysis, and, in addition, the Board may
require for subdivisions of fewer than 30 lots that certain of the following be submitted
where such information is necessary to evaluate the plan because of special circumstances of
the location or proposal . Environmental analyses shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary
team to include a Registered Land Surveyor, Professional Civil Engineer, and Registered
Architect or Registered Landscape Architect, unless otherwise agreed to by the Planning
Board. The following documentation is required from each such analysis.
- c -
a) A set of plans at uniform scale shall be submitted, encompassing
the entire subdivision on a single sheet not
~ larger than 42" x 60", showing the following:
(1) The same data as on the definitive plan, reproduced
as a clear acetate. or mylar overlay.
(2) Topography at two-foot contour intervals, with graphic
drainage analysis; indication of annual high water
mark, location of existing structures, including
fences and walls.
(3) Vegetative cover analysis, including identification
of general cover type (wooded, thicket, grassland,
fresh wetland, etc.), location of all major tree
,. groupings plus other outstanding trees or other botanical
features, important wildlife habitats, and identification
of areas not to be disturbed by construction.
(4) Soil types, approximate groundwater level, location
and results of soil percolation or other subsurface
tests.
(5) Visual analysis, including analysis of scenic vistas,
and locations of visual prominence.
b) A narrative statement shall also be submitted, documenting
the ·following with references to the above maps as germane:
(i) Impact upon surface water quality and level.
(2) Impact upon ground water quality and level.
(3) Material effects upon important wildlife habitats,
outstanding botanical features, scenic or historic
environs.
(4) Capability of soils, vegetative cover, and proposed
erosion control efforts to support proposed development
without danger of erosion, silting, or other
instability.
(5) Relationship to the requirements of Sec. 40 and 40A,
Ch. 131, G.L., and Sec. 105, Ch. 130, G.L. (Wetlands
Acts).
- 9 -
!
i '
i
l
!j;
Ii
I
I:
i
I '. I :
' '
365 Other Submittals. The following shall also accompany submission
of a Standard Definitive Plan:
366
(Amended
2/2/90)
367
a) Typical street cross section for each class of street
within the subdivision, drawn at l" = 4', showing location
of all elements within the street right-of-way, and
typical cross sections of any altered drainage courses
or off-street paths.
b) A locus plan of the subdivision, showing its street configur~
tion in relationship to surrounding streets, at
1" = 2 0 0 0 '· .
c) Identification of landscape types, based on categories of
Appendix A, and a narrative statement of relationship to
the design guidelines of Appendix A, and proposed means,
if any, of ensuring compliance by purchasers of lots with
those guidelines.
d) If requested by the Board, drainage calculations, traverse
notes, evidence of ownership, language of any easements,
covenants or restrictions applying or proposed to apply
to the area being subdivided, rights and easements obtained
for utilities or drainage outside of the subdivision, description
of erosion control methods to be employed.
Small Project Submittals. For small projects, (defined in Section ill 331 and 332) Section
364 does not apply, rather, any plan in form acceptable to the Registey of Deeds or Land
Court may be submitted, provided that on that plan or on separate docuernnts
submitted the proposed centerline profile of any proposed street is shown, and proposed
drainage, utilities, and road construction have been made explicit.
Plan Processing (both Small Project and Standard Plan)
a) Board of Health Review. At the time of filing of the
Definitive Plan, the applicant shall also file a copy with
the Board of Health. The Board of Health shall within
forty-five days after filing of the Plan report to the
Planning Board in writing their approval or disapproval of
said plan. If the Board of Health disapproves said plan,
it shall make specific findings as to which, if any, of the
lots shown in such plan cannot be used for building sites
without injury to the public health, and include such
specific findings and the reasons therefor in such report,
- 10 -
and, where possible, shall make recommendations for the
adjustment thereof. Any approval of the plan by the
Planning Board shall then only be given on condition th~t'
the lots or land as to which such specific findings were
made shall not be built upon without prior consent of the
Board of Health. The Board shall~endorse on the plan such
conditions, specifying the lots or land to which said
conditions apply.
b) Public Hearing. Before approval, modification and approval,
or disapprovaf of the Definitive Plan is given, a public
hearing shall be held by the Planning Board, notice of the
time and ~lace of which and of the subject matter, suffi~
cient for identification, shall be given by the Planning
Board by advertisement in a newspaper of ga:ieral circulation
in the Town of Oak Bluffs, once in each of two successive
weeks, the first publication being not less than
fourteen days before the day of such hearing, and by
mailing a copy of such advertisement to the applicant and
to all owners of land abutting the land included in such
plan as appearing on the most recent local tax list.
c) Performance Guarantee. Defore the Planning Board endorses
its approval of a Definitive Plan, the developer shall
agree to complete without cost to the town all improvements
required by this regulation, and shall provide security
that he will do so, either by covenanting not to sell or
build upon any lots until completion of the improvements.
(which covenant must be referred to on the Plan and registered
or recorded with it) (see Form F), or by posting
bond or other security which the town .can utilize in the
event that the improvements are not completed within two
years (see Forms E-1 and E-2), or by some combination of
these. The Board may grant partial release . from such
security for partial completion of improvements, provided
that the completed portion provides a .reasonable system . for
circulation and utilities pending completion of the rest.
The Board may release the developer from the covenant upon
receipt of an agreement executed by the applicant and by
the holder of a first mortgage on the premises providing
for retention of funds and their availability to the town
upon default (See Ch. 41, G.L., Sec. 81-U, 11th paragraph).
- 11 -
: I
·1
I
Full security shall not be released until the integrity of
road pavement and drainage has been verified following a
full winter of use, until trees and other vegetation have
been established, until either fee to the streets has been
conveyed to the town (Sec. 555) or other provisions for
their continued maintenance have been accepted by the
Board, and until the record plans have been received.
d) Approval, Modification, or Disapproval. The action of the
Board in respect to such Definitive Plan shall be by vote.
Copies of said vote shall be certified and filed with the
Tov:n Clerk and a copy sent by delivery or registered mail
to the applicant. If the Board modifies or disapp~oves
such plan, it shall state in its vote the reasons for its
action.
Criteria for action by the Board shall be the following:
(1) Completeness and technical adequacy of all submissions.
(2) Determination that development at this location does
not entail unwarranted hazard to safety, henlth,.' and
convenience of future residents of the development or
to others because of possible natural disasters,
traffic hazard, or environmental degradation.
(3) Conformity v:ith the Design Standards of Section IV.
(4) Determination, based upon the Environmental Analysis
when submitted, that the subdivision as designed will
not cause substantial and irreversible damage to the
environment, which damage could be avoided or ameliorated
through an alternative development plan.
(5) Determination that the Development Guidelines of
Appendix A have been reflected in the design.
Approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original
drawing of the Definitive Plan by the signatures of a
majority of the Board but not until the statutory twentyday
appeal period has elapsed following the filing of the
certificate of the action of the Board with the Town Clerk
and the Clerk has notified the Board that no appeal has
been filed.
- 12 -
Following endorsement of the Plan by the Board, the applicant
shall provide the Board with a reproducible copy and
two contact prints of the Definitive Plan and of the Street
Plan and :i?rofile, and a copy of final covenants and
restrictions for its files. The Board shall supply the
applicant with a completed Form D.
Approval of the Definitive Plan or release of security
does not constitute the laying out or acceptance by the
town of streets within a subdivision.
368 Rescission. Failure of the developer to record the Definitive
Plan within six months of its endorsement, or to comply with
the construction schedule of the performance agreement (Form
E - Covenant or Form F - Performance Bond), shall constitute
sufficient reason for the rescission of such approval, in
accordance with the requirements of Section 81-W, Chapter 41,
G.L.
- 13 -
I .
I
SECTION N DESIGN STANDARDS
41 General
411 Design Guides (Amended 4/30/90)
a) All lots created within the subdivision shall have a regularity factor of not less than .55.
The regularity factor for each lot shall be determined as follows:
R=
R = regularity factor
16 x Land area in square feet
perimeter 2 in feet
b) That part of the lot area in excess of the required lot area may be excluded from the
above formula in determining the regularity factor. The perimeter of the excess area
shall not include any required road frontage.
c) The Planning Board may reduce the required regularity factor of any lots within the
subdivision to no less than .40 if the applicant can show ample justification for such a
reduction and, in the opinion of the Planning Board, such a reduction would not be
detrimental to the subdivision or the surrounding neighborhood.
412 Cross Section. Grading, location of pavements, utilities, and other improvements shall be
designed and located as indicated on the Typical Street Cross Section (see Appendix).
Streets and Paths
421 Location and Alignment
a) All streets and paths in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in the opinion of the
Board, they will provide safe pedestrian and vehicular travel. Due consideration shall
also be given by the subdivider to the consequences of the street layout upon the
livability, amenity, and environmental impact of the subdivision.
b) Provision satisfactory to the Board shall be made for the proper projection of streets and
paths, or for access to adjoining property which is net yet subdivided.
c) Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property shall not be permitted,
except where, inthe opinion of the Board, such strips are in the public interest.
d) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet should be avoided.
e) Street configuration shall be designed, together with reserved open space, to minimize
the number of lots having frontage exclusively on collector streets.
- 14 -
f) The minimum centerline radii of curved streets shall be
not less than the following:
Lane - 60 feet
Minor Streets - 100 feet
Collector Streets - 300 feet
g) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as
possible at right angles. No street shall intersect any
other street at less than 60 degrees.
h) Any group .of 20 or more lots shall provide for two means
of egress •
. i) Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded or
cut back to provide for a radius at the edge of travelled
way of not less than 30 feet at intersections with a
collector street and 20 feet for intersections involving
only minor streets or lanes.
j) Street intersections on arterial streets (major intertown
streets) shall be spaced not less than 400 feet apart.
k) There shall be vehicular access to each lot via routes no
part of which shall be less than ten feet above Mean Sea
Level.
1) Paths connecting existing trails and paths should be preserved
or created wherever reasonable, not necessarily
following the streets, and should be developed in other
locations where indicated by traffic, access to public or
recreational facilities, or other reasons.
4:22 Width
a) The minimum width of street rights-of-way shall equal the
width of the travelled way plus 18 feet. ·Greater width
shall be required by the Board when deemed necessary for
present and future utilities or their appurtenances.
b) The minimum width of rights-of-way for off-street paths
shall be eight feet.
- 15 -
423 Grade
a) Grades of streets shall be not less than 0.53. Except for
short intervals, grades shall be not more than 6.0% for
collector streets, 10% for minor streets, and 12% for lanes.
b) On any street where grade exceeds six percent on the
approach to an intersection, a leveling area with a slope
of not more than four percent shall be provided for a
distance of not less than 50 feet measured from the
nearest exterior line of the intersecting street.
c) Vertical curves are required whenever the algebraic
difference in grade between centerline tangents is 2.0%
or more.
d) Street centerline profile shall at no point be less than
three feet above the grade of adjacent wetlands or marsh.
424 Sight Distances. Forward stopping sight distances shall be
not less than 100 feet on lanes, 150 feet on minor streets,
or 300 feet on collector streets.
425 Dead-End Streets
a) Dead-end streets shall not be allowed except for lanes,
unless, in the opinion of the Board, they are necessitated
by topography or other local conditions.
b) Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with
eithe~ a turn-around having an outside roadway diameter of
at least 80 feet, and a property line diameter of at least
100 feet, or an alternative configuration accommodating
the turning of a vehicle with 30 foot wheelbase.
43 E?-se~ents
431 Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side
lot lines shall be provided where necessary, and shall be at
least 20 feet wide, unless a smailer width is determined by
the Board to be adequate for the purpose.
432 Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage
way, channel or stream, the Board may require that there be
provided a storm water or drainage easement of a minimum width
of twenty feet to conform substantially to the lines of such
wRter course, drainage way, channel or stream, and to provide
for construction or other necessary purposes.
- 16 -
433 Drainage easements outs.ide of the area of the subdivision, but
occasioned by it, may be required of the subdivider.
434 Slope easements shall be provided where cut or fill slopes
cannot be contained within the street right-of-way.
44 Storm Water Management
441 Storm drainage, culverts, and related facilities shall be
designed to permit the unimpeded flow of all natural water
courses, to ensure adequate drainage of all low points along
streets, to control erosion, and to intercept storm water runoff
along streets at intervals reasonably related to the extent
and grade of the area drained. To the maximum extent
feasible, storm water shall be recharged rather than piped to
surface water, and peak stream flows at the boundaries of the
development shall be no higher following development than prior
to development.
442 Storm sewers, retention basins, and leaching basins shall be
based on a 20 year frequency storm, and culverts shall be based
on a 50 year _ frequency storm, and on coastal flooding to ten
feet elevation (MSL), and shall employ tide gates, back-flow
valves, or other devices as necessary, to avoid damage from
reverse circulation of flood waters.
443 Design shall be based upon either the Rational Method or Manning
Formula. Water velocities shall be between 2 and 10 feet per
second. The coefficient of run-of£ used shall be not less than
0.45 for subdivided areas. All developable land tributary to
facilities being designed shall be assumed to be subdivided.
Leaching basins·, or catchbusin to manhoJ-=- system of drainage
is required, with no storm sewers of l~ss than 12-inch inside
diameter, and with catchbasins at all low points and sags, near
the corners of the roadway at intersecting streets, and at
intervals of not more than 350 feet on continuous grades.
Where used, leaching basins shall be cross-connected. The
Board may require test borings at leaching basin locations
where percolation is in doubt.
45 Water Supply
451 Provisions shall be made for water supply to each lot and for
fire protection and sewage d i sposal. When available, the
water supply shall be from a public water system, in which
event system design shall be as specified by the Oak Bluffs
Water Commissioners, evidenced by certification from the
Commissioners that they approve the design and will permit
connecti on.
- 17 -
452 Where connection to the public water system is not feasible,
a subdivision plan shall be approved only upon presentation of
evidence satisfactory to the Planning Board, upon advice of the
Board of Health, that adequate and suitable ground water is
available for domestic use, and upon presentation of evidence
satisfactory to the Planning Board, upon advice of the Fire
Chief, that adequate and suitable provisions for fire fighting
have been made . .
453 All water and sewage disposal systems shall be so designed as
to neither be impaired nor contribute to contamination in the
event of flooding to 10 feet elevation (Mean Sea Level).
46 Other Requirements
461 Open Spaces. Before approval of a plan the Board may require
that an area be reserved for a possible park or parks, and by
appropriate endorsement on the plan require that no building
be erected upon such reserved area for a period of three years
without the Board's approval. Such reservation shall be made
where particular natural features, abutti~g public land, or the
potential neighborhood need for recreation space make later
public acquisition appear desirable, but in no event shall required
reserved areas exceed 5% of the total area of the subdivision,
unless so required by zoning or other regulations.
462 Protection . of Ifatural Features. Due regard shall be shown for
all natural features, such as large trees, water courses, scenic
points, historic spots, and similar community assets, which, if
preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision.
463 Written Approvals. No Definitive Plan will be approved unless
the developer submits written certification of approval of the
design by all utilities which are to provide services within
the subdivision.
464 Underground Wiring. All wiring, cables, and other appurtenance~
of electric power, telephone, and fire alarm systems shall be
placed underground within the limits of the street right-of~
~ay, except where such underground installation would, in the
judgment of the Planning Board, cause undue hardship by reason
of topography, subscil conditions, or other site peculiarities,
or by reason of the existing development pattern. Electric
power cables shall be not less than 30" below finish grade.
- 18 -
SECTION V REQUIRED iMPROVEMENTS
The following improvements, to be constructed consistent with
good building practice, shall be made by t~e developer without cost
to the town. For Small Projects under Section 33, see requirements
at Section 56.
51 Preparation and 3urfacing of Roadway
~ll Stumps, brush, roots, boulders, trees, and like material shall
be removed as necessary to provide for paving and utilities,
but wherever feasible, existing vegetation shall be protected.
512 All materials not suitable for the foundation shall be removed
from an area ten feet wider than the paved width (5' for each
shoulder), and to a depth of at least 9 inches below finish
grade. Peat, silt, loam or similar yielding materials shall
be removed to a firm foundation for the full width of the
right-of-way. No loam suitable for reuse shall be removed
from the subdivision unless adequate loam will remain or is
otherwise assured to provide all disturbed areas within the
subdivision with a loam depth of at least six inches, and also
there is assurance that all streets_ from v.1hich loam is being
removed will be brought to subgrade with approved foundation
materials within six months.
513 No slopes resulting from grading of streets shall exceed 1 foot
vertical to 3 feet horizontal in fill, 1 foot vertical to 2
feat horizontal in cut, or 1 foot to 3/4 foot in ledge. Slope
easements or retaining walls shall be employed where slopes
cannot be contained within street sidelines. Land between the
outside of the layout and the street pavement, and driveway
entrances, shall be so graded as ~.:o prevent surface water on
the street from draining onto private land except at designated
ponding areas.
514 Travelled ways and shoulders shall be provided with a foundation
consisting of at least 6 inches compacted thickness of
good binding gravel satisfactory to the Superintendent of
Streets, clean, free of organic matter, and containing no
stones over 3 inches in diameter, or four inches of loam or
clay hardening, dense rated gravel, or equivalent. The
material shall be thoroughly watered, and rolled true to line
and grade to conform with the Typical Street Cross Section and
the street profiles. Any depressions that occur, either
during or after rolling, must be filled with additional gravel
or hardening and rolled until the surface is true and even.
- 19 -
515 The wearing surface of roadways and driveways within the rightof-
way shall be a two course type I-1 or, if authorized by the
Board, type F-1, bituminous concrete pavement, applied with a
2 inch* base course and a 1 inch* finish course, after the
roadway has been subjected to traffic for a time specified by
the:-'Superintendent of Streets.
The Board may waive the requirement for pavement on minor
streets and lanes where fee to the street is to remain private
(see Sec. 555), where an alternative all-weather surface is
provided (layered oil surface, or selected graded gravel
aggregate), and where the plan is annotated to the effect that
lots on that plan are subject to possible betterments for
street improvements if the street is accepted by the town.
Among considerations in such waiver shall be anticipated extent
of year-round occupancy, road grades, proximity of dwellings
to the roadway, and the type of all-weather. surface proposed.
516 The travelled way width, exclusive of curbing, shall be as
follows:
With Parking V!i thout Parking**
One-1'.'ay Two-Vlay One-Way Two-Pay
Lane 14 feet 16 feet 10 feet 16 feet
Minor Street 16 feet 20 feet 12 feet lG feet
Collector Street 18 feet 24 feet 14 feet 20 feet
The travelled way shall be located as shown on the approved
cross-section.
52 Berms
Molded bituminous berms or paved gutters shall be installed
wherever pavement grade exceeds 6% or elsewhere where required by
the Board to co::itrol drainage.
53 Paths
531 1~here provided, f:ootpaths outside street rights-of-way shall be
4 feet in width, bicycle paths 6 feet in width.
*after compaction
**No dwellings v.ri thin 75 feet of the travelled way or parking bays
provided.
- 20 -
532 Surfacing shall continue the material of connecting paths, or
where such do not exist, shall be either a two-course 2! inch
type F-1 bituminous concrete pavement for bicycle trails, and
in other cases may be loam or clay hardener or other material
specifically approved by the Board.
54 Utilities
541 ~ater System
a) When connection to the public system is possible, a complete
water system shall be installed, including mains,
gates, valves, and hydrants, consistent with the specifications
and pipe size requirements of the Oak Bluffs
V!a ter Commissioners and as shown on the Street Plans.
b) Before making connection to the public water system, the
developer shall agree to comply with all appropriate
regulations of the l'!a ter Commissioners.
542 Storm Water ~anagement System
A complete storm water management system shall be installed as
shown on the Street Plans and Profiles, and as follows:
a) Piping shall be concrete unless protected corrugated
aluminum is approved by the Board. Piping with less
than 18 inches cover shall be of reinforced concrete.
b) Catchbasins and manholes shail be at least G feet deep
and 4 feet diameter (inside measurements), constructed
of concrete blocks or precast concrete units. They
shall be backfilled for at least one foot around all
sides with l!" washed stone, stopped with peastone.
Leaching basins shall be cross-connected with 12 inch
drainpipe.
c) Open brooks or tributary ditches which are to be altered
shall be shaped to a cross-section and gradient, and
provided with stream bottom hardening, all acceptable
to the Board.
543 Cable Utilities. All cable utilities shall be installed.
Installation of street lights may be required by the Planning
Board as necessary for the safety of the inhabitants of the
neighborhood.
- 21 -
I
I
I
' ' .
55 Other Requirements
551 Monuments. Monuments shall be installed on both sides of the
street at all street intersections, at all points of change in
direction or curvature of streets and at other points where,
in the opinion of the Board, permanent monuments are necessary,
but in any event not spaced further than 500 feet apart. Such
monuments shall be of either granite or concrete, not less
than 30 inches long and 5 inches square, with dressed top and
a ! inch drill hole in the center, and shall be set to
finish grade.
No permanent monuments shall be installed until all construction
which would destroy or disturb their location is completed.
, 552 Street Signs. Street signs of a design and material acceptable
to the Superintendent of Streets shall be installed for each
street at each intersection.
553 Planting
a) Every effort shall be made to preserve and protect
existing vegetation.
b) The subdivider may be required to pl2nt trees where
necessary, in view of existing vegetation, to meet the
Development Guidelines of Appendix A. Before the trees
are planted, a plan showing their proposed location and
species shall be submitted to the Planning Board for
approval, based on the Development Guidelines, and based
on avoidance of problems from pests, disease, salt spray,
or root intrusion. Up to one tree of 2" caliper each
40 feet of street sideline may be required. Trees to be
retained shall not have grade changed over their root
areas more than six inches.
c) All unpaved areas within the street layout shall be
stablized with retained vegetation, topsoil and grass,
well-rooteq low-grov:ing pl.a ntings, bark, or other organic
materials acceptable to the Board.
554 Cleaning Up. Before sale of a lot, the subdivider shall clean
up any debris thereon caused by street construction and
installation of utilities.
- 22 -
' I •
555 Fee to Streets. The following shall be observed unless
waived by the Planning Board for subdivisions where the
public interest is served by retention of private ways;
and means of assuring such retention have been agreed
upon. The subdivider shall retain title to the fee of
each street or path in the subdivision until conveyed
to the Town, or for three years, whichever is the lesser.
Notation that this is to be done shall be placed upon
the Definitive Plan.
556 Record Plans. Upon completion of construction, and before
release of the ' performance guarantee, the subdivider shall
have prepared and submit Record Plans at l" = 40', which
shall indicate the actual location of the following:
a) Street lines
b) Edge of travelled way, and path locations
c) All permanent monuments ..
d) Location atid inverts of utilities and drainage required
to be installed by the developer.
e) Location of any other underground utilities, such as
electricity and telephone.
The accuracy of such record olan shall be certified by a
registered l~nd surveyor. In addition, a professional
civil engineer shall certify that all construction
was executed in conformance with the subdivision regulations
and with all requirements agreed upon as a condition to
plan approval.
56 Small Project Requirements
For a Small Project.under Section 33, the Planning Board may
normally vrn.ive the following requirements:
Bituminous concrete pavement
Paths, except where preserving an existing path
Record Plans
- 23 -
'
'' "
SECTION VI ADMINISTRATION
61 Schedule of ~ork
611 The work connected with the items mentioned in Sec. V shall
proceed in the following order, each item to be accomplished
so as not to interfere with previous work.
a) The roadway shall be brought to subgrade.
b) Base gravel shall be placed.
c) Water, gas lines, cable utilities, and drains shall be
placed with related equipment. All service connections
shall be installed to the lot lines unless jacking across
the street is feasible without breaking or weakening road
pavement.
d) Surfacing shall be placed with sidew~ks and curbs.
e) Monuments and street signs shall be placed.
612 The work shall proceed as above with exceptions only by order
of the Planning Board.
613 Inspections shall be arranged for as outlined on Form H
Inspection Form.
62 Variation
Strict compliance with the requirements of these . rules and
regulations may be waived when, in the judgment of the Board, such
action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the
Subdivision Control Law.
63 One Dwelling Per Lot
Not more than one building designed or available for dwelling
purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on
any lot in a subdivision or elsewhere within the Town without the
consent of the Planning Board. Consent shall be granted only for
structures in compliance with zoning restrictions, and only upon the
Board finding that adequate ways and utilities servicing such site
for such building have been provided in the same manner as otherwise
required for lots within a subdivision.
64 Ref ere nee
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference
is made to Sec. 81-K to 81-GG, Ch. 41, G: •. L .• , inclusive.
- 24 -
I ) . .,
A P P E N D I X A
DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES BY LANDSCAPE TYPE
The following provides criteria for categorizing land into six
landscape types, based on land form, vegetation and existing
development. For each landscape type expected to be found in Oak
Bluffs, guidelines are provided for development consistent with town
goals and character. The layout and construction of ways within
subdivisions shall be so designed as to comply with these guidelines
and so as to facilitate vegetative cover and building development
consistent with them. Included in these guidelines are considerations
beyond subdivision contro+, such as suggested building materials.
These are included here as a reference, for possible implementation
at the developer's option.
Both the landscape types and the design guidelines are based
largely on Looking at the Vineyard, Vineyard Open Land Foundation,
1973. Further suggestions may be obtained from that report, especially
pp. 10-44.
Developers who believe that alternative guidelines would better
meet the general goals being sought are encouraged to state those
alternative guidelines as a part of their plan submittal.
SALT LANDS
Identification: Salt ponds, salt marsh, dunes, beaches, and the low
grassland and open thickets bordering and visually linked to
them.
Objectives: Protect ecology of estuarine and fragile areas, preserve
visual sense of expanse and isolation, avoid flood damage.
Building siting: No building on legally protected wetlands and
dunes. Avoid building on any beach, dune, wetland, pond edge
or barrier dune, or on pond edges elsewhere except when
building is functionally r related to the water. Use small
clusters set low within thicket or wood.
Road location: Within thicket or wood, beach access by paths only ·
above flood elevations.
Vegetative cover: Protect native plants and fauna; avoid importing
exotic plants, large trees, mowed lawns.
- A-1 -
' . .
Building design: Preferably low, muted color, soft form: wood,
sod, thatch, earth, weathered silvers, grays, and browns. Avoid
metal, painted wood, finished masonry.
Other considerations: Note restrictions in zoning, this regulation,
Sec. 40 and 40A, Ch. 131, G.L., and elsewhere.
BLUFFS
Identification: Steep ocean edges of eroding moraines, plus beaches
below, plus land above visually connected to bluffs.
Objectives! Minimize erosion or other ecological imbalance, preserve
visual scale, project characteristic Island image.
Building siting: Avoid development on bluffs themselves to beyond
their visible crests, cluster in relation to land folds, tree
g~oves.
Road location-: Not visible from shore. No roads running up bluff.
Vegetative cover: No tall vegetation on crests. Make more open.
Building design: Low, complex, slope-following. No large, light
surfaces, paint, or metal. Materials which blend or weather.
Other considerations: Design for aspect from water as well as from
land.
OPEN PLAINS
Identification: Open grassland, low scrub oak, and shrub, within
the flat to gently undulating outwash plain south of the
moraine.
Objectives: Maintain open sweep of land, avoid shapeless suburbia.
Building siting: Cluster tightly, avoid scattered structures, avoid
cedar-dotted transitional areas. Some tall structures.
- A-2 -
Road location: Follow minor folds in ground or depress below grade.
Collector streets straight or long curves. Minor roads in
clusters possibly rectilinear, others curving in response to
minor land features.
Vegetative cover: Keep area around clusters open. Plant trees
only within clusters or along roads. Mow, plow, or graze.
Building design: Anything not inconsistent with Vineyard tradition;
no heavy fences.
Other considerations: Agriculture encouraged.
WOODED PLAINS
Identification: Predominantly wooded areas within the flat to
gently undulating outwash plain south of the moraine.
Objectives: Avoid "suburban" development character, protect forest
ecology, introduce variety.
Building siting: Cluster preferred; scattered buildings away from
clearings, screened from roads. Avoid continuous development.
Some centers on main roads.
Road location: Frequent curves, staggered intersections; rectilinear
grid acceptable in some cases.
Vegetative cover: Clear underwood, only selectively clear trees.
Building design: Close, varied visual density, intimate complex
spaces, strong colors and textures, occasional thin and tall
structures.
Other considerations: Better suited to development than most landscape
types.
WOODED MORAINE
Identification: Predominantly wooded areas within the rolling
moraine land.
- A-3 -
. ' .
Building siting: Clustered or scattered, low structures on hilltops,
taller structures on slopes and valleys, placed at edges
of clearings or in thinned woods.
Road location: 1'1 inding, following or diagonal to contour, along
ridges if not in sight of valley, or in valleys. Staggered
intersections, loop configurations.
Vegetative cover: Cleared patches for gardens, partial views. No
clearing on hilltops.
Building design: Not critical, wood preferred.
Other considerations: Care to avoid erosion, need to preserve some
wooded areas free from development.
SETTLEMENT AREAS
Identification: Land whose character is established by and
impinging upon existing development abutting it.
Design considerations: Need study in each individual case to
develop guidelines for extending qualities of and harmonizing
with existing development.

DISTRICTS
R1
R2
R3
R4
B1
B2
HC
Residential Uses
Single family dwelling
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Conversion to duplex in conformance with section 7.1
BA
BA
BA
BA
N
N
N
Rooming/boarding guest house
PB
PB
PB
N
PB
N
PB
Conversion of one or two story to apartment units in conformance with section 7.2.1
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
Conversion of three story to apartment units in conformance with Section 7.2.2
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
Other conversion in compliance with Section 7.2.3
N
N
N
N
BA
N
N
Flexible Development
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
Exempt & Institutional Uses
Use of land or structures for religious purposes
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Use of land or structures for educational purposes on land owned or leased by the commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational corporation
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Child care facility
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Use of land for the primary purpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture or viticulture on a parcel of more than five acres in area
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Facilities for the sale of produce, and wine and dairy products, provided that during the months of June, July, August and September of every year, or during the harvest season of the primary crop, the majority of such products for sale, based on either gross sales dollars or volume, have been produced by the owner or leasee of the land containing more than five acres in area on which the facility is located
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Municipal facilities (* with the exception of recreation in R4 districts)
Y
Y
Y
Y *
Y
N
Y
Public drinking water supply facility
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Health care use, less than 100,000 square feet
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Health care use, more than 100,000 square feet
N
N
N
N
N
N
BA
Essential services
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
Over
DISTRICTS
R1
R2
R3
R4
B1
B2
HC
Commercial Uses
Nonexempt agricultural use
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
Nonexempt educational use
PB
PB
PB
N
PB
N
PB
Motel or hotel
PB
PB
PB
N
Y
N
PB
Inn or guest house with not more than 12 rooms
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
Private nonprofit club or lodge
PB
PB
PB
PB
PB
N
PB
Motor vehicle sales and services
N
N
N
N
PB
N
N
Motor vehicle general and body repair
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
Motor vehicle light service
N
N
N
N
Y
N
N
Retail stores and services not elsewhere set forth
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
Retail food shop
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
Restaurant
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
Restaurant, drive-in or fast food
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Indoor commercial recreation
N
N
PB
PB
Y
N
PB
Outdoor commercial recreation
N
N
PB
PB
?
N
PB
Boat yards and boat services
PB
PB
PB
N
PB
N
PB
Bicycle sales, rental, repairs
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
Art galleries or studios
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
Craft or artisan shop
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
N
Stable
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Stables on land containing 5 or more acres
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Adult Care
N
N
N
N
N
N
BA
Manufacturing and Light Manufacturing
N
N
N
N
PB
PB
N
DISTRICTS
R1
R2
R3
R4
B1
B2
HC
Other Uses
Temporary structures and uses for development
PB
PB
PB
N
PB
N
PB
Windmill
Y
Y
Y
N
Y
N
Y
Residential Accessory Uses
Swimming pool
Y
Y
Y
Y
Recreation court
Y
Y
Y
Y
Home business
Y/BoS
Y/BoS
Y/BoS
Y/BoS
N
N
N
Windmill
Y
Y
Y
N
Adult Day Care Homes (section 3.2.3.2)
Y/Ba
Y/Ba
Y/Ba
Y/Ba
N
N
N
Boarders in Single Family Dwelling (section 3.2.3.3)
Y/Ba
Y/Ba
Y/Ba
Y/Ba
N
N
N
Contractor's Yard (section 3.2.3.4)
Y/BoS
Y/BoS
Y/BoS
Y/BoS
N
N
N
Storage or Parking of Commercial Landscaping Equipment (section 3.2.3.5)
Y/BoS
Y/BoS
Y/BoS
Y/BoS
N
N
N

Table of Dimensional Requirements - Appendix B
District Minimum Lot Size (sq. ft.) Minimum Lot Frontage (ft.) Front Side Rear Maximum Building Height (ft.)

R-1 *
10,000 (plus 10,000 per
family unit in excess of 1
on the lot
80 (or 65 if, 20 ft. back
from the street line, the lot
is at least 80 ft. wide)
20 20 20 32
R-2
20,000 (plus 20,000 per
family unit in excess of 1
on the lot)
115 (or 90 if, 25 ft. back
from the street line, the lot
is at least 115 ft. wide)
25 20 20 32
R-3
60,000 (plus 60,000 per
family unit in excess of 1
on the lot)
150 (or 125 if, 30 ft. back
from the street line, the lot
is at least 150 ft. wide)
50 50 50 32
R-4
130,000 (plus 130,000 per
family unit in excess of 1
on the lot)
200 (or 170 if, 40 ft. back
from the street line, the lot
is at least 200 ft. wide)
50 (except for a permitted
driveway no wider than 12
ft.)
50 (except for a permitted
driveway no wider than 12
ft.)
50 (except for a permitted
driveway no wider than 12
ft.)
32
B-1 5 35
B-2
10,000 (plus 10,000 per
family unit in excess of 1
on the lot
80 (or 65 if, 20 ft. back
from the street line, the lot
is at least 80 ft. wide)
20 20 20 32
Health Care ** 10,000 80 5 5 5 35

* Refer to Section 4.2.7 of the Zoning By-laws
** Refer to Section 4.2.6 of the Zoning By-laws