GENERAL BY-LAWS
OF THE
TOWN OF SHERBORN
Includes changes made at the 2019 ATM
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-2-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter 1 Meetings .................................................................................................4
Chapter 2 Rules of Procedure at Town Meetings ...................................................4
Chapter 2A Board of Selectmen/Select Board ..........................................................5
Chapter 3 Powers and Duties of Town Officers
Not Prescribed by Statute .......................................................................5
Chapter 4 Advisory Committee ...........................................................................12
Chapter 5 Registration and License Requirements for Dogs ...............................13
Chapter 5A Regulations for Control of Dogs ................................................. 14
Chapter 6 Capital Budget Committee ..................................................................15
Chapter 7 Town Traffic Safety Committee ..........................................................16
Chapter 7A Council on Aging ................................................................................16
Chapter 8 Hunting By-Law .................................................................................17
Chapter 9 Unregistered Cars ................................................................................17
Chapter 10 Public Ways ........................................................................................18
Chapter 11 Dangerous Excavations .......................................................................19
Chapter 12 Disorderly Behavior ............................................................................19
Chapter 13 Police Regulations ..............................................................................20
Chapter 14 Repeal of By-Laws .............................................................................20
Chapter 15 Recreation Commission ......................................................................20
Chapter 16 Violations ............................................................................................21
Chapter 17 General Wetlands By-Law ..................................................................22
Chapter 18 Historic District Commission .............................................................27
Chapter 19 Common Victualler's License .............................................................29
Chapter 20 Personnel By-Law ...............................................................................29
Chapter 21 Groundwater Protection By-Law ........................................................31
Chapter 22 Driveways ...........................................................................................36
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-3-
Chapter 23 Anti-Littering and Dumping ................................................................37
Chapter 24 Farm Pond ............................................................................................38
Chapter 25 Comprehensive Stormwater Management By-Law .............................38
Chapter 26 Stretch Energy Code ............................................................................43
Chapter 27 Registration of Solicitors .....................................................................44
Chapter 28 Revolving Funds ..................................................................................50
Chapter 29 Marijuana Not Medically Prescribed ...................................................51
Chapter 30 Denial or Revocation of Permits ..........................................................51
Personnel Administration Plan ...............................................................................................53
Special Acts of the General Court Relating to the Town of Sherborn ....................................74
Statutes of the Commonwealth Accepted by the Town of Sherborn ......................................78
Note: The General By-Laws were repealed in their entirety and a new set adopted in 1968. The
newly adopted By-Laws were essentially a modification of the old By-Laws with several sections
added. The dates appearing after various sections herein indicate years subsequent to 1968 in
which the section was added or amended.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-4-
CHAPTER 1. MEETINGS
Section 1. The Annual Meeting for the election of officers and determination of such matters as
by law are required or permitted to be upon the ballot shall be held on the second Tuesday in May.
The polls shall be open for at least twelve (12) hours. The opening and closing time of the polls
shall be established each year by the Select Board. (Amended 1974, 1979)
Section 2. All other business shall be considered at a deliberative session of the Annual Meeting
to be held on such date in last half of April or first week in May and at such place as shall be
specified in a separate Warrant therefore. (Amended 1969, 1974, 1979)
Section 3. Notice of every Town Meeting shall be given not less than seven (7) days before the
day appointed for said Meeting. Notice shall be given by posting an attested copy of the Warrant
calling the meeting in at least five (5) public places in the Town. The return of the officer, stating
the manner in which notice was given, shall be endorsed upon the Warrant. (Amended 1980, 2010)
Section 4. At least twenty-one (21) days before the Annual Meeting referred to in Section 2 of
this Chapter, the Annual Town Report shall be posted to the Town’s website, and hard copies shall
be available to those residents who request them and copies of the Annual Town Report will also
be available for inspection and copying at the Town Hall, provided that at least thirty (30) days
before the Annual Meeting, a postcard shall be distributed to each household in the Town in which
a voter eligible to vote at the Annual Town Meeting resides advising that the Annual Town Report
will be posted and that copies will be available at the Town Hall. Provision will be made to
distribute hard copies to those households which request it and who are unable to get to Town Hall
during its open hours. (Amended 2012)
CHAPTER 2. RULES AND PROCEDURES AT TOWN MEETINGS
Section 1. Only registered voters may vote at Town Meetings. The number of registered voters
necessary to constitute a quorum at any Town Meeting, except at a meeting devoted exclusively
to the election of town officials, shall be one hundred (100), but a smaller number may adjourn to
a stated date, time and place.
Section 1A. Whenever a two-thirds vote is required by statute, such vote may be declared as such
by the Moderator without a count and be recorded as such by the Clerk upon such declaration;
provided, however, that seven (7) or more voters may challenge such declaration, at which time a
count shall be taken. (Amended 1997)
Section 2. All articles in the Warrant shall be taken in the order of their arrangement unless
otherwise decided by a two-thirds vote of the voters present and voting.
Section 3. In case of motions to amend or to fill blanks, the one expressing the largest sum or
the longest time shall be put first, and an affirmative vote thereon shall be a negative vote on any
smaller sum or shorter time.
Section 4. When a report of a committee is placed in the hands of the Moderator, it shall be
deemed to be properly before the meeting for its action thereon, and a vote to accept the same shall
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-5-
discharge the committee, but shall not be equivalent to a vote to carry out the recommendations
without a special vote to adopt.
Section 5. No vote shall be reconsidered at the same Town Meeting unless it be ordered by twothirds
of the voters present and voting thereon at the same session. (Amended 1972)
Section 6. When a unanimous vote is not obtained on any substantive motion requiring a vote
greater than a majority for passage, the said motion shall be voted upon at the same session by
written ballot, using the same check list, if fifty voters so request. (Amended 1972)
Section 7. All proposed expenditures for equipment, the estimated cost of which exceeds $4,000
shall be separately identified in the appropriate budget line item. The appropriation to meet an
obligation under a lease or a lease with an option to purchase for a total payment in excess of
$4,000 shall be separately identified in the budget under the appropriate budget line item or warrant
article. (Amended 1990)
Section 8. The Town Clerk is authorized to assign appropriate numbers or letters to by-law
sections, subsections, paragraphs and subparagraphs where none are approved by Town Meeting;
if such numbering or lettering is approved by Town Meeting, to make non-substantive editorial
revisions to the same to ensure consistent and appropriate sequencing and numbering; and, to make
non-substantive editorial revisions to references regarding such numbering or lettering as
contained within the by-laws to ensure accuracy and conformity.
All such editorial revisions shall be identified with a footnote that describes the revision and the
reason therefor. (Added 2019)
CHAPTER 2A. BOARD OF SELECTMEN TO BE KNOWN AS THE “SELECT
BOARD”
Section 1. Effective July 1, 2018, for purposes of these bylaws, the Sherborn Board of
Selectmen shall be known as the Sherborn Select Board.
CHAPTER 3. POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWN OFFICERS NOT
PRESCRIBED BY STATUTE
Section 1. The Select Board shall have full authority as agents of the Town, acting upon the
advice of the Town Counsel, to settle any claims or suits against the Town when the sum to be
paid does not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000). Any settlement requiring the
payment of a sum greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), except as authorized by
law, shall be made only when authorized by the voters at Town Meeting. (Amended 1968, 1991,
2008)
Section 2. Whenever it shall be necessary to execute any deed conveying land, the same shall
be executed by the Town Treasurer in behalf of the Town, unless the Town in any special case
shall otherwise vote.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-6-
Section 3. All appointments which the Select Board is authorized to make shall be made in the
month of May or June, after the Annual Town Meeting for the election of officers. All such
appointments shall become effective on the 15th day of June, and run until a successor is appointed
and qualified. Nothing in this section is to be construed to prevent the making of appointments to
fill vacancies as they may occur. (Amended 1979)
Section 4. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 of this Chapter the Select Board shall annually
appoint a competent lawyer who is a member in good standing of the Massachusetts Bar as Town
Counsel for a term of one year. He shall receive such compensation as the Selectmen may
determine. All articles in the Warrant for Town Meeting shall be submitted to the Town Counsel
for his examination and approval. The Town Counsel shall examine and approve all bonds, leases,
obligations, conveyances, contracts, and other legal instruments, and do every professional act
which may be required of him on behalf of the Town, including the prosecution and defense of all
suits to which the Town is a party. He shall also furnish a written opinion on any legal question
that may be submitted to him in writing, with a copy thereof to be sent to the Selectmen, by any
Town Board or Committee on a matter concerning such Board or Committee, and shall at all times
furnish legal advice to any officers of the Town upon any subject concerning the duties incumbent
upon such officer by virtue of his office.
Section 5. That the Select Board shall annually have printed in the Town Report the yearly
salary and wages of each Town employee. (Added 1975)
Section 5A. All fees received by any Town officer by virtue of his or her office shall belong to
the Town, and shall be paid into the Town Treasury by such officer. (Added 2001)
Section 5B. Any organization engaged in charitable work or a post of any incorporated
organization of veterans who served in the military or naval service of the United States in time of
war or insurrection may, for a particular time period not to exceed a total of four days, and for a
charitable purpose stated in such license, obtain a license from the Town to conduct under their
control a temporary or transient business in which transient vendors participating in such sales
shall not be subject to the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 101, Sections 3 to
12, inclusive, without the necessity of any vote by the Select Board to approve such license. (Added
2016)
Section 6. Town Administrator (Added April 28, 1986, Amended 1987, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2019)
6.1 Appointment; Qualifications; Term. The Select Board shall appoint a Town Administrator
for a term, effective June 15, of three years, after a one year probationary period, and fix his/her
compensation within the amount annually appropriated for that purpose. The Town Administrator
shall be appointed solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications.
He/She shall be a professionally qualified person of proven ability, especially fitted by education,
training and previous experience in municipal administration to perform the duties of the office.
He/She shall not have served in an elective office in the town government for at least twelve
months prior to appointment. He/She shall devote full time to the office and shall not hold any
other public office, elective or appointive, nor engage in any other business or occupation during
his/her term, unless such action is approved in advance, in writing, by the Select Board.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-7-
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Town Administrator, the Select Board shall, pending
appointment of a new Town Administrator, appoint a qualified person as an Interim Town
Administrator to perform the duties of the Town Administrator on an interim basis. The Interim
Town Administrator shall have all of the powers and duties of the Town Administrator, unless
otherwise provided by Town By-law. Within sixty days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office
of Town Administrator, the Select Board shall appoint an interim Town Administrator for a term
not to exceed ninety days. If the vacancy is not filled by the end of that appointment, the Select
Board may re-appoint the Interim Town Administrator for an additional sixty day appointment.
The Select Board shall start the process for hiring a new Town Administrator within fourteen days
of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Town Administrator.
6.2. Power and Duties: Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Town Administrator
shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Town and shall, under the policy direction of the
Select Board, supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient administration of all Town
departments, committees, commissions, boards, offices and agencies within the direct jurisdiction
of the Select Board, but not those within the jurisdiction of other elected officials, elected
committees, elected boards, elected councils or elected commissions, or those under the Chief of
Police and Fire Chief, and of all functions for which the Town Administrator shall have
responsibility, authority or control by Town by-law, or by Town meeting vote; provided however
that the Town Administrator shall not exercise any control over the discretionary power vested by
statute in any such department, committee, commission, board, council or office. The Town
Administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
a) Management of the office of the Select Board and other agencies under the control of the
Select Board, and establishment of effective working relationships among all town boards,
departments, commissions and committees.
b) Direct supervision of the employees of the Select Board’s office and general supervision of
department heads under the control of the Select Board. Department heads and other
employees shall report to the Select Board through the Town Administrator.
c) General and Appointing Authority of Town employees.
The Town Administrator shall appoint, based upon merit and fitness alone, and may remove,
subject to the provisions of the General Laws and town by-laws where applicable,
employees who work for town departments, committees, boards councils and commissions
except for employees who work for the Town's elected officials, elected committees, elected
boards, elected councils or elected commissions, or are appointed by the Fire Chief pursuant
to General Laws, chapter 48 section 42 and persons appointed by the Commonwealth, or
work pursuant to appointments for which another method of appointment or removal is
provided by the General Laws or this bylaw. The Town Administrator shall consider the
recommendations of committees, boards, councils, commissions and department heads
when making any appointments of employees within their respective areas of responsibility.
Appointments to positions made by the Town Administrator pursuant to the appointing
authority granted in this section shall become effective immediately. The Town
Administrator shall be responsible for the initial screening of all applicants and may make
recommendations to the Select Board for finalists for the positions of Fire Chief, Chief of
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-8-
Police and Director of Department of Public Works, each of who shall be appointed by the
Select Board.
d) General and Appointing Authority of appointed Boards:
The Town Administrator will forward to the Select Board all applicants for appointment to
town committees, boards, councils or commissions including recommendations of the
respective boards, committees, councils and commissions under the Select Board.
e) The Town Administrator shall be the Town’s Human Resource Director and shall have the
following authority regarding the management of Town employees, except for school
employees and employees of the Board of Library Trustees, and may delegate to a qualified
human resources professional any or all of the following functions:
1. Administer a personnel system including, but not limited to, a classification and
compensation plan in cooperation with the Personnel Board; job descriptions, an
annual performance appraisal process; and the review and maintenance of all
personnel records, contracts, and collective bargaining agreements.
2. Administer and enforce any personnel rules and regulations contained within the
Personnel Administration Plan, and By-laws adopted by the Town
3. Consult with the Personnel Board, as necessary, regarding the interpretation and
administration of the Personnel Administration Plan
4. Work within the Personnel Administration Plan regarding responding to any
allegations of improper conduct of any officer or employee of any department under
his/her jurisdiction.
5. Review all hiring, terminations, and other personnel actions of any department,
committee, board, council or commission to ensure compliance with local, state and
federal laws and provide advice to the appointing authority. The Town
Administrator shall establish application and hiring procedures to ensure that proper
process is followed and that the most qualified applicants are considered for hiring.
f) The Town Administrator shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all Town
buildings, facilities and property including property under the control of the Select Board,
except school property and the property under the control of the Board of Library Trustees,
Elder Housing Committee, Conservation Commission, Town Forest Committee, Recreation
Commission and Cemetery Commission, unless placed under the Town Administrator's
control by General Laws or by vote of the Town Meeting. The Town Administrator will be
an ex-officio, non-voting participant of the Elder Housing Committee, Conservation
Commission, Recreation Commission and Cemetery Commission for the purposes of
coordinating efficient and effective care of the town assets under their control. The Town
Administrator may attend and participate at meetings of such committees or commissions
at his or her discretion.
g) The Town Administrator will act as the chief procurement officer, both under the
provisions of Chapter 30B of the General Laws, if applicable, and otherwise, being
responsible for the purchasing of all contracted services, supplies, materials, and equipment
for the town including the bidding and awarding of all contracts under the provisions of
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-9-
Chapter 30B and all other contracts over $10,000 in value, except for those powers and
duties that he or she delegates as chief procurement officer to the school department or
otherwise as provided in chapter 30B, §19, or under this by-law provision. The Town
Administrator shall give prior approval and execute all such contracts on behalf of the
Town, except school department contracts and as otherwise provided by law.
h) The Town Administrator, or the Town Administrator’s designee, shall serve as the
Information Technology Manager for all Town departments, except the Schools and
Library, with responsibility and authority to ensure information technology connectivity
between Town departments, promote information technology efficiency, and improve
overall workflow;
i) Other duties as the Select Board shall determine.
6.3. Removal and Suspension of the Town Administrator: The Select Board may terminate,
remove, or suspend the Town Administrator from office pursuant to procedures set forth in the
written employment agreement between the Town and the Town Administrator.
6.4 Severability: Should any section or provision of this by-law be determined by a court to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the by-law as a whole or
any other section or provision hereof other than the section or provision so determined to be
unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 7. Thirty days after a member of any non-salaried appointed board, committee,
commission or other Town agency shall no longer reside in the Town of Sherborn, the member's
appointment shall be vacated unless said member requests in writing, with a copy to the Town
Clerk, to the appointing authority that his or her appointment continue to a day certain. (Added
April 28, 1986)
Section 8. The Board of Selectman may establish a recycling program for the purpose of
recycling any type of solid waste, included but not limited to paper, glass, metals and plastics, in
accordance with such rules and regulation as the Select Board may make from time to time. Such
rules and regulations may also specify the manner in which designated recyclable material or
materials shall be received or collected, may specify the point at which the ownership of such
designated recyclables shall vest in the Town, may prohibit removal, without authorization by the
Select Board, of such designated recyclables from any place in the Town after the ownership of
such recyclables has vested in the Town, and may establish fines for violations of such rules and
regulations not to exceed $200 per violation. (Added 1992)
Section 9. Except where otherwise provided by statute, each committee, board or commission
shall annually elect one of its members as Chair to preside at meetings thereof, and another as Vice
Chair to act in the absence of the Chair, and such other officers as such committee, board, or
commission shall determine. In the event a committee, board or commission is newly organized,
the Appointing Authority may provisionally designate a temporary Chair for purposes of
organizing such committee, board or commission; but in any event, such election of officers shall
occur within thirty days of the appointment of the committee, board, or commission. (Added 1995)
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-10-
Section 10. Except where otherwise provided by statute, no department, board, officer, or
committee shall accept a non-monetary gift or grant with a value of more than $50 from any source
without first obtaining the approval of the Select Board. Whenever such a gift or grant has been
offered, notice shall be given to the Town Administrator. (Added 2001)
Section 11. Town officers not elected by ballot shall be appointed in the manner provided by
statue, by-law, or vote of the town meeting, or, in the absence of any such provision, by the Select
Board. (Added 1999)
Section 12. All employees of the Town and such elected or appointed officers of the Town as the
Select Board may, from time to time, designate, shall be eligible to receive worker compensation
benefits from the Town pursuant to Chapter 152, Section 69 of the General Laws; provided,
however, that no member of the Select Board or of the Police or Fire Department shall be eligible,
by reason of such membership, to receive such benefits. (Amended 2010)
Section 13. The Select Board is authorized to enter into personnel contracts on behalf of the Town
for the exercise of the Town’s corporate powers for all matters within the jurisdiction of the Select
Board, on such terms and conditions as it deems in the best interests of the Town, but subject to
any terms and conditions as may be imposed by Town Meeting. The Select Board shall not contract
for any purpose or on any terms or conditions inconsistent with the provisions of any general or
special law. (Added 2014)
Section 14: Finance Director/ Accountant (Added 2015)
Finance Director/ Accountant Appointment, Qualifications
The Select Board shall create a department of Finance Director / Accountant and appoint a Finance
Director/Accountant to manage said department. The Select Board shall fix his/her compensation
in a manner consistent with the Personnel Bylaw and related plan and within the amount annually
appropriated for that purpose.
The Select Board shall appoint a Finance Director /Accountant solely on the basis of his/her
executive and administrative qualifications. He/She shall be a professionally qualified person of
proven ability, especially fitted by education, training and previous experience to perform the
duties of the office. He/She shall not have served in an elective office in the Town's government
for at least twelve months prior to appointment.
The Select Board shall commence the process of hiring a Finance Director/Accountant within
fourteen days of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of Finance Director/Accountant.
Interim Finance Director / Accountant
The Select Board, in the event of a vacancy in the office of Finance Director/Accountant for any
reason, shall appoint within sixty days of the occurrence of that vacancy, a qualified person as an
Interim Finance Director/Accountant for a term not to exceed ninety days to perform the duties of
the Finance Director/Accountant on an interim basis. He/She shall not have served in an elective
office in the Town's government for at least twelve months prior to his/her appointment.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-11-
The Interim Finance Director/Accountant shall have all of the powers and duties of the Finance
Director/Accountant, unless otherwise provided by Town By-law.
If the vacancy is not filled by the end of that interim appointment, the Select Board may reappoint
the Interim Finance Director/Accountant for an additional sixty-day appointment.
Powers and Duties of Finance Director/Accountant
The Finance Director / Accountant, notwithstanding any provision of Chapter 3, section 6 of the
Sherborn General Bylaws to the contrary and except as otherwise provided in this section, shall
have the independent authority to perform all the duties required by law or the Town's Bylaws and
shall:
a. Report directly to the Select Board that shall be responsible for annually evaluating his/her
performance; and coordinate with the Town Administrator on the day to day financial
operations;
b. Appoint, employ, supervise, evaluate, retain and may suspend or terminate the staff, whether
employees or contractors, necessary for the operation of the Finance Director / Accountant
Department;
c. Manage the cash flow of the town, and record reconciliation;
d. Conduct a strategic analysis and forecasting of: revenue, expenditures, (short, intermediate and
long term) and employee benefits;
e. Meet periodically with the Treasurer (whether elected or appointed), Collector (whether
elected or appointed), Director of Assessing and the Town Administrator as a group or
separately;
f. In consultation with and considering the recommendations of the Treasurer, Collector, Director
of Assessing and Town Administrator, create, maintain and oversee consistent and integrated
financial procedures and computer systems throughout the Town’s financial function;
g. Coordinate financial information with the Sherborn and Dover/Sherborn Regional school
departments, and the Treasurer, Collector, Director of Assessing, and the Town Administrator
and provide reports, as needed or requested, to Town Departments and Committees;
h. Perform all the duties specifically required of a Town Accountant by the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts;
i. Perform other duties, not assigned by law to the Town Treasurer or Town Collector or the
Town Board of Assessors, as the Select Board shall determine including but not limited to
the administration of Payroll/Benefit programs for Sherborn's municipal and school
employees;
j. Report quarterly on each of the above enumerated duties to the Chairman of the Select Board,
Chairman of the Advisory Committee, Treasurer, Collector, Director of Assessing and Town
Administrator; such reports shall be public record except as to portions which may be exempt
from disclosure under law and available to the general public.
Removal or Suspension of the Finance Director / Accountant
The Select Board may terminate, remove or suspend the Finance Director/Accountant from
office pursuant to procedures set forth in the written employment agreement between the
Town and the Finance Director/Accountant; or in the absence of a written employment
agreement, for cause and in accordance with the Town’s Bylaws.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-12-
Severability
Should any section or provision of this by-law be determined by a court to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the by-law as a whole or any other section or
provision hereof other than the section or provision so determined to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 15. Fire Chief (Added 2016)
In addition to the Fire Chief’s authority under the State Board of Fire Prevention Regulations, the
Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee may require review by an independent third party with
expertise in the matter of any proposed or completed work, plans, construction application, or other
matters requiring fire protection, fire code or fire department review. Such third party review shall
be at the applicant’s expense. The Fire Chief or the Fire Chief’s designee shall obtain from the third
party reviewer a proposal outlining the costs for the third party review, and the cost as set forth in
the third party reviewer’s proposal shall be paid by the applicant to the town in advance of the third
party reviewer performing the services. The Fire Chief shall make the final determination as to
whether the proposed or completed work, plans, construction, applications, or other matters comply
with fire protection, fire code, and fire department requirements.
CHAPTER 4. ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Section 1. There shall be an Advisory Committee for the Town which shall perform the duties
set forth in this chapter, and be governed by the provisions thereof. The Advisory Committee shall
consist of nine (9) voters of the Town, other than Town officers, appointed or elected. The
Moderator shall appoint three (3) members each year for a term of three (3) years, the appointments
shall be made in the month of May or June after the Annual Town Meeting for the election of
officers and the appointments shall become effective on the first day of August and run until a
successor is appointed and qualified. No Advisory Committee member shall serve for more than
two (2) successive terms; provided, however, that a member who has been appointed to complete
the unexpired term of a former member may, upon completion of such unexpired term, thereafter
serve no more than two (2) additional successive terms. Any member of said committee who shall
be appointed by the Selectmen or elected to town office or a committee or board shall forthwith
upon his qualification in such office cease to be a member of said Committee. Any member of
said Committee who shall remove from the town shall, upon such removal, cease to be a member
of said Committee. Members absent from one third of the regular meetings in any calendar year
may be removed by a two-thirds vote of the other members, present and voting. Said Committee
shall choose its own officers and serve without pay, excepting, however, that the secretary thereof
may receive such compensation as the Town may by vote provide. Said Committee shall cause to
be kept a true record of its proceedings. (Amended 1979, 2008)
Section 2. In the event of any vacancy in its membership, the Advisory Committee shall notify
the Moderator in writing, and the Moderator shall thereupon fill such vacancy.
Section 3. The Advisory Committee shall consider all matters of business included within the
articles of any Warrant for a Town Meeting.
Section 4. A public hearing shall be held by the Advisory Committee upon all articles in any
Warrant for a Town Meeting, except for a meeting held solely for the election of officers and
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-13-
determination of such matters as by law are required or permitted to be upon the ballot. At least
five (5) days before such hearing, notice shall be given by posting a copy thereof in one (1) or
more public places in the Town, and by distributing said notice to each household in which a voter
eligible to vote at the Town Meeting resides. (Amended 1980)
Section 5. After the public hearing required by section 4 of this chapter, and after due
consideration of the subject matter of each article in the Warrant, the Advisory Committee shall
issue a written report to the Town, at least five (5) days before each special Town Meeting, and
ten (10) days before the deliberative session of the annual Town Meeting. This report shall be
distributed to each household in the Town in which a voter eligible to vote at the Town Meeting
resides. This report shall include the committee's estimates or recommendations for the action of
the Town on each article in the Warrant. The recommendations shall be those of a majority of the
entire committee but nothing herein shall be construed to prevent recommendations by a minority
as such. Where necessary, the substance of the motion to be offered by the committee on each
article at the Town Meeting shall be printed in the report. The report shall state the total amount
of the appropriations recommended by them on the entire Warrant and the approximate tax rate
based on such recommendations or suggestions as it may deem advisable on any matters pertaining
to the welfare of the Town. It may issue recommendations on referenda and other matters on any
ballot other than the choices of individuals for offices. (Amended 1974, 1980)
Section 6. The Advisory Committee shall have authority at any time to investigate the books,
accounts and management of any department of the Town, and to employ such experts and other
assistance as it may deem advisable for that purpose and the books and accounts of all departments
and officers of the Town shall be open to the inspection of the Committee and any person employed
by it for that purpose. The Committee may appoint sub-committees and delegate to them such of
its powers as it deems expedient.
Section 7. The various Town Boards, Officers and Committees charged with the expenditure of
Town money shall, not later than the thirty-first of December of each year, prepare detailed
estimates of the amounts deemed by them necessary for the administration of their respective
offices or departments for the ensuing fiscal year, with explanatory statements of the reasons for
any changes from the amounts appropriated for the same purposes in the preceding year. They
shall also prepare estimates of all probable items of income which may be received by them during
the ensuing year in connection with the administration of their departments or offices, and a
statement of the amount of appropriation requested by them for the ensuing fiscal year. Such
estimates and statements shall be filed with the Town Accountant who shall at once transmit same
to the Advisory Committee. (Amended 1980)
Section 8. The Advisory Committee shall duly consider the estimates and statements filed by
the Town Boards, Officers, and Committees, and may confer with said Boards, Officers and
Committees. The Advisory Committee shall thereupon recommend such sums and in such
division of items as it considers necessary and convenient.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-14-
CHAPTER 5. REGISTRATION AND LICENSE REQUIREMENTS FOR
DOGS (Added 1980, amended 1982, 1990, 1997,1998, 2004, 2010, 2015, 2016, 2018)
Section 1. A person who at the commencement of the license period, which shall begin January
1 of each year, is, or who during any license period becomes, the owner or keeper of a dog three
months or over, which is not duly licensed, and the owner or keeper of a dog when it becomes
three months old during a licensing period, shall cause it to be registered, numbered, described,
and licensed until the end of such license period, which shall be December 31 of each year, and
the owner or keeper of a dog so registered, numbered, described, and licensed during any license
period, in order to own or keep such dog after the beginning of the succeeding license period shall,
before the beginning thereof, cause it to be registered, numbered, described, and licensed for such
period. (Amended 1990)
Section 2. The annual fee for such licenses shall be set by the Town Clerk in accordance with
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40 Section 22F. (Amended 1990, 1998, 2004)
Section 3. Any person who is the owner or keeper of a dog in the Town of Sherborn, and who
fails to license said dog within the time required by Sections 137 and 137A of Chapter 140 of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be subject to additional penalties as permitted by Section 141
of Chapter 140 of the General Laws, payable to the Town and to be collected as provided by law.
Said penalty shall begin on March 1st or the first business day of March of each year.
Section 4. Dog Fund. All monies collected as fees, fines, charges, penalties and other like
monies as set forth in this By-Law shall be deposited in a Dog Fund established under the
provisions of General Laws Chapter 44, section 53E. (Added 1998)
Section 5. No person shall maintain a kennel without obtaining a license, subject to annual
renewal, in accordance with G.L. c. 140, § 137A. The Town Clerk shall not issue a kennel license
until a kennel has passed inspection by the animal control officer. The fee for such license shall
be set by the Town Clerk in accordance with M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 22F.
An owner or keeper of five or more dogs, three months or older, must secure a Personal Kennel
License from the Town Clerk or other type of kennel license as may be applicable under this
Section and state law. An owner or keeper of four or fewer dogs, three months or older, may elect
to secure a Personal Kennel License from the Town Clerk rather than licensing each dog under
this Chapter.
CHAPTER 5A. REGULATIONS FOR CONTROL OF DOGS (Added 2018)
Section 1. No dog shall be allowed in any public place or street within the town unless it is
effectively restrained or unless it is confined within a motor vehicle. A dog is under restraint for
purposes of this By-Law if it is accompanied by its owner or other person responsible for the dog,
who is in full control, and such dog is securely restrained with a collar and leash or such dog is
under immediate and effective voice control. For purposes of this By-Law, the dog must be within
the keeper’s sight and the keeper must be carrying a leash, whether the dog is securely restrained
or under effective voice control.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-15-
Section 2. No person shall permit any dog to enter or remain upon the private property of another
without the permission of the owner or person in control thereof, and no person shall permit any
dog to enter or remain upon any public property of the Town, when prohibited by the board or
officer in control thereof.
Section 3. In addition to the remedies set forth herein and in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
140, Sections 136A to 174E, inclusive, or any other applicable provision of law, this By-Law may
be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity, including, but not limited to, noncriminal
disposition pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D and the
Town’s Non-Criminal Disposition By-Law. If non-criminal disposition is elected, then any person
who violates any provision of this By-Law shall be subject to the following penalties:
(1) First violation: written warning.
(2) Second violation: $50.
(3) Third violation: $100.
(4) Fourth and each subsequent violation: $250.
Subsequent offenses shall be determined as offenses occurring within one year of the date of the
first noticed offense.
The Animal Control Officer or any Police Officer of the Town shall be empowered to enforce
provisions of this By-Law.
Section 4. Unrestrained or unlicensed dogs may be sought out, caught and confined by the Animal
Control Officer or any Police Officer of the Town, and impounded pursuant to Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 140, Sections 151A and 167. The owner or keeper of any dog impounded under the
provisions of this By-Law may claim such dog, provided he or she first procures from the Town
Clerk a license and tag for any such dog that is not licensed and reimburses the Town for the care
of the dog during the period of impoundment.
Section 5. Notwithstanding the provisions of this By-Law, the Board of Selectmen may designate
certain areas and/or times in which dogs will be permitted to run at large, subject to such rules and
regulations as may be determined by the Board of Selectmen.
Section 6: Owners of dogs shall be legally responsible for any and all injury or destruction of
property caused by their dog(s) at all times.
Section 7. Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or restrict the authority of the Board of
Selectmen and/or Animal Control Officer from exercising any authority conferred upon them by
the Massachusetts General Laws, including but not limited to Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 140, Section 157 relative to nuisance and dangerous dogs.”
CHAPTER 6. CAPITAL BUDGET COMMITTEE (Added 1966)
Section 1. There shall be a Capital Budget Committee composed of one member of the Town
Advisory Committee, appointed by and from it, and two members to be appointed by the Town
Moderator. They shall be appointed for staggered three-year terms. (Amended 1986)
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-16-
Any vacancies occurring shall be filled in the manner of the original appointment and the term
shall be for the remainder of the original appointee's term.
Section 2. The Committee shall consider all matters relating to proposed expenditures of money
for capital improvements and may make recommendations to the Town and all Town Boards,
Officers and Committees with reference to such expenditures, and may hold hearings if the
committee so desires.
Section 3. The various Town Boards, Officers and Committees charged with the expenditure of
Town money, shall before February 1st of each year, prepare and file with the Committee detailed
estimates of the amounts deemed by them advisable for the Town to expend for capital projects
annually for a period of six years, together with explanatory statements providing such additional
information about each proposed capital project as reasonably may be requested by the Committee.
(Amended 1973)
Section 4. The Committee shall make a report annually of the matters so considered by it, with
recommendations or suggestions relative thereto. Said report shall appear in the report of the
Advisory Committee to the annual Town Meeting and in the Annual Town Report. (Amended
1987)
Section 5. For the purpose of this By-Law, a capital improvement or project shall be a physical
betterment or item of equipment having a useful life, of at least five years, and a cost of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more. (Amended 1987)
CHAPTER 7. TOWN TRAFFIC SAFETY COMMITTEE (Added 1965)
Section 1. The Committee shall be known as the "Town Traffic Safety Committee."
Section 2. The members of the Committee shall be seven (7) in number, consisting of five (5)
voting members and the Police Chief and the Director of DPW, who shall be non-voting advisors.
(Amended 1991)
Section 3. The members, other than the Police Chief and the Director of DPW, shall be
appointed by the Select Board at the Annual Town Meeting: two members for one year, two
members for two years, and one member for three years, with three (3) year terms for future
members thereafter, who shall be appointed by the Select Board. (Amended 1991, 1992)
Section 4. The purpose of the Committee shall be to develop and recommend a continuous
program of traffic safety and control.
Section 5. The Committee shall make a report annually of the matters considered by it, with
recommendations or suggestions relative thereto. Said report shall appear in the Annual Town
Report.
CHAPTER 7A. COUNCIL ON AGING (Added 1972)
Established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40, Section 8B of the General Laws.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-17-
Section 1. The Select Board shall appoint a Council on Aging for the purpose of coordinating
or carrying out programs designed to meet the problems of the aging in cooperation with programs
of the Commission on Aging established under Chapter 6, Section 73 of the General Laws.
Section 2. The Council on Aging shall consist of not less than seven nor more than nine
members who shall be appointed by the Select Board for a term of three years as provided in
Section 3 of Chapter 3. Upon adoption of this by-law amendment, the terms of the current
members of the Council on Aging shall be extended to the fifteenth day of June of the year in
which they were due to expire. (Amended 1979, 1989)
Section 3. Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the membership of the Council, by reason of
death, resignation inability to act or for any other reason, the vacancy shall be filled by the Select
Board for the remainder of the term. (Amended 1992)
Section 4. The Council on Aging, at its first meeting after the appointment of new members
each year, shall elect from its membership a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, a Secretary and a
Treasurer. Each officer shall hold office until the next annual election. In the event a vacancy
occurs in any of the offices above, the Council shall elect one of its members to fill such vacancy.
(Amended 1983)
Section 5. The Council shall prepare and submit to the Town, an Annual Report of its activities
and shall send a copy thereof to the Commission on Aging.
Section 6. The Council may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may require.
CHAPTER 8. HUNTING BY-LAW (Amended 2012, 2019)
Section 1. No person shall fire or discharge any firearms or explosives of any kind nor shall use
bow and arrow where the arrow is equipped with a metal or other dangerous tip within the limits
of any highway, park, or public property, or on any private property, except with the written
consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof, which consent shall be dated not more than one
year prior; provided, however, that this By-law shall not apply to the lawful defense of life or
property, nor to any discharge of firearms in accordance with law.
Section 2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this By-Law shall be fined not more
than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense.
CHAPTER 9. UNREGISTERED CARS
Section 1. No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked, or
unregistered motor vehicle on any publicly maintained way within the Town.
Section 2. No person in charge or control of any property within the Town, whether as owner,
tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise shall allow more than one unregistered motor vehicle to
remain on such property except as provided in Section 3 and 5 of this By-Law.
Section 3. The Select Board may issue a permit to keep, store or allow more than one such motor
vehicle to remain on such property after said Board has held a public hearing thereon, first causing
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-18-
at least 14 day notice of the time, place and subject matter of such hearing to be given at the
expense of the Applicant by (1) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and
(2) registered mail to each of the persons appearing upon the Assessors' most recent valuation list
as the owners of property abutting the property in question. Said Board shall not issue such a
permit unless it finds that the presence of more than one such motor vehicle on such property (1)
will not nullify or substantially derogate from the intent or purpose of this By-Law and (2) will not
constitute a hazard to the safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and (3) will not
adversely affect the neighborhood in which such property is situated.
Section 4. Each permit shall (1) specify the maximum number of such motor vehicles that may
be kept, stored or allowed to remain on such property and (2) be limited to a reasonable period of
time not exceeding two years and (3) to be a personal privilege of the applicant and not a grant
attached to and running with the land.
Section 5. This By-Law shall not apply with regard to a motor vehicle in an enclosed building;
a motor vehicle on the property of a holder of a class license under Section 58 of Chapter 140 of
the Massachusetts General Laws, a motor vehicle on the property of a farming or business
enterprise operated in a lawful manner when necessary to the operation of such enterprises; or a
motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depositary maintained in a lawful place and
manner by the Town.
Section 6. Any person who continues to violate the provisions of the By-Law after thirty (30)
days following receipt by him of written notice of such violation from the Selectmen, shall be
liable for a penalty not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. Each day that any
violation is allowed to continue after said thirty (30) day period shall constitute a separate offense.
CHAPTER 10. PUBLIC WAYS (Amended 1994)
Section 1. No person shall lay, throw or place, or cause to be laid, thrown or placed any ice or
snow on the portion of any street or any sidewalk in the Town which has been cleared or plowed
for travel and no person shall discharge water onto town streets so as to cause erosion of roadways
and icing conditions of streets. (Amended 1984)
Section 2. No person shall, without the written permission of the Director of DPW, deposit
within any public way of the Town, or by the side thereof, any ashes, cinders, papers, tin cans,
offal, rubbish, trash, litter or any waste matter whatsoever.
Section 3. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
of not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense. (Amended 1988)
Section 4. The record owner of land on which a building is located shall display the street
number or numbers of such building in a manner readily visible from the street and in compliance
with the Regulations for Street Numbers issued by the Select Board. The street number or numbers
so displayed or required to be displayed for said building shall be taken from the existing street
numbering system shown on the annual Town of Sherborn Street List, provided that if the Select
Board shall determine that due to irregularities in the numerical order of the street numbering
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-19-
system affecting said building and other buildings located on the same street, the Select Board
shall assign to each building the correct number required to eliminate such irregularities.
If the Select Board shall determine that the street number of any building in the Town shall be
changed in order to correct the irregularities in the street numbering system as set forth in the
preceding paragraph, the record owner of the land on which said building is located shall be
allowed a period of ninety (90) days after receipt of written notice from the Select Board of the
new street number to display such number. Failure to display such new number in the manner
specified in this Section after said ninety (90) day period, shall constitute a violation of this Section
and shall be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars. Each day that any violation is
allowed to continue after said ninety day period shall constitute a separate offense. (Replaced
previous Section 5 1986)
CHAPTER 11. DANGEROUS EXCAVATIONS
Section 1. No owner of any land in the Town shall excavate his land or cause such land to be
excavated, or permit an existing excavation to remain, if such excavation will constitute a hazard
to the public safety. Within five (5) days after such owner has been notified in writing by the
Select Board that in their opinion such excavation constitutes a hazard to the public safety, the
owner shall erect barriers or take other suitable measures to protect the public from the excavation.
Section 2. The provisions of Chapter 82A of the General Laws and 520 CMR 14.00, regarding
Excavation and Trench Safety, shall be expressly incorporated into this By-law. (Amended 2008)
Section 3. Permitting Authority. The Director of Department of Public Works or his or her
designee, appropriately trained, shall administer the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with
Chapter 82A, Section 2 of the General Laws and 520 CMR 14.00. (Added 2008)
Section 4. The fee for permits issued in accordance with this Chapter shall be set by the Director
of Department of Public Works, in accordance with Chapter 82A, Section 2 of the General Laws.
(Added 2008)
Section 5. Any person violating this Chapter shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00) for
each offense. (Added 2008)
CHAPTER 12. DISORDERLY BEHAVIOR (amended 2010)
Section 1. No person shall willfully remove, mar, destroy or damage any public tree, shrub,
flowerbed, grassy border, structure, sign or device.
Section 2. No person shall enter upon the premises of another for the purpose of committing any
wanton or malicious act, nor for the purpose or with the intention of invading the privacy of another
by peeping into the window of a house or spying upon any person residing therein.
Section 2A. No person shall drink or possess an unsealed container of any alcoholic beverage as
defined in Chapter 138, Section 1 of the Massachusetts General Laws (a) while in or upon any
street to which the public has a right of access, whether in or upon a vehicle or on foot without
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-20-
permission of the Select Board or (b) while on or upon any public place or public building without
permission of the Select Board or (c) while in or upon private parking lots and private ways to
which the public has access unless prior consent has been obtained from the owner or authorized
person in control thereof. All alcoholic beverages in possession of a person or persons shall be
seized and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against the person or persons arrested
or summoned before the court, at which time they shall be returned to the person or persons entitled
to lawful possession.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Town to arrest any person or persons who violate
the provisions stated above and to cause such person or persons to be brought before a Justice of
the District Court of Middlesex at Natick upon a complaint made for violation of this section.
(Added 1975, amended 1979)
Section 2B. No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol as defined by General Laws chapter 94C, section 1, within the limits of any
park, playground, cemetery, school building, school grounds, parking lot, public building or public
land owned or under the control of the Town of Sherborn, or on any public way or way to which
the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees, including any person in a motor vehicle
while it is on or upon any public way or any way to which the public has a right of access as
aforesaid, within the Town of Sherborn.
All marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol being used in violation of this section may be seized and
held until final adjudication of the charge against any such person or persons has been made by
the court. (Added 2010)
Section 3. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter other than Sections 2A or
2B shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offence. Violations
of Sections 2A or 2B of this Chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) for each offence. (Amended 2010)
CHAPTER 13. POLICE REGULATIONS
Section 1. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in the destruction or
damage to public property to an apparent total extent of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more, shall
within twenty-four (24) hours make a full and complete report in writing of such accident to the
Police headquarters in the Town. A driver who has been incapacitated as a result of such accident,
and to such extent as to make reporting impossible or unfavorable to his recovery, shall not be
required to report such accident until he has recovered sufficiently to be able to do so. The report
shall be made on a form furnished by the Police Department, copies of which shall be available at
the Police Department. Compliance with this section, however, shall not relieve such driver from
the additional responsibility of reporting to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles any accident required
to be reported to the Registrar.
CHAPTER 14. REPEAL OF BY-LAWS
Section 1. These By-Laws and the repeal of all By-Laws heretofore in force, shall not affect any
act done, any right accrued, any penalty or liability incurred, or any suit, prosecution or proceeding
pending at the time they take effect.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-21-
Section 2. All By-Laws heretofore in force shall be repealed at the time these By-Laws shall
become effective, after approval by the Attorney General as required by Statute.
CHAPTER 15. RECREATION COMMISSION (Added 1972)
Section 1. There shall be a Recreation Commission consisting of three members to be elected
by ballot, one for a term of one year, one for a term of two years and one for a term of three years,
at the annual meeting next following the adoption of this By-Law and at each annual meeting
thereafter one member for a term of three years.
Section 2. The Recreation Commission shall have the powers and duties conferred by General
Laws, Chapter 45, Section 14.
CHAPTER 16. VIOLATIONS (Added 1978; amended 1989, 1992, 2012, 2014)
Section 1. Whoever violates any By-Law of the Town shall pay for each offense a fine not
exceeding two hundred dollars unless some other penalty is expressly provided by law or by some
By-Law of the Town.
Section 2. Any by-law of the Town of Sherborn or any rule or regulation of any town officer,
board or department, the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may, in the discretion
of the town official who is the appropriate enforcing person, be enforced in the method provided
in Section 21D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws. Enforcing person as used in the by-law shall
mean any police officer with respect to any offense; the Building Inspector, Animal Control
Officer, Constable, Zoning Enforcement Officer, Department of Public Works Director,
Conservation Commission Members or Agent, and any such other official as the Select Board may
from time to time designate, each with respect to violation of by-laws and rules and regulations
within their respective jurisdictions. If more than one official has jurisdiction in a given case, any
such official may be an enforcing person with respect thereto.
Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the intention of this by-law that the
following by-laws are to be included within the scope of this by-law, and that the specific penalties
and enforcing persons as listed here shall apply in such cases:
Chapter 5, Section 3 (Unlicensed Dogs)
Penalty: $50.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officers, Animal Control Officer
Chapter 5A, Section 3 (Control of Dogs)
Penalty: During any twelve month period: first violation, written
warning; second violation, $50; third violation, $100; fourth
and each subsequent violation, $250.
Enforcing Persons: Police Officers, Animal Control Officer
Chapter 8, Section 2 (Hunting prohibition)
Penalty: $50.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officer, Constable
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-22-
Chapter 9, Section 6 (Unregistered cars)
Penalty: $50.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officer, Zoning Enforcement Officer
Chapter 10, Section 4 (Obstruction of public ways)
Penalty: $100.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officer, Department of Public Works Director
Chapter 11, Section 2 (Dangerous excavations)
Penalty: $200.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officer, Department of Public Works Director
Chapter 12, Section 3 (Disorderly behavior)
Penalty: $50.00
Enforcing Persons: Police Officer
Chapter 16, Section 1 (Violations)
Penalty: $200.00 per violation
Chapter 17, Section 9 (Wetlands)
Penalty: $200.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officers, Conservation Commission members or
agent
Chapter 21, Section 12 (Groundwater Protection)
Penalty: $200.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officers, Board of Health agents, Building Inspector,
Conservation Commission designated agents, Fire Chief or
Fire Chief's designees
Chapter 23, Section 3 (Littering)
Penalty: $300.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officers
Chapter 24, Section 1 (Farm Pond Violations)
Penalty: $200.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officers, Farm Pond Rangers
Chapter 27 (Registration of Solicitors)
Penalty: $50.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officers
Sherborn Zoning By-Laws 1st offense: warning; 2nd and subsequent offenses:
Penalty: $100.00 per violation
Enforcing Persons: Police Officer, Zoning Enforcement Officer
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-23-
CHAPTER 17. GENERAL WETLANDS BY-LAW (Added 1981, amended 2013)
Section 1: Application
The purpose of this By-Law is to protect the wetlands of the Town of Sherborn by controlling
activities deemed to have a significant effect upon wetland values, including, but not limited to,
the following: public or private water supply, ground water, flood control, erosion control, storm
damage, water pollution, and wildlife habitat (collectively, the “interests protected by this By-
Law”).
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, alter or build upon or within one hundred feet of, any bank,
fresh water wetland, beach, marsh, meadow, bog, swamp, or on or within one hundred feet of lands
bordering on any estuary, creek, river, stream, pond or lake, or any land under said waters or on or
within one hundred feet of any land subject to storm flowage, flooding or inundation, or within
one hundred feet of the 100-year storm line, or within the riverfront area other than in the course
of maintaining, repairing or replacing, but not substantially changing or enlarging, an existing and
lawfully located structure or facility used in the service of the public and used to provide electric,
gas, water, telephone, telegraph and other telecommunication services, without filing written
application for an order of conditions to remove, fill, dredge, alter or build upon, and receiving
and complying with a permit issued pursuant to this By-Law. The application shall be
accompanied by plans and analyses required by the Sherborn Conservation Commission.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to mosquito control work done under the provisions
of G.L. c. 40, §5(36), G.L. c. 252 or any special act; maintenance of drainage and flooding systems
of cranberry bogs; to work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land in
agricultural or aquacultural use; or to any project authorized by special act prior to January 1, 1973
and to qualifying forest management practices.
Such application may be identical in form to a notice of intent filed pursuant to Chapter 131,
Section 40 of the General Laws, shall be filed by delivery in hand with receipt from the
Commission or sent by certified mail to the Sherborn Conservation Commission (“the
Commission”), shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount established by regulation payable
to the Town of Sherborn and must be filed concurrently or after applications for all other permits,
variances and approvals required by the Zoning By-Law, the Subdivision Control Law or any other
by-law or regulation.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an area is subject to this Bylaw
may in writing request a determination from the Commission. Such a Request for
Determination of Applicability (RDA) or Abbreviated Notice of Resource Area Delineation
(ANRAD) filed under the Act shall include information and plans as are deemed necessary by the
Commission.
Upon written request of any person, the Commission shall, within twenty-one days, make a written
Determination (Determination of Applicability) as to whether this By-Law is applicable to any
land or work thereon. When the person requesting a Determination is other than the owner, notice
of the Determination shall be sent to the owner as well as to the requesting person.
The applicant shall give written notice of the filing of Notice of Intent and Abbreviated Notice of
Resource Area Delineation at the time of such filing, by certified mail and return receipt requested,
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-24-
or hand delivery written acknowledgement of receipt, to all abutters within one hundred feet of the
property line of the land where the activity is proposed at their mailing addresses shown on the
most recent applicable tax list of the assessors, including owners of land directly opposite on any
public or private street or way, and in another municipality or across body of water and to such
other persons as the Commission may, by regulation, determine. The notice shall state a brief
description of the project and the date of the Commission hearing or meeting date if known.
Section 2. Hearing
The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application within twenty-one days of its
receipt. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by the Commission at the
expense of the applicant, not less than five days prior to the hearing, by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation in Sherborn and by mailing a notice to the applicant, the Board of Health,
the Select Board, the Planning Board, all abutters, and to such other persons as the Commission
may, by regulation, determine.
Section 2.1 Order of Conditions
If, after the public hearing, the Commission determines that the area and/or activity that is the
subject of the application is significant to the interests protected by this By-Law, the Commission
shall, within twenty-one days of such hearing, issue or deny an order of conditions for the work
requested. If it issues an order of conditions after making such determination, the Commission
shall impose such conditions as it determines are necessary for protection of those interests and all
work shall be done in accordance with those conditions. The conditions may include a condition
that certain land or portions thereof not be built upon or altered, filled or dredged, that streams not
be diverted, dammed or otherwise disturbed. The applicant may file a new application on any
project, provided that the new application is accompanied by plans and analyses which reflect
significant differences from the original filing.
If the Commission determines that the area that is the subject of the application is not significant
to the interests protected by the By-Law, or that the proposed activity does not require the
imposition of conditions, it shall issue a Determination of Applicability without conditions within
twenty-one days. .
Section 3. Emergency Projects
This By-Law shall not apply to any emergency project as defined in Chapter 131, Section 40 of
the General Laws.
Section 4. Pre-acquisition Violation
Any person who purchases, inherits or otherwise acquires real estate upon which work has been
done in violation of the provisions of this By-Law or in violation of any order of conditions issued
pursuant to this By-Law shall forthwith comply with any such order or restore such land to its
condition prior to any such violation; provided, however, that no action civil or criminal, shall be
brought against such person unless commenced within three years following the recording of the
deed or the date of death by which such real estate was acquired by such person.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-25-
Section 5. Regulations
After due notice and public hearing, the Commission may promulgate rules and regulations to
effectuate the purposes of the By-Law. Failure by the Commission to promulgate such rules and
regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or
invalidate the effect of this By-Law.
Section 6. Burden of Proof
The applicant shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the credible evidence that
the work proposed in the application will not have significant effects upon the values protected by
this By-Law. Failure to provide adequate evidence to the Commission supporting a determination
that the proposed work will not have significant effects upon the values protected by this By-Law
shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny an order of conditions or grant an order of
conditions with conditions or, in the Commission’s discretion, to continue the hearing to another
date to enable the applicant or others to present additional evidence.
Section 7. Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this By-Law.
Section 7.1 The term “person” shall include any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth or
political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to town by-laws, administrative agencies, public
or quasi-public corporations or bodies, the Town of Sherborn, and any other legal entity, its legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
Section 7.2 The term “applicant” shall mean any person requesting an order of conditions,
abbreviated notice of area delineation, or determination of applicability under this By-Law.
Section 7.3 The term “alter” shall include, but without limitation, the following actions when
undertaken in areas subject to this By-Law.
a) Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate material of any kind;
b) Changing drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, salinity distribution,
sedimentation patterns, flow patterns, and flood retention characteristics;
c) Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
d) Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may degrade water quality;
e) Driving of piles, erection of buildings or structures of any kind;
f) Placing of obstructions whether or not they interfere with the flow of water;
g) Changing of water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other physical or chemical
characteristics of the water.
Section 7.4 The term “banks” shall mean that part of land adjoining any body of water which
confines the water.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-26-
Section 7.5 The terms "freshwater wetlands", "swamps", "wet meadows", "bogs", and
"marshes" shall have the meanings set forth in Chapter 131, Section 40 of the General Laws, as
the same may be amended time to time.
Section 7.6 Plans and Analyses
The term “plans and analyses” shall mean such material, studies, and information as the
Commission determines are necessary to describe the proposed activity and its effects on the
interests protected by this By-Law. Plans and analyses may include without limitation:
a) Engineering drawings signed by a registered engineer or land surveyor;
b) Geological survey maps of the area in question;
c) Information regarding soil characteristics in the area;
d) Information regarding flood characteristics and maximum water table levels in the area;
e) Erosion and sedimentation prevention plans for the proposed activity.
Section 7.7 Forest Management Practices
The term “qualifying forest management practices” shall mean those forest management practices,
including the harvesting of forest products, carried out in accordance with the Forest Cutting
Practices Act (Mass. General Laws, Chapter 132, Section 40-46) and the Slash Law (Mass.
General Laws, Chapter 48, Section 16).
If a cutting plan under Chapter 132 is required, a copy of said plan, approved by the State Forester,
shall be forwarded to the Sherborn Conservation Commission prior to the commencement of work.
In the event that such qualifying forest management practices are carried out not in accordance
with the above Acts and the relevant plan, and in a manner determined by the Conservation
Commission to cause harm to wetlands, the Commission may take appropriate enforcement
measures.
Section 7.8 The Commission may adopt additional definitions not inconsistent with this Section
7 in its regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 5 of this By-Law.
Section 8. Security
The Commission may require, as a permit condition, that the performance and observance of other
conditions be secured by one or both of the following methods:
a) By bond or deposit of money in an amount determined by the Commission to be sufficient
and payable to the Town of Sherborn upon default;
b) By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant running with the land, executed
and properly recorded (or registered, in the case of registered land).
Section 9. Enforcement
Any person who violates any provision of this By-Law or any condition of an order of conditions
issued pursuant to it shall be punished by a fine of not more than $200.00. Each day or portion
thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; if more than one,
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-27-
each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense. Alternatively, this By-Law may be
enforced pursuant to Mass. General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 21D under Chapter 16, Section 2
of the Town of Sherborn General By-laws. Upon request by the Commission, the Select Board
and the Town Counsel shall take such legal action as may be necessary to enforce this By-Law
and orders of conditions issued pursuant to it.
CHAPTER 18. HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION (Added 1983)
Section 1. Membership
A. The HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION shall consist of seven members, all of whom (1)
when possible should be residents of the Town and (2) should have demonstrated interest and
ability to understand, appreciate, and promote the purpose of the By-Law.
The Commission shall be appointed by the Select Board.
B. The seven members shall be comprised of the following:
1. One from two nominees submitted by the Sherborn Historical Commission.
2. One from two nominees submitted by the chapter of the American Institute of Architects
covering the area.
3. Three residents or property owners of a property within a Sherborn Historic District.
4. Two Sherborn residents including preferably a registered landscape architect, building
trades contractor, a Realtor, or an attorney.
C. It shall be the duty of the Select Board to request nominees from the organizations listed above.
If, after thirty days, a nomination requested has not been made then the appointment shall be
made without the nomination.
Section 2. Term
Historic District Commission members shall be appointed for three years. However, the initial
appointment shall be staggered so that three members shall be appointed for three years, two
members for two years, and two members for one year. Members shall serve no more than two
successive terms. In the event of a vacancy, interim appointments may be made by the appointing
authority to complete the unexpired term.
Section 3. Officers/Quorum
The Historic District Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and
Secretary from its own membership.
Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business.
Section 4. Meetings
The Commission shall hold regular meetings and may hold special meetings at the call of the Chair
provided that public notice requirements are met.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-28-
Section 5. Powers and Duties of the Commission
The Historic District Commission shall have all the powers and duties of an Historic District
Commission as described in the Historic District Act, Chapter 40C General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and as set forth in this Chapter and not inconsistent with said
Chapter 40C. The Historic District Commission:
a) Shall establish and amend rules, regulations, and forms for the conduct of business which are
consistent with the purpose of this Chapter.
b) Shall keep accurate records of meetings, applications, findings, and determinations, all of
which shall be part of the public record.
c) May, subject to appropriation, employ consultants or obtain other assistance and incur
expenses appropriate to performing its duties, and may accept money gifts and expend the
same for such purposes. The Commission may administer on behalf of the Town any
properties or easements, restrictions, or other interests in real property which the Town may
have or may accept as gifts or otherwise as the Town may designate.
d) May determine a fee schedule for Certificates of Appropriateness, Certificates of Non-
Applicability, and Certificates of Hardship for the purpose of reimbursing the Town for
expenses for notices to abutters, legal advertising, and administrative costs of the Commission.
e) Shall have, in addition to the powers, authority and duties granted to it by this Chapter, such
other powers, authority, and duties as the Town Meeting may, from time to time, delegate.
f) Shall provide its assistance to all property owners in the Historic Districts by making available
its expertise, experience, standards, and policies regarding the preservation of the Historic
Districts, and shall assist owners, when requested, to make applications for the appropriate
Certificate of Appropriateness, Non-Applicability, or Hardship in the most expeditious way.
g) Shall review all proposed new construction or alterations to buildings or structures within the
Historic District which add to or alter the exterior architectural features visible from the public
ways, excepting only the buildings, structures, and exterior architectural features specifically
exempted from consideration of the Historic District Commission by the Zoning By-Laws.
h) Shall, upon application by an owner or an owner's agent in such form and with such
information as the Commission shall reasonably require, determine the appropriateness of any
proposed construction or alteration under its jurisdiction and issue the appropriate Certificate
of Appropriateness, Non-Applicability, or Hardship or Determination of Disapproval after
giving public notice and holding public hearings as required by this Chapter and the Zoning
By-Laws.
i) Shall advise the Building Inspector whether each and any application for a building permit
within the Historic District requires a Certificate of Appropriateness, Non-Applicability, or
Hardship prior to the issuance of a building permit, and such building permit shall not be issued
prior to issuance of such certificate except for work explicitly exempt from the jurisdiction of
the Commission.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-29-
j) May adopt from time to time after the required hearings and consistent with the intent of this
Chapter, rules exempting additional architectural features within the Historic District from the
jurisdiction of the Commission, and may rescind such rules.
CHAPTER 19. COMMON VICTUALLER'S LICENSE (Added 1984,amended
2006)
The Select Board may grant licenses to Common Victuallers.
CHAPTER 20. PERSONNEL BY-LAW (Added 1988, amended 1992, 1996, 2010)
Section 1. Definitions
“Appointing Authority”: The authority granted to appoint employees for a particular board or
department by the town by-laws, state statute, or town meeting vote
“Board”: The Personnel Board as described in Section 3 of this by-law
“Department”: Any department, board, committee, commission or other employing authority of
the town subject to this by-law
“Department Head”: The officer, department, board, committee, commission or other body having
immediate supervision and control of a department. In the case of a department serving under the
supervision and control of The Select Board, the officer, board, committee, commission or other
body immediately responsible to The Select Board for the administration of the department
“Employee”: An employee of the town occupying a position of employment subject to this bylaw
“Plan”: The Personnel Administration Plan
“Town”: The Town of Sherborn
Section 2. Application
a) This by-law shall apply to all Town Departments, and to all positions of all Employees in the
service of the Town, whether full-time or part-time, seasonal, special or any other type of
employment other than the following:
? Those positions filled by popular election; provided, however, that the Board shall, if so
requested by the Advisory Committee, make recommendations prior to the annual Town
meeting relative to salaries for elective positions;
? Those positions which are covered by collective bargaining agreements;
? Those positions under the direction of the School Committee
? The Town Administrator and any other town employees who have an individual contract
of employment with the Town pursuant to General Laws chapter 41 sections 108N and
108O.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-30-
b) This by-law may be amended by a majority vote at any Town Meeting. The Board may, on its
own initiative, propose amendments to this by-law which may affect the Personnel
Administration Plan. Where amendments to this by-law are proposed by persons or authorities
other than the Board, the Board shall be given a copy of any proposed amendment at least
thirty (30) days before the Town meeting at which it is to be considered. The copy shall contain
the names and addresses of the proponent(s).
Section 3. The Personnel Board
a) There shall be an unpaid Personnel Board consisting of three or more members appointed by
the Select Board. Members of the Board, serving upon the effective date of this by-Law, shall
serve as members of the Board until the expiration date of their respective terms or upon their
written resignation to the Select Board. If a member of the Board resigns their position before
the expiration of their term, the Select Board is responsible to replace that member, with a new
member, to serve for the balance of the unexpired term.
b) For the purposes of fulfilling its duties, with a minimum of three members constituting the
Board, two members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the business of the Board,
and an affirmative vote of two members of the Board shall be necessary for any official act of
the Board.
c) With more than three members, increase the quorum as follows: four or five members, a
quorum of three; six or seven members, a quorum of four.
d) The Chairperson of the Advisory Committee, or his or her designee, will serve as ex-officio,
but will not vote on any matter coming before the Board.
e) The Board members must meet all of the following criteria:
? A Board member must be a registered voter in the Town;
? A Board member cannot be an Employee of the Town including being in an elected office;
? A Board member cannot be a member of any other permanent Town committee, board or
commission, if the committee, board or commission is responsible for supervision of any
Employee, whether full-time or part-time.
Section 4. Duties of the Personnel Board
a) The Board shall maintain a relevant Personnel Administration Plan that is compliant with state
law including operating within the meaning of Section 108A and 108C of Chapter 41 of the
General Laws, as amended.
b) The Board may choose to revise the Personnel Administration Plan, as necessary. Any
revisions require Town approval, at the next scheduled Town meeting, and must be compliant
with state law as mentioned in Section 4.a) of this by-law.
c) The Board shall provide advice to the Town, as requested, regarding any matters relating to
the application of the Personnel Administration Plan.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-31-
d) The Board, as part of the application of the Personnel Administration Plan, shall make a costof-
living (COLA) recommendation to the Advisory Board for each fiscal year no later than
November 1 prior to such fiscal year.
e) The Board shall establish its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its official
actions, which shall be kept open for public inspection to the extent provided by law, and
subject to appropriation, therefore, may make such expenditures, as may be necessary, for the
performance of its duties.
f) For the purposes of interpreting the Personnel Administration Plan; complying with state law;
and seeking a professional opinion; the Board may seek advice from Town Counsel, as
necessary.
Section 5. Severance Clause
The provisions of this by-law are hereby declared to be severable, and if any provision and the
application of any such provisions to any person or under any circumstances shall be held to be
invalid, illegal or unconstitutional, such invalidity, illegality or unconstitutionality shall not be
construed to effect the validity, legality, or constitutionality of any of the remaining provisions or
of that provision with respect to persons or circumstances other than those as to which the
offending provision is held to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional.
CHAPTER 21. GROUNDWATER PROTECTION BYLAW
(Added 1992, amended 1993, 2006)
Section 1: Preamble: Interests protected by this Bylaw.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Town of Sherborn by protecting, preserving and maintaining the groundwater supplies of the
Town. The groundwater underlying the Town is the sole source of the drinking water for the
residents of the Town. Because there is no public water supply available, residents maintain private
wells located on the various lots within the Town. Spills and discharges of petroleum products and
other toxic and Hazardous Material and Discharges of sewage and salt have repeatedly threatened
the quality of groundwater and related water resources, throughout the Commonwealth and
elsewhere, posing potential public health and safety hazards and threatening economic losses to
the affected communities. By adopting this bylaw, the Town intends to reduce the threat of such
spills and discharges. An additional purpose of this Bylaw is to protect the residents of the Town
and the Town itself from the potentially devastating financial and environmental consequences of
contamination of wells or groundwater due to leakage arising from failure of underground storage
tanks.
Section 2: Definitions.
"Discharge" shall mean the introduction of a liquid or soluble or leachable solid material upon or
into land or water bodies having an effect within the Town of Sherborn. Discharge includes,
without limitation, leakage of such materials from failed or discarded containers or storage systems
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-32-
and includes disposal of such materials into any wastewater disposal or treatment system, dry wall,
catch basin or landfill which has not received approval by the Board of Health.
“Fertilizer” shall mean any of a large number of natural and synthetic materials including, but not
limited to, nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium compounds, the normal use of which is by
spreading on or working into soil to increase its capacity to support plant growth.
"Groundwater": all water below the surface of the ground, including that in bedrock.
"Hazardous Material" shall have the same definition as is set forth in 310 Code of Massachusetts
Regulations (CMR) 40.000, as follows: material, including, but not limited to, any material in
whatever form which, because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable,
reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately or in combination with
any substance or substances, constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety,
welfare or to the environment, when improperly stored, treated, transported, disposed of, used or
otherwise managed. The term shall not include oil, but shall include waste oil and all those
substances which are included under 42 U.S.C. §9601(14), but it is not limited to those substances.
The term shall also include, but is not limited to all material regulated as hazardous waste or
recyclable material under 310 CMR 30.000.
“Manure” shall mean barnyard or stable dung, which may include discarded animal bedding, used
to fertilize soil. It shall not mean manure deposited naturally.
"Pesticides" shall mean any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest, any insecticide, herbicide, rodenticide, any other
substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant or desiccant,
provided that the term "pesticide" shall not include (i) any article that is a "new animal drug" within
the meaning of section 201w of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. s.321(w)),
or that has been determined by the Secretary of the United States Department of Health, Education
and Welfare not to be a new animal drug by a regulation establishing conditions of use for the
article; (ii) any article that is an animal feed within the meaning of section 201(x) of such act (21
U.S.C. s.321(x)), or (iii) any chemical the storage of which is governed by regulations adopted by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Pesticide Board pursuant to c. 132B of the General
Laws of the Commonwealth.
“Stockpiling or disposal of snow” shall mean the transportation of snow by means of a truck,
excavator, loader or similar equipment to a location off the property onto which it has fallen. It
shall not refer to simply plowing, shoveling or blowing such snow to the edges of a highway,
street, road, sidewalk or parking lot.
“Tank” shall include any tank of any design and any capacity, whether above or under the ground,
and includes both the Tank itself together with related piping and controls, and shall also include
drums, and bulk storage containers of any kind, description and design but excluding tanks that
are part of aircraft or motorized vehicles and contain fuel for such vehicles, and excluding tanks
used exclusively for the storage of propane.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-33-
Section 3: Regulation of Storage Tanks.
A. New underground Tanks prohibited. Following the effective date of this bylaw, the installation
of any underground Tank of any design and of any capacity for storage of any material other than
water, propane or septage if part of a septic system approved by the Board of Health is prohibited
within the Town of Sherborn. New commercial, municipal or agricultural Tanks meeting all
requirements of 527 CMR, including those requirements that have deferred effective dates, are
exempt from this provision.
B. Storage Tanks. Following the effective date of this bylaw, storage Tanks may be installed
either:
(1) within a building as defined in Section 1.5 of the Zoning Bylaw of the Town, such as a
basement of a residence, only where there is full compliance with 527 CMR and with the rules
and regulations of the Fire Chief, adopted pursuant to Section 3C of this Chapter;
(2) above ground outdoors, only where there is full compliance with 527 CMR and with the
rules and regulations of the Fire Chief, adopted pursuant to Section 3C of this Chapter.
C. Local Rules and Regulations. The Fire Chief may adopt rules and regulations implementing,
detailing and specifying additional requirements so that
(1) underlying each Tank shall be a surface that is designed and at all times operated so that it
is free of cracks and gaps and is sufficiently impermeable to contain leaks and spills until the
leakage or spillage of stored material is detected and removed; and further
(2) each Tank shall be placed on such surface so that the surface beneath the Tank is visible
for inspection for spills and structural integrity; and further
(3) piping and related fittings are to meet specifications set forth in the regulations; and
(4) such regulations shall contain a procedure for the issuance of variances from such
requirements upon good cause shown when unusual conditions related to size, location, or
geography exist and when an alternative design would accomplish the intent of this Bylaw.
D. Existing Underground Tanks – Any existing underground tank shall be removed from the
ground or closed in accordance with 527 CMR by April 30, 2007, unless documentation is
provided that it has been upgraded to comply with the requirements of 527 CMR regarding
equipment for the prevention and detection of leaks, including cathodic protection, double walls
and monitoring systems. Documentation of compliance with the testing requirements of 527 CMR
must also be provided.
Section 4: Hazardous Material.
A. Outdoor Storage. Because of the risk of soil contamination from rain, wind and weather
conditions, the outdoor storage of Hazardous Material, except as exempted by Section 4D of this
Chapter, is prohibited within the Town of Sherborn. Unless exempted in Section 4D, Hazardous
Material lawfully used within the Town may be stored only in sheltered conditions within
weatherproof buildings or under waterproof roofs where there exists an impermeable floor graded
to contain spills or discharges, or an impermeable floor with a containment berm or wall.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-34-
B. Disposal Prohibited. The release or disposal of Hazardous Material within the limits of the
Town, other than at such lawful disposal sites and times as may be designated by the Board of
Health, is prohibited.
C. Notification Requirements. In order that the Town, the abutters and public safety officials may
know of the existence and locations where Hazardous Materials is stored, every person who
regularly stores or keeps at one location two hundred (200) pounds or more of any one Hazardous
Material, or a cumulative total of two hundred (200) pounds of several different Hazardous
Materials, except as exempted in Section 4D of this Chapter, shall notify the Select Board prior to
initiating such storage and on or before December 31 of each year thereafter. The notification shall
consist of a statement setting forth the owner's name, the quantity and type of Hazardous Material,
the date when the Hazardous Material will be or was first stored and location thereof.
D. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the requirements of this Section:
(1) Pipelines: existing utility pipeline facilities constructed and used for the purpose of
transporting and conveying petroleum products and natural gas; provided, however, that any
such transportation and conveyance complies with all applicable law and is designed,
constructed, operated and used so as to prevent contamination of groundwater or surface water.
(2) Commercial or Agricultural Tanks: existing or new commercial or agricultural Tanks
meeting all requirements of 527 CMR, including those requirements that have deferred
effective dates.
(3) Any Hazardous Material that is subject to the requirements of section 5, 6 or 7 of this
Chapter, except that this exemption shall not relieve a person who regularly stores or keeps
such Hazardous Material from the requirements of section 4C of this Chapter.
Section 5: Fertilizer and Manure.
A. Fertilizer Storage. Because of the risk of groundwater contamination from rain, wind and
weather conditions, the outdoor storage of two hundred (200) pounds or more of fertilizers at any
one location is prohibited, except as follows:
(1) The temporary and transitory outdoor storage of fertilizer of no more than one week
duration shall be allowed as of right in areas other than within one hundred feet of a well head,
bank, or freshwater wetland, beach, marsh, meadow, bog, or swamp, or within two hundred
feet of any estuary, creek, river, stream, pond or lake or any land under said waters or bordering
lands subject to flooding as defined in the Sherborn Wetlands Regulations.
(2) Fertilizers may be stored under waterproof roofs where there exists an impermeable floor;
or in or upon a motor vehicle or trailer, provided that such fertilizers are sealed within
waterproof containers and are covered by a waterproof tarp, roof or the equivalent overhead
coverage from exposure to weather;
B. Manure Storage. Manure piles of more than 200 pounds shall not be stored:
(1) within 100 feet of any water supply well head; or
(2) within 100 feet of (a) any bank, freshwater wetland, beach, marsh, meadow, bog, swamp,
estuary, creek, river, stream, pond or lake; or (b) bordering land subject to flooding (generally
the 100-year storm flood line); all as defined in the Sherborn Wetlands Regulations, unless
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-35-
such storage is covered or within a waterproof container or structure with an impermeable floor
that prevents the release of runoff from the manure.
Section 6: Road Salt and Deicing Chemicals.
A. Prohibition of introduction of snow from outside Town into the Town for storage and/or
melting. Because of the use of road salt and other deicing chemicals in snow removal and snow
clearing, following the effective date of this Bylaw, the transportation of snow from outside the
Town into the Town for storage and/or melting within the Town limits is prohibited;
B. The stockpiling or disposal of snow or ice removed from highways, streets, roadways,
sidewalks and parking lots is prohibited except as follows:
(1) In the event of severe winter weather the DPW Director may stockpile snow as necessary
only at locations designated by the Select Board.
(2) Where the Planning Board has required snow removal to maintain parking spaces as a
condition of its site plan approval, property owners may remove snow from the premises and
stockpile it in coordination with the DPW Director.
C. Bulk storage. The bulk storage outside of road salt or deicing chemicals or any mixture of
sand and road salt or sand and deicing chemical is prohibited. Bulk storage of road salt or deicing
chemicals or any mixture of sand and road salt or sand and deicing chemicals, whether mixed or
unmixed, is allowed within weatherproof buildings or under waterproof roofs where there exists
an impermeable floor graded to contain spills or discharges or an impermeable floor with a
containment berm or wall.
D. Exemption. The following are exempt from the requirements of this Section:
(1) The outside storage of one 25 lb. or less bag of salt or deicing chemical for normal home,
office or store use on the premises; or
(2) The outside storage of one 55 gallon drum or equivalent container of sand-salt mixture,
provided that the open end of the drum is equipped with a covering.
Section 7: Certain Petroleum-based Commercial Activities Regulated within the Town.
Because of the existence within the Town of certain types of commercial petroleum-based
activities and because of the unreasonable risk of groundwater contamination created by such
commercial activities, any commercial operation within the Town, whether new or pre-existing,
involving new or used automobile and/or truck sales or storage establishments, gasoline service
stations, automobile repair shops, truck service stations, or similar commercial petroleum-based
establishments, shall be required following the effective date of this Bylaw to comply with the
standards set forth below, without regard to whether such activities are new or pre-existing:
A. Such activity is at all times to be in full compliance with a site management plan prepared by
the owner or operator of the site and approved by the Board of Health, which plan is to specify
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-36-
(i) storage, use and handling of any Hazardous Materials or petroleum products utilized on
the site and
(ii) the precautions taken or to be taken to minimize the threat of spills and to prevent the
discharge of contaminants into the soil and groundwater of the Town; and
B. The activity must at all times be in compliance with the requirements of Sections 3 and 4 of
this Chapter, if applicable; and
C. Such activity shall at all times be conducted so that all reasonable precautions are taken to
minimize the threat of spills and to prevent the discharge of contaminants into the soil and
groundwater of the Town of Sherborn.
Section 8: Solid Waste.
The disposal within the Town of solid waste except grass, compost, brush and other decomposing
plant or animal material other than at the Sherborn Transfer Station, or at such locations as may
be established from time to time by the Board of Health, is prohibited.
Section 9: Application of this Bylaw to Operations and Activities of the Town of
Sherborn.
All Departments of the Town of Sherborn shall comply with all Sections of this Bylaw.
Section 10: Report of Leaks, Spills and Discharges.
In the event of a Discharge, spill or loss of petroleum product, pesticides, Hazardous Materials or
other chemicals regulated by this Bylaw, or the unaccounted for decline in volume of such
substances that may indicate that a leak or discharge) has occurred, that requires such owner or
operator to report such spill, loss or discharge to representatives of the governments of the United
States or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, such owner or operator shall also immediately
provide duplicate notification or report to the Fire Chief and to the Board of Health.
Section 10A: Pesticide Storage
The Town recognizes that Pesticides play an important and necessary role in controlling insects
and other pests. To protect further the groundwater of the Town, the storage of two hundred and
fifty (250) pounds or more of Pesticides on one lot of land within the Town of Sherborn is
prohibited unless such Pesticides are stored in sheltered conditions within weatherproof buildings
where there exists an impermeable floor. This Section 10A shall take effect on January 1, 1995.
Section 11: Enforcement.
Violations of this Chapter shall be governed by Chapter 16 of the General Bylaws. Each day
during which the violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 12: Severability.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-37-
Provisions of this Chapter are severable and if any provision hereof shall be held invalid by any
court of competent jurisdiction under any circumstances, such invalidity shall be construed as
narrowly as possible and the balance of the Chapter shall be deemed to be amended to the
minimum extent necessary to effect its purposes.
CHAPTER 22. DRIVEWAYS (Added 1994)
Section 1. No driveway shall be constructed or substantially altered at the point of intersection
with a public street or private way unless a written permit is first obtained from the Director of
DPW in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Select Board. No provision of these
rules and regulations shall operate so as to prevent construction on any lot on which such
construction would otherwise be permitted.
No foundation or building permit shall be issued for the construction of a new dwelling unless
such driveway permit has first been obtained. The Director of DPW may impose such conditions
in said permit as will reasonably protect said streets or private ways from damage or obstruction
as a result of said construction or substantial alteration. (Amended 1999)
Section 2. Where a new driveway or a driveway for a new dwelling will exceed 500 feet in length
from a public street or private way to any dwelling located on any lot, said driveway shall meet
the following minimum standards:
a. Minimum Width - Said driveway shall have a minimum width of fourteen feet (14') with a
minimum 10 inch gravel base and a top surface of either gravel or bituminous concrete or
combination of both.
b. Minimum Weight Bearing - The Director of DPW shall approve the minimum weight
bearing capacity as certified by a Registered Professional Engineer of all such driveways
at such locations where the driveway shall consist of a bridge or shall have located under
it any culverts or pipes for the purpose of water flow.
c. Vertical Clearances - All overhead utilities or structures of any kind shall have minimal
vertical clearance above said driveway of 15½ feet.
d. Turnaround - All said driveways shall be constructed with a maintained turnaround area or
circular turnaround, in proximity to the dwelling as may be approved by the Director of
DPW.
e. Maximum Grades and Minimum Radii - Said driveway shall be constructed with maximum
grade slopes of no more than 8% and minimum turning radii in all locations of not less
than 40 feet.
f. Other Conditions - All applicants for such driveway permits shall submit suitable plans to
the Director of DPW for approval, who may impose such conditions in said permit as will
reasonably assure access to and from said public street or private way to any dwelling built
on the property of the applicant for the purpose of assuring access to such structures of all
public safety services.
g. Waivers - The Director of DPW shall waive any of the requirements of this Section in a
given case upon written request by the Planning Board.
Section 3. This Chapter shall not apply to any driveway in existence upon the effective date hereof
or to any repair or replacement thereof.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-38-
CHAPTER 23 ANTI-LITTERING AND DUMPING (Added 2004)
Section 1. No person, without lawful authority so to do, shall throw, sweep or place and suffer to
remain on any street, public place or right of way any papers, ashes, earth, garbage, rubbish, litter,
refuse or any noxious liquid or solid substance, or any glass, nails, tacks, scrap iron or similar
articles.
Section 2. No person, unless having the authority so to do, shall dump, or deposit any ashes,
rubbish, refuse, offal or trash on any street, public place or right of way contrary to the rules and
regulations of the Selectmen.
Section 3. The penalty for the violation of this By-Law shall be $300.00 for each offense.
CHAPTER 24 FARM POND (Added 2006, Amended 2010)
Section 1. Any violation of the Rules and Regulations of Farm Pond adopted by the Select Board
pursuant to Chapter 304 of the Acts of 1935, shall be punished by a fine of Two Hundred ($200.00)
Dollars as set forth in General Laws Chapter 45, Section 24 by means of non-criminal disposition
in accordance with Section 21D of General Laws, Chapter 40.
CHAPTER 25. COMPREHENSIVE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
BY-LAW (Added 2011, Amended 2019)
Section 1: Authority
This By-law is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution, the Home Rule statutes and pursuant to the regulations of the federal
Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
Section 2: Purpose
The purpose of this By-law is to regulate discharges to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
System (MS4) to protect the Town of Sherborn’s water bodies and groundwater and to safeguard
the public health, safety, welfare and the environment. Increased and contaminated stormwater
runoff associated with construction sites, developed land uses and the accompanying increase in
impervious surface are major causes of impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds,
streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater. This purpose is accomplished through the following:
2.1 Institute water resource protection measures identified in the Supplemental Final
Comprehensive Water Resource Management Plan / Environmental Impact Report -
Commonwealth of Massachusetts EOEA File Number 8844 (CWRMP);
2.2 Protect groundwater and surface water from degradation;
2.3 Promote groundwater recharge;
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-39-
2.4 Require practices to control the flow of stormwater from new and redeveloped sites into
the Town storm drainage system in order to prevent flooding and erosion;
2.5 Require practices that eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation and control the volume and
rate of stormwater runoff resulting from land disturbance activities;
2.6 Prevent pollutants from entering the Town’s Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
(MS4) and minimize discharge of pollutants from the MS4;
2.7 Ensure that soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and stormwater runoff control
practices are incorporated into the site planning and design process and are implemented and
maintained;
2.8 Ensure adequate long-term operation and maintenance of structural stormwater best
management practices so that they work as designed;
2.9 Comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater discharges;
and
2.10 Establish the Town’s legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Bylaw
through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
Nothing in this By-law is intended to replace the requirements of the Town of Sherborn Zoning
By-law, General By-laws, or any other By-law that may be adopted by the Town of Sherborn.
Any activity subject to the provisions of the above-cited By-laws must comply with the
specifications of each.
Section 3: Definitions
Except as listed below, words, all terms, abbreviations and acronyms that appear in this bylaw and
are also defined in Appendix A of the Final 2016 Massachusetts Small MS4 General Permit
(“Appendix A”) signed April 4, 2016 with an effective date of July 1, 2018, (MS4 General Permit)
or as most recently amended, shall be construed to have the meaning presented in Appendix A.
Illicit Connection – A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance, which allows an illicit discharge
(as described in Section 4.1 below) into the municipal storm drain system, including without
limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and any connections from indoor drains,
sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed or approved before
the effective date of this Bylaw.
Any other definitions that apply in the interpretation and implementation of this By-law shall be
included as part of any Stormwater Regulations promulgated as permitted under Section 5.2 of this
By-law.
Section 4: Applicability
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-40-
4.1 Illicit Discharges - The following activities are prohibited:
a. Illicit Discharges – No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be discharged
any pollutant, unauthorized stormwater or non-stormwater discharge into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) and/or Town right-of-way.
b. Illicit Connections – No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any
illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system, regardless of whether
the connection was permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom at the time
of connection.
c. Obstruction of MS4 – No person shall obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of
storm water into or out of the MS4 without prior written approval from the Director of
Department of Public Works (DPW)
d. Yard Wastes – No person shall dump or dispose of yard waste (leaves, grass clippings,
etc.) into the MS4, or into catch basins, retention/detention basins or any other
component of a stormwater management system which discharges to the MS4.
4.2 Permitted Non-Stormwater Discharges
A limited category of non-stormwater discharges are only allowed with a permit from the Director
of DPW. Such permits may be granted only following an examination of potential alternatives and
a finding by the Director that there is no viable alternative. These categories are:
a. Uncontaminated pumped ground water
b. Foundation drains
c. Water from crawl space pumps
d. Footing drains
4.3. Prohibited Non-Stormwater Discharges
The following non-stormwater discharges are strictly prohibited:
a. De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges
b. Discharging water from any source into the street
4.4 Land Disturbance
No person shall undertake construction activity that requires (a) Planning Board review (including
new subdivisions, special permits for multi-family development, and site plan review for new
commercial/industrial development or redevelopment), (b) a Building Permit (such as new single
family residential development or redevelopment), or (c) utility line work, AND if the activity will
disturb or alter one acre or more of land, either initially or as part of a common plan for
development that will disturb or alter one acre or more of land, without obtaining a Stormwater
Management Permit (SMP) from the Planning Board.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-41-
Any activity that is subject to Site Plan Review or the Subdivision Control Law or requires a
Special Permit from the Planning Board per the Sherborn Zoning Bylaw shall be eligible for an
SMP to be reviewed and granted as a component of such other permitting process.
4.5 Exemptions
The following activities shall be exempt from the requirement for an SMP:
4.5.1 Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as defined by M.G.L.
Chapter 128 Section 1A.
4.5.2 Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas.
4.5.3 Creating impervious area consisting of a previously existing unpaved driveway for a single
family dwelling, or expansion of an existing paved driveway for a single family dwelling.
4.5.4 The construction of fencing that will not alter existing terrain or drainage patterns.
4.5.5 Construction or maintenance and repair of utility service lines (gas, water, electric,
telephone, fire alarms, etc.) other than drainage lines or systems, which will not alter terrain,
ground cover, or drainage patterns.
4.5.6 Emergency repairs to any stormwater management facility.
4.5.7 Any work or projects for which all necessary approvals and permits, including building
permits, have been issued before the effective date of this By-law.
4.5.8 Construction of items normally appurtenant to residential uses, such as decks; patios;
walkways; fruit, vegetable, or flower gardens; driveways; sheds; swimming pools; and tennis or
basketball courts.
4.5.9 Repair or replacement of septic systems.
4.5.10 Any construction activity or project wholly within the jurisdiction of the Conservation
Commission provided that an Order of Conditions has been issued by the Conservation
Commission.
Section 5: Administration
5.1 The Planning Board shall administer and implement the Land Disturbance provisions of
this By-law, and Department of Public Works shall administer and implement the Illicit
Discharges provisions.
5.2 Rules And Regulations - The Planning Board and DPW may adopt, and periodically amend,
Rules and Regulations relating to the terms, performance standards, conditions, definitions,
enforcement, fees (including application, inspection, and/or consultant fees), procedures and
administration of this Comprehensive Stormwater Management By-law by majority vote of the
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-42-
Planning Board, after conducting a public hearing to receive comments on any proposed Rules and
Regulations or revisions thereto. Such hearing dates shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
local circulation, at least seven days prior to the hearing date. After public notice and public hearing,
the Planning Board may promulgate Rules and Regulations to effectuate the purposes of this Bylaw.
Failure by the Planning Board to promulgate such Rules and Regulations or a legal declaration
of their invalidity by a court shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this By-law.
5.3 Stormwater Management Handbook and NPDES Permits - The Planning Board will
utilize the policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards of the latest
edition of the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards and Handbook for execution of
the provisions of this By-law. This Handbook includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment
practices, including the specific design criteria for each stormwater practice. The standards and
handbook may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in engineering,
science, monitoring, and local maintenance experience. The Planning Board will also utilize the
provisions of the MS4 General Permit and other NPDES permits.
5.4 Actions - The Planning Board may take any of the following actions as a result of an
application for a Stormwater Management Permit as more specifically defined as part of
Stormwater Regulations promulgated as a result of this By-law: Approval, Approval with
Conditions, or Disapproval.
5.5 Appeals Of Actions - A decision of the Planning Board shall be final. A decision by the
Planning Board made under this Section 24 shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in an action
in the nature of certiorari filed within 60 days thereof, in accordance with Massachusetts General
Laws chapter 249 Section 4.
5.6 Permits And Procedures - Permit Procedures and Requirements shall be defined and
included as part of any Rules and Regulations promulgated as permitted under Section 5.2 of this
By-law.
5.7 Water Resources Mitigation Fund - The Planning Board may allow the applicant to
contribute to the Town of Sherborn Water Resources Mitigation Fund where it has been
demonstrated that there are not sufficient conditions for onsite stormwater best management
practices in order to meet the Performance Standards as described in the Regulations promulgated
under this By-law. Funds may be used to design and construct stormwater projects that will
improve the quality and quantity of surface waters in Sherborn by treating and recharging storm
water from existing impervious surfaces that is now discharged to said waters with inadequate
treatment or recharge. The amount of the contribution to the fund shall be determined by the
Planning Board.
Section 6: Enforcement.
6.1 Land Disturbance
6.1.1 The Department of Public Works Director (DPW), Building Inspector and the Police shall
be the enforcement agents. When the Planning Board or its enforcing agent determines that an
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-43-
activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this Chapter, Stormwater
Regulations or an SMP, the agent shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the
property. Persons receiving a notice of violation may be required to:
6.1.2 Halt all construction activities until there is compliance. A “stop work order” will be in
effect until the Planning Board or its agent confirms that the activity is in compliance and the
violation has been satisfactorily addressed.
6.1.3 Maintain, install or perform additional erosion and sedimentation control measures;
6.1.4 Monitor, analyze and report to the Planning Board regarding progress in addressing
activities cited in a notice of violation;
6.1.5 Remediate erosion and sedimentation resulting directly or indirectly from the activity.
6.1.6 Failure to comply with a notice of violation in the time specified therein constitutes a
violation of this By-law and may result in penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures
authorized in this Chapter.
6.1.7 Upon identification of the illicit source all responsible parties will be notified. Immediate
cessation of improper disposal practices are required. Where elimination of an illicit discharge
within 60 days of its identification is not possible, DPW shall immediately commence actions
necessary for elimination. DPW will then establish an expeditious schedule for its elimination and
report the dates of identification and schedules for removal in the annual MS4 reports to EPA. In
the interim, DPW shall take all reasonable and prudent measures to minimize the discharge of
pollutants to and from its MS4.
6.2 Illicit Discharges
6.2.1 The DPW Director or his designee shall be the enforcement agent for illicit discharges.
6.2.2 Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this Chapter, Regulations, or SMP’s or
violation notices issued thereunder, may be punished by a fine of not more than $250.00. Each day
or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense, and each
provision of the Chapter, Regulations or SMP violated, shall constitute a separate offense.
6.2.3 Non-Criminal Disposition. As an alternative to the penalty in Section 6.2, the enforcing
authority may elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in Chapter 16, Section
2 of the General Bylaws of the Town of Sherborn. Each day or part thereof that such violation
occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense, and each provision of this Chapter,
Regulation or permit violated shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty for non-criminal
disposition shall be $200.00 per violation.
Section 7 Severability
If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this By-law shall be held invalid for any reason,
all other provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
CHAPTER 26 STRETCH ENERGY CODE (Added 2011)
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-44-
Section 1 Definitions.
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 2009 - The International Energy Conservation
Code (IECC) is a building code created by the International Code Council. It is a model code
adopted by many state and municipal governments in the United States for the establishment of
minimum design and construction requirements for energy efficiency. Commencing on July 1,
2010, the baseline energy conservation requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code
will default to IECC 2009 and Massachusetts amendments.
Stretch Energy Code - Codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR
Appendix 115. AA, the Stretch Energy Code is the International Energy Conservation Code
(IECC) 2009 with amendments contained herein.
Section 2 Purpose.
The purpose of 780 CMR 115.AA is to provide a more energy efficient alternative to the base
energy code applicable to the relevant sections of the building code for both new construction and
existing buildings.
Section 3 Applicability.
The Stretch Energy Code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not included
in the scope of this code shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, 61, or 93, as applicable.
Section 4 Stretch Code.
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR
Appendix 115.AA, including any amendments or modifications thereto, is herein incorporated by
reference into this Chapter.
Section 5 Enforcement.
The Stretch Code shall be enforced by the Building Inspector.
CHAPTER 27 REGISTRATION OF SOLICITORS (Added 2012)
1. Purpose
This by-law adopted pursuant to chapter 43B, section 13, of the General Laws and Article 89 of
the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, establishes
registration requirements and specific operational requirements for persons intending to engage in
door-to-door canvassing or soliciting in the Town of Sherborn in order to protect its citizens from
disruption of the peaceful enjoyment of their residences and from the perpetration of fraud or other
crimes; and, to allow for reasonable access to residents in their homes by persons or organizations
who wish to communicate either commercial or non-commercial messages.
2. Definitions
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-45-
For the purpose of this By-Law, the following definitions shall apply:
2.1. “Soliciting” shall mean and include any one or more of the following door-to-door activities:
a) selling, or seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods or services, including
advertising in any type of publication, for any kind of consideration whatsoever;
b) selling, or seeking to obtain prospective customers for application for purchase of
insurance of any kind;
c) selling, or seeking to sell subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals, newspapers or
any other type of publication;
d) seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, or any valuable thing for the support
or benefit of any association, organization, corporation or project wholly or in part for
commercial purposes or by a professional solicitor or commercial co-venture for a charitable
or other non-commercial organization; and
e) seeking to obtain information on the background, occupation, economic status, political
affiliation, attitudes, viewpoints, or the like of the occupants of a residence for the purpose
of selling or using such data, wholly, or in part, for commercial purposes.
2.2. “Canvassing” shall mean and include any one or more of the following door-to door
activities:
a) person-to-person distribution of literature, periodicals, or other printed materials for
commercial purposes, but shall not include placing or dropping off printed materials on the
premises:
b) seeking to enlist membership in any organization for commercial purposes: and
c) seeking to present, in person, organizational information for commercial purposes.
2.3. “Residence” shall mean and include every individual dwelling unit occupied for residential
purposes by one or more persons.
2.4. “Registered Solicitor” shall mean any person who has obtained a valid certificate of
registration for the Town of Sherborn as required by this By-Law.
2.5. “Charitable Organizations”, “Charitable” and “Commercial co-venturer” shall be defined as
follows:
“Charitable”, including but not limited to benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, scientific, literary, religious, health, safety or welfare-related, or in furtherance of
governmental or civic objectives, and benefiting the general public or some indefinite class
thereof.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-46-
“Charitable organization”, any person whose purposes or actual operation are charitable in
nature or one holding himself out to be a charitable organization in whole or in part, including
any person who in any manner employs a charitable appeal as the basis of any solicitation or
an appeal which could be reasonably interpreted to suggest that there is a charitable purpose
to any such solicitation.
“Commercial co-venturer”, any person who for profit or other commercial consideration,
conducts, produces, promotes, underwrites, arranges or sponsors a performance, event, or
sale to the public of a good or service which is advertised in conjunction with the name of
any charitable organization or as benefiting to any extent any charitable purpose. Any such
person who will benefit in good will only shall not be deemed a commercial co-venturer if
the collection and distribution of the proceeds of the performance, event or sale are
supervised and controlled by the benefiting charitable organization.
2.6. “Professional solicitor” shall be defined as defined in General Laws chapter 68, §18.
3. Registration
Every person or organization intending to engage in soliciting or canvassing door-to-door in the
Town of Sherborn must apply for a permit with the Chief of Police by filing a registration
application form with the Sherborn Police Department. Application for both individual and
organizational registrations shall be filed at least seven business days in advance.
3.1. Organization application forms shall include the following information:
a) The name and address of the organization applying for registration, and the names and
addresses of the organizations’ principal officers. If the organization is a charitable
organization, a certification that the most recent Annual Registration Statement required to
be filed with the Attorney General’s Division of Public Charities has been so filed. If the
organization is a professional solicitor or a commercial co-venturer for a charitable
organization, a copy of the contract with the charitable organization must be provided with
this application. Failure to include a copy of the contract with the charitable organization
under such circumstances will render the application incomplete and no action will be taken
thereon:
b) The name, title and telephone number, date of birth and valid driver’s license or other
government-issued photo identification of the person(s) filing the application form:
c) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the person(s), if any, who will be directly
supervising the solicitation or canvassing operation in the Town of Sherborn:
d) A list of the names, addresses, date of birth of all individuals who will be employed in
solicitation or canvassing, in the Town of Sherborn, by the applicant:
e) Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed; provided, however, that no
certificate may be granted for longer than a 90-day period:
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-47-
f) Names of the last three communities, if any, in which the organization has conducted a
solicitation or canvassing operation, complete with the date of the issuance and date of the
expiration of any permits or licenses issued by those communities to the organization.
g) Insurance information and license, if applicable.
3.2. Individual registration forms shall be required for all individuals, including those who are
affiliated with an organization registered under Chapter 26.3.1 hereof. Individual registration
forms shall contain the following information:
a) Name and address of the present place of residence and length of residence at that address;
if less than three years residence at present address, the address of residence(s) during the
past three years:
b) Date of birth:
c) Name, address and telephone number of the person or organizations whom the applicant
represents and the length of time the applicant has been associated with or employed by that
person or organization. If the individual is a professional solicitor or a commercial coventurer
for a charitable organization, a copy of the contract, if any, with the charitable
organization must be provided with this application. Failure to include a copy of the contract
with the charitable organization under such circumstances will render the application
incomplete and no action will be taken thereon:
d) Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed; provided, however, that no
certificate may be granted for longer than a 90-day period;
e) Names of the last three communities, if any, in which the applicant has solicited or
canvassed door-to-door, complete with the date of issuance and date of the expiration of any
permits or licenses issued by those communities to the applicant.
f) Valid driver’s license or other government issued photo identification; and
g) Make, model and registration number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant while
soliciting or canvassing.
4. Registration Fee
There shall be a $20.00 application fee for an individual registration card or re-registration. There
is no application fee for organizational applicants that apply for registration or re-registration.
5. Registration Cards
5.1. The Police Chief or his designee, after a review of the application, which will include an
investigation of the applicants pursuant to Section 26.5.4, but in no event more than seven business
days after receipt of a fully-completed application, shall furnish each person with a registration
card which shall contain the following information:
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-48-
a) The name of the person;
b) A recent photograph of the person;
c) The name of the organization, if any, which the person represents:
d) A statement that the individual has been registered with the Town of Sherborn Police
Department but that registration is not an endorsement of any individual or organization: and
e) Specific dates or period of time covered by the registration.
5.2. Persons engaged in solicitation or canvassing as defined in this By-Law must carry the
registration card while soliciting or canvassing and present the card to any person solicited or upon
request of any police officer.
5.3. Registration cards are valid only for the specific dates or time period specified thereon and
in no case for longer than 90 days.
5.4. The Police Chief shall routinely grant registrations without further inquiry but shall refuse
registration to an organization or an individual where registration has been revoked for violation
of this By-Law within the previous two-year period or who has been convicted of murder,
manslaughter, rape or any other sex crime, kidnapping, robbery, arson, burglary, breaking and
entering, felony assault, illegal possession of a firearm or dangerous weapon, distribution of any
illegal narcotic drugs, felony larceny, three or more misdemeanor assaults or three or more
misdemeanor larcenies, as such persons pose a substantial degree of dangerousness to minors and
other persons vulnerable to becoming victims of the violent crimes so listed. The police chief shall
also refuse to register a person who is a sex offender required to register with the Massachusetts
Sex Offender Registry Board, or any other similar government entity, and who is a classified or
considered to be a moderate to high risk or re-offending. Such individuals pose a substantial degree
of dangerousness to minors or to other persons vulnerable to becoming victims of sex crimes. For
the purposes of this By-Law, a “Continued without a finding” or similar disposition will be
considered the same as a conviction.
6. Exceptions
6.1. Registration shall not be required for officers or employees of the Town, County, State or
Federal governments when on official business.
6.2. Individual registration shall not be required for minors under the age of 17.
6.3. Nothing in this By-Law shall be construed to impose any registration requirement or
otherwise restrict or in any way regulate any activity for religious, political, newspaper distribution
or public policy purposes or other non-commercial purposes, including, charitable, benevolent or
fraternal activities, regardless of whether such activity includes acts that would otherwise
constitute soliciting or canvassing.
7. Duties of Persons Going Door-to-Door
7.1. Upon going into any residential premises in the Town of Sherborn, every solicitor, canvasser
or other person must first examine any notice that may be posted, prohibiting solicitation or other
activities. If such a notice is posted, the solicitor, canvasser or other person shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-49-
7.2. Any solicitor, canvasser or other person who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so
by the occupant.
7.3. Immediately upon gaining entrance to any residence, each solicitor or canvasser as defined
in this By-Law must do the following:
a) Present his registration card for inspection by the occupant:
b) Request that the occupant read the registration card; and
c) Inform the occupant in clear language of the nature and purpose of his business and, if
he is representing an organization, the name and nature of that organization.
8. Restriction on Methods of Solicitation, Canvassing, or Other Door-to Door Activities.
It shall be unlawful for a solicitor, canvasser or other person to do any of the following:
a) Falsely represent, directly or by implication, that the solicitation, canvassing or other
activity is being done on behalf of a governmental organization, or on behalf of any
municipal employee or elected official;
b) Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at the residence without express prior
permission of an occupant, before 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m., where there is no sign posted
otherwise limiting solicitation or the hours of solicitation or such other activities;
c) Continue to solicit, canvass or conduct activities after being advised by police of the
registration requirements or after a registration certificate has been revoked or denied;
d) Utilize any form of endorsement from any department head currently employed or
serving the Town of Sherborn; and
e) Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence in an illegal fashion.
9. Penalty
9.1. Any person or organization who violates Section 7.2, with an accompanying signed
statement of the offended party, or Section 8 of this By-Law, may be punished by a fine of up to
three hundred dollars for each and every offense, which may be recovered upon complaint before
the district court and shall enure to the town, all in accord with chapter 40, section 21 of the General
Laws. Any person or organization who violates any other provision of this By-law shall be
punished by a fine of up to one hundred dollars for each and every offense, which may be recovered
upon complaint to the district court and shall enure to the town, all in accord with chapter 40,
section 21 of the General Laws. As an alternative, a noncriminal penalty may be assessed by the
appropriate enforcement person, in accordance with Chapter 16 of these By-laws.
9.2. Any person or organization who for himself, itself, or through its agents, servants or
employees is found after investigation by a police officer to have:
a) violated any provision of this By-Law, or applicable state for federal laws governing
soliciting or canvassing; or
b) knowingly provided false information on the registration application,
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-50-
shall have his, her or its registration revoked by the Chief of Police by written notice delivered to
the holder of the registration in person, or sent to the holder by certified mail at the address set
forth in the application.
10. Appeals
Any person or organization who is denied registration or whose registration has been revoked may
appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Town of Sherborn Town Administrator. Such
appeal must be filed within five days after the receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The
Town Administrator shall hear the appeal within ten days after the filing of the written notice of
appeal, provided, however, that if the Town Administrator fails to make a determination within
thirty days after the filing of the appeal, the registration shall be deemed granted or reinstated as
the case may be.
11. Severability
Invalidity of any individual provision of this By-Law shall not affect the validity of the By-Law
as a whole.
CHAPTER 28 REVOLVING FUNDS (Added 2017, amended 2019)
Section 1. There are hereby established pursuant to the provisions of General Laws chapter 44,
section 53E½, the following Revolving Funds:
Program or Purpose
Authorized
Representative or
Board to Spend
Department Receipts
Elder Housing
Elder Housing
Committee
Rents for units at Woodhaven to
maintain Buildings and Grounds
Farm Pond Select Board
Fees in connection with Farm Pond
Sticker Fees used to maintain the
property and pay Waterfront Personnel
Council on Aging Programs Council on Aging
Fees in connection with Lifetime
Learning, Social Events, Transportation
and Home Delivered Meals for
Sherborn Seniors
Board of Health Immunization
Clinic
Board of Health
Fees and Charges received from
Emergency Clinics from Medicare and
other private insurance reimbursements
from administration of vaccines at BOH
immunization clinics
Town Forest Sale of Firewood
Town Forest
Committee
Fees and Charges received from the Sale
of Firewood
Recycling Committee Sale of
Bins
Recycling Committee
Fees and Charges received from the Sale
of Bins
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-51-
Ambulance Fire Chief
Fees and Charges in connection with
Ambulance Services
Parks and Recreation
Recreation
Commission
Fees and receipts in connection with
providing recreational programs and
activities.
Section 2. Expenditures from each revolving fund set forth herein shall be subject to the limitation
established annually by Town Meeting or any increase therein as may be authorized in accordance
with General Laws chapter 44, section 53E½.”
CHAPTER 29 MARIJUANA NOT MEDICALLY PRESCRIBED (Added 2017)
Consistent with M.G.L. Chapter 94G, Section 3(a)(2), all types of marijuana establishments as
defined in M.G.L. Chapter. 94G, Section 1, to include all marijuana cultivators, marijuana testing
facilities, marijuana product manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed
marijuana-related businesses, shall be prohibited in the Town of Sherborn. This Chapter shall be
effective upon passage by the voters at a Town election.
CHAPTER 30. DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS (Added 2018)
Section 1. The Town Collector (hereinafter referred to as the “Collector”) shall annually, and may
periodically, furnish to each department, board or commission (hereinafter referred to as the
“Licensing Authority”) that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, a list of
any person, corporation or business enterprise (hereinafter referred to as the “Party”) that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal
charges, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of
such tax or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
Section 2. Process for Denial, revocation or suspension of license or permit.
a. The Licensing Authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including
renewals and transfers, of any Party whose name appears on said list furnished to the Licensing
Authority from the Collector or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the
subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or
is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any Party whose name appears
on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Collector; provided, however, that written
notice is given to the Party and the Collector, as required by applicable provisions of the law, and
the Party is given a hearing, to be held no earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be
prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any Party.
b. The Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such
license denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party.
c. Any findings made by the Licensing Authority with respect to such license denial, revocation
or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding, and shall not be relevant to
or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial,
revocation or suspension.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-52-
d. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this Section shall not be reissued
or renewed until the Licensing Authority receives a certificate issued by the Collector that the
Party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or
other municipal charges payable to the Town as of the date of issuance of said certificate.
Section 3. Payment agreement.
Any Party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the
Licensing Authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit, and
validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said
license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and hearing as required by
applicable provisions of law.
Section 4. The right to waive.
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is no
direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or
members of his immediate family as defined in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 268A,
Section 1, in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.
Section 5. Non-applicability
Sections 1 through 4 inclusive, shall not apply to the following licenses and permits:
A. Open burning (MGL Chapter 48 Section 13)
B. Sale of articles for charitable purposes (MGL Chapter 101 Section 33)
C. Children work permits (MGL Chapter 149 Section 69)
D. Clubs, Associations dispensing food or beverage licenses (MGL Chapter 140 Section 21E)
E. Dog licenses (MGL Chapter 140 Section 137)
F. Fishing, hunting, trapping licenses (MGL Chapter 131 Section 12);
G. Marriage licenses (MGL Chapter 207 Section 28)
H. Theatrical events, public exhibition permits (MGL Chapter 140 Section 181)
I. Bicycle permits (MGL Chapter 85 Section 11A)”
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-53-
TOWN OF SHERBORN
PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION PLAN
(Added 1989; amended 1996, 1998, 2000, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2015; amended and restated 2009,
2017)
The Personnel Administration Plan for the Town of Sherborn, Commonwealth of Massachusetts
originally approved by the Town of Sherborn at its Annual Town Meeting held on April 25-26, 1988
pursuant to Section 4 of Chapter 20 of the General By-Laws of the Town of Sherborn, as amended, is
now fully amended and restated as the Personnel Administration Plan approved by the Town of
Sherborn at its Annual Town Meeting on April 25/27, 2017.
1. DEFINITIONS
As used in this Personnel Administration Plan, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
a. “Appointing Authority” has the meaning given in Section 1 of the By-Law.
b. “By-Law” shall mean the Personnel By-Law of the Town of Sherborn, as adopted and
amended from time to time as Chapter 20 of the By-Laws of the Town of Sherborn.
c. “Department” has the meaning given in Section 1 of the By-Law.
d. “Department Head” has the meaning given in Section 1 of the By-Law.
e. “Employee” has the meaning given in Section 1 of the By-Law.
f. “Employment” shall mean the time during which an Employee is actively employed by the
Town or is absent from active Employment as authorized pursuant to this Plan.
g. “Fiscal Year” shall mean the 12-month period beginning on July 1 and ending on the
following June 30.
h. “Job Classification Plan” shall mean Appendix A to this Plan, as amended from time to
time by the Personnel Board
i. “Plan” shall mean this Personnel Administration Plan, as amended from time to time in
accordance with the By-Law.
j. “Supervisor” shall mean a Department Head or any other position that directs an activity
or an Employee.
k. “Town” shall mean the Town of Sherborn, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
l. “Work Week” shall mean the period of time beginning at 12:00 a.m. on Sunday and ending
at 11:59 p.m. on the next Saturday.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-54-
2. APPLICATION
The Plan shall apply to all Departments and to all positions in the service of the Town to which
the By-Law is applicable, provided, however, that (a) the terms and conditions of Employment for
any Department Head or Police Department Superior Officer with whom the Select Board has
negotiated and entered into a written employment agreement or person covered by a collective
bargaining agreement shall be governed by the terms of that employment agreement or collective
bargaining agreement and (b) sections 11, 12, 13, 14, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28 and 30 of the Plan shall
apply to all Employees of the Town including elected or appointed Employees and Employees
subject to a collective bargaining agreement or who have entered into a written employment
agreement with the Town. If the Plan and a written employment or collective bargaining agreement
conflict, the written employment agreement or collective bargaining agreement shall govern but
solely to the extent of the conflict.
3. JOB CLASSIFICATIONS AND EMPLOYMENT CATEGORIES
Employees of the Town shall be designated as working in one of the Job Classifications listed in
the Job Classification Plan and be assigned to one of the following Employment Categories:
a. REGULAR FULL-TIME
Employees regularly scheduled to work at least 40 hours per Work Week are Regular Full-
Time Employees.
b. REGULAR PART-TIME
Employees regularly scheduled to work at least 20 hours per Work Week but not more than
39 hours per Work Week for no less than 10 consecutive months in any 12 consecutive
month period are Regular Part-Time Employees.
c. SUPPLEMENTAL PART-TIME
Employees regularly scheduled to work fewer than 20 hours per Work Week are
Supplemental Part-Time Employees.
d. CASUAL PART-TIME
Employees who work for the Town on an occasional basis and are paid an hourly rate for
such work are Casual Part-Time Employees.
e. TEMPORARY OR SEASONAL
Employees employed on a full-time or part-time basis for a specific short and defined
period of time not exceeding six (6) consecutive months in any one 12 consecutive month
period are Temporary or Seasonal Employees.
4. WORK HOURS AND PAY
a. Work Schedule: Employees are generally scheduled to work four (4) or five (5) days per
Work Week with their allotted hours distributed over the Work Week, based on the needs
of their Departments. An Employee who works six (6) or more hours in any one (1) day
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-55-
is scheduled for a one-half hour unpaid meal period. Daily and weekly work schedules
may be changed from time to time at the discretion of the Town, acting through the
Appointing Authority, to meet the varying needs of the Town. An Employee may be asked
to work more or fewer than eight (8) hours in any given day, and to work those hours
consecutively or with a break of several hours, depending on the Town’s needs.
b. Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) Status:
i. Non-Exempt: Non-exempt Employees will receive compensatory time for all hours
worked in any single Work Week in excess of their regularly scheduled hours. A nonexempt
Employee will accrue one (1) hour of compensatory time for every hour worked
in excess of his or her regular hours in any Work Week up to 40 hours and 1.5 hours
of compensatory time for each hour worked in excess of 40 in any Work Week.
Compensatory time must be approved by the Employee’s Supervisor, and Supervisors
must maintain written records of all additional hours worked. Such compensatory time
may be used in the same manner as vacation time. Employees must use accrued
compensatory time, if any, before using vacation time. When an Employee’s
Employment terminates for any reason, the Employee will be paid for all accrued,
unused compensatory time at the Employee’s hourly rate in effect at the time of his or
her termination.
ii. Exempt: Exempt Employees are salaried, and are expected to work the hours necessary
to complete their assignments in a professional manner. Department Heads may
exercise discretion in modifying schedules from time to time in recognition of excess
hours worked, provided that such scheduling changes do not result in increased payroll
expense.
Under the FLSA, Exempt Employees are paid on a “salary basis,” meaning that the
Employee regularly receives a predetermined amount of compensation each pay period.
The predetermined amount cannot be reduced because of variations in the quality or
quantity of the Employee’s work. Subject to exceptions listed below, an Exempt
Employee must receive the full salary for any Work Week in which the Employee
performs any work, regardless of the number of days or hours worked. Exempt
Employees do not need to be paid for any Work Week in which they perform no work.
Deductions from the pay of Exempt Employees will be made only in the following
circumstances: (1) an Exempt Employee is absent from work for one or more full days
for personal reasons other than sickness or disability and has used all of his or her
vacation and personal days; (2) an Exempt Employee is absent from work for one or
more full days due to sickness or disability, the Employee has used all of his or her sick
days, and the Employee is not eligible for short term disability pay; or (3) to offset
amounts Employees receive as jury duty fees, or for military pay. Also, the Town is
not required to pay the full salary in the first or last Work Week of Employment or for
Work Weeks in which an Exempt Employee takes unpaid leave under the Family and
Medical Leave Act (FMLA). In these circumstances, either partial day or full day
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-56-
deductions may be made. Nothing in this Section would prevent an Exempt Employee
from being demoted into another position or from having their employment terminated.
The Town’s policy is to comply with the salary basis requirements of the FLSA.
Therefore, any improper deduction may not be made from the salaries of Exempt
Employees. If an Employee believes that an improper deduction has been made from
his or her salary, the Employee should immediately report this information to the
Finance Director/Accountant or designee.
c. Improper Deductions: The Finance Director or his or her designee shall promptly
investigate reports of improper deductions. Employees shall be promptly reimbursed for
any improper deduction.
d. Work From Home:
i. General Rule: The Town does not permit Employees to self-determine a work-fromhome
schedule. Every Employee is expected to perform his or her work at the designated
workplace during their designated work hours.
ii. Exceptions to General Rule: From time to time, a Department Head may, however,
determine that working from home may be appropriate, on a temporary basis, for a
certain Employee. Work from home arrangements shall be assessed by the Town
Administrator on a case-by-case basis in a timely manner, focusing on the operational
needs of the Department. Approval to work from home in no way changes the terms
and conditions of Employment with the Town.
iii. Exception Request Procedure: If an Employee’s Department Head deems that working
from home is warranted, the Department Head shall file a written request with the Town
Administrator with as much advance notice as possible. The written request shall detail
the basis for, and the length of, the work-from-home request. The request must also
explain how an Employee working from home will perform all functions of his or her
position. If working from home requires the use of Town property, the written request
must include a written explanation of how the security, confidentiality and privacy of
the Town property will be maintained. The Town Administrator’s written approval or
disapproval of the request shall be final. If a Department Head does not follow the
process described in the Plan or does not accept the Town Administrator’s final
decision, the Town Administrator will send written notification of the Plan violation to
the Select Board and Personnel Board.
5. VACATIONS
a. All Regular Full-Time and Regular Part-Time Employees shall be eligible for vacation
days as follows:
? 10 vacation days per Fiscal Year in each of the first five (5) Fiscal Years of continuous
Employment;
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-57-
? 15 vacation days per Fiscal Year in each of the next five (5) Fiscal Years of continuous
Employment; and
? 20 vacation days per Fiscal Year in each of the Fiscal Years of continuous Employment
after 10 Fiscal Years of continuous Employment.
Vacation days shall be earned and accumulated pursuant to Schedule 1.
b. Eligibility Computation:
i. In determining vacation day credit pursuant to Schedule 1, an Employee shall be given
vacation day credit for a full month of Employment for the first month of Employment
if the date of commencement of Employment was on or before the 15th day of that
month. Likewise, the Employee will be given a full month of vacation credit when
determining his or her vacation day credit if the date of Employment termination is
after the 15th day of the month in which the termination of Employment occurs. Except
as provided in this subsection of the Plan, the computation of an Employee’s vacation
entitlement shall be made counting only full calendar months of consecutive
Employment toward the service required for eligibility.
ii. No Employee is eligible to use any vacation day credit until the Employee has been
employed by the Town for a least six (6) months.
iii. An Employee who terminates his or her Employment having earned and accumulated
but not used vacation day credit shall be eligible for payment for the earned and
accumulated vacation day credit at the time of his or her Employment termination. If
Employment is terminated because of an Employee’s death, the Town shall pay his or
her estate for the deceased Employee’s earned and accumulated vacation day credit as
of the date of death. Employees who have not been in the Town’s Employment for at
least six (6) months shall not be eligible for any vacation credit or payment for any
unused vacation days.
iv. Any Employee who is involuntarily called to fulfill his or her military service duty shall
receive payment for the vacation day credit on the date of his or her leaving the Town’s
active Employment as if he or she had terminated Employment on that date.
c. Vacation day credit shall not be cumulative from Fiscal Year to Fiscal Year except as
provided in the Plan. Employees entitled to two (2) weeks of vacation day credit may carry
over up to one (1) week of vacation day credit to the following Fiscal Year. Employees
with three (3) or more weeks of vacation day credit may carry over up to two (2) weeks of
vacation day credit to be taken in the following Fiscal Year. Vacation day credit not taken
in the Fiscal Year immediately following the Fiscal Year in which it was earned or in the
Fiscal Year to which it is carried over as provided in the Plan shall be forfeited. The
Finance Director/Accountant or his or her designee will notify the Employee’s Supervisor
and each Employee of his or her leave accumulation vacation day credit as of July 1 of
each Fiscal Year. The annual vacation day credit notice also shall advise the Employee of
the amount of vacation day credit that may be carried over and the amount that will be
forfeited if not taken within the Fiscal Year.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-58-
d. All Employees eligible for vacation days shall use vacation days in accordance with a
schedule mutually agreed upon by the Employee and his or her Supervisor or Department
Head. Employees are encouraged to use vacation days in full week increments. Each
Supervisor or Department Head shall establish notice and scheduling requirements
governing the scheduling of use of vacation days for the Employees in his or her respective
Departments.
e. A Regular Full-Time Employee shall be paid for vacation days at the per diem rate of pay
received by the Employee at the time a vacation day is used.
f. A Regular Part-Time Employees shall be paid during vacation days at the per diem rate of
pay received by the Employee at the time the Employee takes the vacation. The vacation
day credit granted to Part-Time Employees shall consist of the same percentage of the day
or vacation day that his or her Employment bears to full-time Employment.
6. HOLIDAYS
a. Regular Full-Time Employees shall be paid for each of the holidays set out in this
subsection of the Plan. Payment shall be at the Employee’s regular hourly rate or daily
rate as applicable. Paid holidays shall not be granted to Temporary, Casual Part-Time,
Supplemental Part-Time, or Seasonal Employees.
b. Regular Part-Time Employees shall be paid for each of the holidays set out in subsection
c. If a holiday does not fall on a Regular Part-Time Employee’s regularly scheduled work
day, the Regular Part-Time Employee will be given compensatory time on a pro-rata basis
in lieu of the paid holiday. The paid holiday granted to Part-Time Employees shall consist
of the same percentage of a day that his or her Employment bears to Full Time
Employment. A paid holiday that falls on a day which an Employee’s Department is
normally closed and Employees of the Department normally do not work shall be
celebrated on the regular work day for that Department that is closet in time to the actual
date on which the paid holiday falls.
c. Schedule of Paid Holidays: New Years Day, Memorial Day, Veterans Day, Martin Luther
King Day, Presidents Day, Patriots Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. The paid holiday schedule may be altered by the
Select Board at the beginning of a calendar year, provided that Employees are granted an
equivalent number of paid holidays.
7. SICK PAY
a. Regular Full-Time and Regular Part-Time Employees who have completed 30 days of
Employment shall accrue one (1) sick day for each month of Employment completed.
Employees may accumulate a maximum of sixty (60) sick days. Regular Part-Time
Employees shall be paid for sick days on a pro-rata basis, in the same proportion that their
regularly scheduled weekly hours bears to Full-Time Employment.
b. An Employee may use sick days for the following reasons: (i) absence due to an
Employee’s illness or injury; (ii) absence to care for an Employee’s spouse, child or parent,
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-59-
or to care for their spouse’s child or parent, due to illness or injury, or, (iii) absence up to
three (3) days per Fiscal Year for an uncategorized reason with the prior written approval
of his or her Department Head and the Town Administrator (a copy of such approval shall
be placed in the Employee’s personnel file)
c. An Employee may be required to provide his or his Supervisor, Department Head, or the
Town Administrator with a physician’s certificate of incapacity due to illness or injury
after three (3) consecutive working days of absence or after a series of repeated absences
within 60 calendar days. Such certification shall include, at a minimum, the date the illness
began or injury occurred and the probable date of the Employee’s return to work. The
Employee shall provide the requested physician’s certificate within five (5) working days
of the Town’s request. The Town Administrator shall also have the right to require that an
Employee be examined by a Town designated physician at the Town’s expense to
determine an Employee’s fitness for duty, and to ensure that he or she can safely perform
the essential functions of his or her position with or without a reasonable accommodation.
d. No payment will be made for accrued but unused sick pay at the end of a Fiscal Year or
upon termination of Employment.
e. Supplemental Part-Time, Casual Part-Time, Temporary and Seasonal Employees shall not
be entitled to paid sick days.
8. PERSONAL DAYS
Regular Full-Time and Regular Part-Time Employees shall be eligible for three (3) days of paid
personal time in any Fiscal Year for the purpose of attending to personal business that unavoidably
conflicts with the Employee’s work schedule. Regular Part-Time Employees shall be paid for
personal days on a pro-rata basis, in the same proportion that their regularly scheduled weekly
hours bears to full time Employment.
9. JURY DUTY LEAVE
An Employee who is summoned for jury duty shall be paid by the Town an amount equal to the
difference between the compensation he or she would normally earn and the compensation paid
by the court for any day on which the Employee is summoned for jury duty.
10. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
Any Regular Full-Time Employee or Regular Part-Time Employee is eligible for up to three (3)
paid days off with pay for the purpose of making arrangements for and attending the funeral of a
parent, parent-in-law, sister, brother, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, spouse, child, grandchild, stepchild
or his or her spouse’s grandparent or in special situations by obtaining the prior written
approval of the Department Head and the Town Administrator.
11. MILITARY LEAVE
Employees will be granted military leave in accordance with federal and state law.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-60-
12. FAMILY MEDICAL LEAVE ACT (FMLA) AND SERVICE MEMBER FAMILY LEAVE
a. FMLA Leave: The Town will grant a leave of absence to Employees who meet the
eligibility requirements described in this section of the Plan for: (1) the care of a child after
birth or adoption or placement with the Employee for foster care; (2) the care of a spouse,
child, or parent (each a “Family Member” for purposes of this section of the Plan) with a
serious health condition; (3) an Employee's own serious health condition; or (4) a “qualifying
exigency” arising because a Family Member is on or is called to active duty in the Armed
Forces in support of a military contingency operation (“FMLA Leave”). FMLA Leaves will
be granted for a period of up to twelve (12) Work Weeks in any rolling 12-month period, which
is measured backward from the date of an Employee’s qualifying FMLA event. Any FMLA
Leave used during the previous 12 months is subtracted from the Employee’s 12-week FMLA
allotment.
To be eligible for an FMLA Leave, an Employee must have completed at least one (1) full year
of service with the Town and have worked a minimum of 1,250 hours in the 12-month period
preceding the FMLA Leave.
If an Employee’s FMLA Leave is planned in advance, the Employee must provide the Town
Administrator with at least 30 days’ notice prior to the anticipated FMLA Leave date, using
the Town's official FMLA Leave Forms. FMLA Leave Forms must be obtained from the Town
Administrator. If the FMLA Leave is unexpected, the Employee should notify the Town
Administrator as far in advance of the anticipated FMLA Leave date as is practicable.
All Town benefits that operate on an accrual basis will continue to accrue during the paid
FMLA Leave period. However, such accruals will cease once the Employee is on unpaid leave
status. Employees will be required to use all available paid leaves during the FMLA Leave
period. Once such benefits are exhausted, the balance of the FMLA Leave will be without
pay. All group health benefits will continue during the FMLA Leave for so long as the
Employee continues regular Employee contributions to these plans.
Employees requesting a FMLA Leave to care for a covered Family Member with a serious
health condition may be required to provide medical certification to the Town Administrator
from the Family Member's physician attesting to the nature of the serious health condition,
probable length of time treatment will be required, and the reasons that the Employee is
required to care for the Family Member. Employees may also be required to provide additional
physician's statements at the Town Administrator’s request.
If an Employee expects to be or is absent for more than five (5) consecutive work days as a
result of the Employee’s own serious health condition (including pregnancy), the Employee
will be required to submit appropriate medical certification to the Town Administrator from
the Employee’s physician. Such certification must include, at a minimum, the date the
disability began or is expected to begin, a diagnosis, and the probable date of the Employee’s
return to work. During an FMLA Leave, Employees may also be required to provide the Town
Administrator with additional physician’s statements on request from the Town Administrator
attesting to the Employee’s continued disability and inability to perform the essential functions
of their position with or without reasonable accommodation.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-61-
Before an Employee will be permitted to return from FMLA Leave due to the Employee’s
serious health condition, the Employee will be required to present the Town Administrator
with a note from the Employee’s physician indicating that the Employee is capable of returning
to work and performing the essential functions of his or her position with or without reasonable
accommodation. If required, the Town Administrator will consider making reasonable
accommodation for any disability the Employee may have in accordance with applicable laws.
FMLA Leave taken to care for a newborn child, an adopted child, or for a child placed in the
Employee’s home for foster care, must be taken in consecutive Work Weeks. Leave taken for
any other reason may be taken consecutively, intermittently, or on a reduced work/leave
schedule based on certified medical necessity. In such instances, the Town Administrator will
follow applicable law in reviewing and approving such leave requests.
b. Service Member Family Leave: The Town Administrator acting on behalf of the Town
will also grant a leave of absence to Employees who meet the eligibility requirements described
below to care for a Family Member or next of kin who is undergoing medical treatment,
recuperation or therapy, is otherwise in outpatient status, or is otherwise on a temporary
disability retired list, for a serious injury or illness which was incurred in the line of duty and
which renders the service member unfit to perform the duties of the service member’s office,
grade, rank or rating. Eligible Employees may take up to 26 Work Weeks of Service Member
Family Leave in any rolling 12 month period (calculated the same way as FMLA Leave).
Employees cannot exceed a combined total of 26 Work Weeks of FMLA and Service Member
Family Leave in any 12-month period.
Employees who intend to take an FMLA Leave because of a qualifying exigency covered by
the Service Member Family Leave shall provide notice to the Town Administrator as soon as
is practicable. Employee requests for a Service Member Family Leave shall be supported by
a certification of the need for such leave.
c. Return from Leave: Upon return from FMLA or Service Member Family Leave, an eligible
Employee is entitled to be reinstated to his or her former position, or an equivalent position
with equivalent Employment benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of Employment.
Exceptions to this reinstatement requirement may apply if circumstances have changed (e.g.,
if the Employee's position is no longer available due to a job elimination.)
To the extent any provision in this Plan conflicts with the provisions of the FMLA, the terms
of the FMLA shall prevail.
13. SMALL NECESSITIES LEAVE
Employees who are eligible for FMLA Leave are also eligible for Small Necessities Leave. An
eligible Employee (as defined in the FMLA Leave policy described above) is entitled to a total of
24 hours of Small Necessities Leave during a rolling 12-month period, which is measured
backward from the date of an Employee’s Small Necessities Leave event. Any Small Necessities
Leave used during the previous 12 months is subtracted from the Employee’s 24-hour Small
Necessities Leave allotment. In addition to FMLA Leave, Small Necessities Leave may be granted
for the following purposes:
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-62-
? To participate in activities directly related to the educational advancement of a son or
daughter of the Employee, such as parent-teacher conferences or interviewing for a new
school;
? Accompanying a son or daughter of the Employee to routine medical or dental
appointments, such as check-ups or vaccinations; and
? Accompanying an elderly relative of the Employee to routine medical or dental
appointments or appointments for other professional services related to the elder’s care,
such as interviewing at nursing or group homes.
Employees will be required to use all available paid leaves during the Small Necessities Leave
period. Once exhausted, the balance of the Small Necessities Leave will be without pay.
Employees may take Small Necessities Leave intermittently or through a reduced work schedule.
If the necessity for Small Necessities Leave is foreseeable, the Employee must provide the Town
Administrator with not less than seven (7) calendar days’ advance written notice before the date
on which Small Necessities Leave is to begin. If the necessity for Small Necessities Leave is not
foreseeable, the Employee shall provide such notice as is practicable.
14. PARENTAL LEAVES OF ABSENCE
Full-time Employees who do not qualify for an FMLA Leave or who have used all of their FMLA
leave and who have been employed by the Town for at least three consecutive months may request
a Parental Leve of Absence for the purpose of giving birth, adopting a child under the age of
eighteen, or adopting a child under the age of twenty-three if the child is mentally or physically
disabled.
Leave requests must be made in writing at least two weeks in advance of the date the Employee
would like the leave to begin or, in emergency situations, with as much advance notice as is
practicable.
Parental Leaves of Absence will be unpaid and may be taken for up to eight (8) Work Weeks.
However, an Employee may elect to use available paid leave time. Employees will not accrue
additional paid leave time during a Parental Leave of Absence.
An Employee on Parental Leave must give the Town Administrator written notice of his or her
intention to return to work, at least two (2) calendar weeks before the end of the eight (8) Work
Week leave period. An Employee who returns from Parental Leave by the end of the eight (8)
Work Week period will be reinstated to the same position in which he/she worked prior to leave,
or a similar position with similar status and pay.
When applicable, FMLA leave and parental leave may be applied and used concurrently.
15. ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE
An Employee may submit a written request for up to three (3) days of unpaid Administrative Leave
during each Fiscal Year. The Town Administrator may grant the Employee administrative leave
for reasons that are jointly determined to be in the best interest of the Town. An Employee may
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-63-
submit a written request for up to three (3) days of unpaid Administrative Leave during each Fiscal
Year. The Town Administrator may grant the Employee administrative leave for reasons that are
jointly determined to be in the best interest of the Town.
16. GROUP INSURANCE
The Town offers Regular Full-Time Employees and Regular Part-Time Employees a group life
insurance plan and group health insurance plan.
17. RETIREMENT
Pursuant to and in accordance with the applicable sections of M.G. L. Chapter 32, all Regular Full-
Time and certain Regular Part-Time Employees who are under age 65 are required to join the
Middlesex County Retirement System (MCRS). This contributory benefit is funded jointly
through a mandatory payroll deduction and the Town.
18. PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
a. Annual Performance Evaluations: All Regular Full-Time and Regular Part-Time
Employees of the Town shall be evaluated annually on or before July 1 of each Fiscal Year.
Department Heads shall use the Employee Performance Evaluation Form issued by the Town
Administrator and shall submit completed Performance Evaluation Forms on or before
September 1 of each Fiscal Year to the Town Administrator.
b. Probationary Performance Evaluations: A newly hired Employee shall be evaluated, in
writing, by his or her Department Head after the completion of the applicable probationary
period (as defined and described in this Plan). If the probationary period (or any extension
thereof approved by the Town Administrator) ends between April 1 and July 1 of the Fiscal
Year, the first annual performance evaluation will take place the following Fiscal Year on or
before July 1. All completed Performance Evaluation Forms shall be submitted to the Town
Administrator within 30 days following the applicable probationary period.
c. All Performance Evaluations: The Employee and Department Head will each sign the
Performance Evaluation Form after the Employee’s evaluation is complete to signify their
agreement that the evaluation has been conducted. The Department Head shall give the
Employee a signed copy of the Performance Evaluation Form, retain a copy of the signed
Performance Evaluation Form, and forward a copy of the signed Performance Evaluation Form
to the Town Administrator for the Employee’s personnel file.
d. Performance Evaluations Forms shall be locked and maintained under the control of the
Town Administrator, acting as Human Resources Director. The Town Administrator’s
personnel file (including Performance Evaluation Forms) shall be maintained in a locked file
at Town Hall under the control of the Select Board.
19. POSITION RECLASSIFICATION
a. All position reclassifications and related job description changes and pay rate adjustments
shall be documented in an approved Personnel Action Form.
b. No position may be reclassified either higher or lower, until:
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-64-
i. the Town Administrator has determined that such a reclassification will be consistent
with the By-Law, the Job Classification Plan, and the operational needs of the Town
and,
ii. the Personnel Board has approved the reclassification.
20. HIRING
a. All new hires must be initiated by submitting the Town’s Personnel Requisition Form. A
job description approved by the Appointing Authority, the Town Administrator, and the
Personnel Board must be attached to the Personnel Requisition Form prior to the
announcement of the job opening. Compensation for the position must be consistent with
Section 21 of this Plan. Failure to complete the Town’s Personnel Requisition Form may delay
or nullify an applicant’s Employment.
b. Job openings must be published at least once in a local paper of general circulation and/or
a municipal publication, and posted on the Town’s website and Town Hall Bulletin Board at
least 14 calendar days prior to the job being filled, unless exigent circumstances require that
the position be filled in a shorter timeframe. The announcement will include at least job title,
pay range, summary of job duties, application deadline, and instructions on how to apply.
c. An applicant shall complete the Town’s Application for Employment prior to being
interviewed. For a period of no less than 12 months after the job has been filled, the Appointing
Authority shall retain all materials submitted by the applicant, all of the Applications for
Employment and associated records concerning the position and filling of the position. The
Applications for Employment and related records shall be available for review at any time by
the Town Administrator upon request during the 12 month period after the job has been filled.
d. Prior to offering Employment to an applicant on behalf of the Town, the Appointing
Authority shall submit a copy of the applicant’s Application for Employment and a draft
Employment Offer Letter to the Town Administrator utilizing the Personnel Action Form.
With this submission, the Appointing Authority shall: report the number of responses received;
the number of applicants determined to be qualified; the number of applicants interviewed;
and, where/when and by whom the interviews were conducted.
e. All hires must be in compliance with M.G.L. Chapter 268A, Conduct of Public Officials
and Employees.
f. The Town reserves the right to conduct layoffs or eliminate positions due to budget
constraints, reorganization, or other operational needs. Under such circumstances, the
Employee will be given written notice from the Town Administrator. In the event that a
position is restored within one (1) Fiscal Year, the Employee will be notified of the callback
opportunity. The Employee must notify the Town whether he or she will accept the callback
within three (3) business days. For a period of one (1) Fiscal Year, an Employee who had his
or her position eliminated or is involved in a layoff, will be given preference in hiring processes
involving Town positions for which the Employee meets minimum qualifications.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-65-
21. PAY AND SALARY SCHEDULE
a. The Town endeavors to set competitive pay rates for each Town job that are comparable
to pay rates for comparable work in similarly situated towns. Pay rates also take into
consideration comparable Town positions and the Town’s budgetary constraints.
b. The job classification for each job covered by the Plan is set forth in the Job Classification
Plan.
c. The pay rate for each classification or job within a classification shall be determined by the
Personnel Board in conjunction with the Town’s budgetary process.
22. PROBATIONARY PERIOD FOR NEW HIRES
a. New Hires: The probationary period for newly hired Employees shall be six months. A
probationary period may be extended for up to an additional six (6) months upon request to
and approval by the Town Administrator using the Personnel Action Form. A copy of the
approved probationary period extension shall be provided to the employee in writing. A
probationary period may be established for up to one (1) Fiscal Year from the date of
Employment at the discretion of the Appointing Authority.
b. Other Actions: A six-month probationary period shall also be implemented when an
Employee’s job is combined or reclassified, or an Employee is reassigned or voluntarily
transfers to a new job.
23. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY
a. Equal Employment Opportunity Policy: The Town provides equal employment
opportunities to all Employees and applicants for Employment without regard to race, color,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, genetic information, status as
a veteran or as a member of the military or status in any group protected by applicable federal
or state laws. This policy applies to all terms and conditions of Employment, including hiring,
placement, promotion, termination, layoff, recall, transfer, leaves of absence, compensation
and training.
The Town expects that all Employees will treat one another with respect and cooperation. The
Town expressly prohibits any form of unlawful Employee discrimination or harassment based
on race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, genetic
information, status as a veteran or a member of the military, or status in any group protected
by applicable federal or state law. The purpose of this equal employment opportunity policy is
not to regulate Employees' personal morality but rather to ensure that interference with the
ability of a Town Employee to perform his or her expected job duties is not tolerated and may
be cause for termination by the Appointing.
b. Equal Employment Opportunity Complaint Procedure: Supervisors and Department Heads
are responsible for creating an atmosphere free of discrimination and harassment, and
Employees are responsible for respecting the rights of their coworkers.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-66-
If an Employee experiences any job-related discrimination or harassment based on his or her
race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, national origin, age, disability, veteran or military
status, or status in any group protected by applicable law, or believes that he/she has been
treated in an unlawful, discriminatory manner, the Employee should report the incident in
writing to the Town Administrator.
When the Town Administrator receives a complaint, the Town Administrator shall report to
the Chair of the Personnel Board that a complaint has been made. The Chair and the Town
Administrator shall jointly determine, on a case by case basis, whether the Town Administrator
will conduct the investigation. The complaint will be promptly investigated in a fair and
expeditious manner. The investigation will be conducted in such a way as to maintain
confidentiality to the extent practicable under the circumstances. The investigation will
include a private interview with the complainant, the person about whom the complaint has
been made and with witnesses as necessary.
When the investigation is completed, the Town Administrator may seek additional advice as
appropriate. The Town Administrator or designee shall present the findings and conclusions
about the facts of the matter in writing to the Employee and to the Chair of the Personnel Board.
Thereafter, the appropriate Department Head will, to the extent appropriate, be informed of the
complaint and the investigation results by Town Administrator. The Town Administrator will
review recommended personnel actions, up to and including termination, with the Department
Head and appropriate parties.
If the complaint filed pursuant to this section involves the Town Administrator, the Employee
will report the matter to the Chair of the Personnel Board. The Chair shall then consult with
Town Counsel and the Chair of the Select Board on a proper course of action, which may
include designating Town Counsel, an outside party, or other member of the Personnel Board
to promptly investigate the matter in a manner consistent with the procedures set forth in the
previous subsections of this section. The findings of the investigation shall be submitted to the
Chair of the Personnel Board and to the Chair of the Select Board.
The Town prohibits any form of retaliation against an Employee for filing a bona fide
complaint under this equal employment opportunity policy or for assisting in a complaint
investigation. However, if, after investigating any complaint of unlawful discrimination or
harassment, the Town Administrator determines that an Employee has knowingly provided
false information regarding the complaint, disciplinary action may be taken against the
individual who filed the complaint or who knowingly provided false information. Disciplinary
action may be taken, up to and including termination.
24. SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY AND COMPLAINT PROCEDURE
a. Introduction: The Town’s goal is to promote a workplace that is free of sexual harassment.
Sexual harassment of Employees occurring in the workplace or in other settings in which
Employees may find themselves in connection with their Employment is unlawful and will not
be tolerated by the Town. Further, any retaliation against an individual who has complained
about sexual harassment or retaliation against individuals for cooperating with an investigation
of a sexual harassment complaint is similarly unlawful and will not be tolerated. To achieve
our goal of providing a workplace free from sexual harassment, the conduct that is described
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-67-
in this policy will not be tolerated, and the Town has provided a procedure by which
inappropriate conduct will be dealt with, if encountered by Employees.
The Town takes allegations of sexual harassment seriously. The Town will respond promptly
to complaints of sexual harassment, and where it is determined that such inappropriate conduct
has occurred, it will act promptly to eliminate the conduct and impose such corrective action
as is necessary, including disciplinary action where appropriate. An Employee may be placed
on administrative leave pending investigation.
This sexual harassment policy sets forth the Town’s goals of promoting a workplace that is
free of sexual harassment. The sexual harassment policy is not designed or intended to limit
its authority to discipline or take remedial action for workplace conduct which it deems
unacceptable, regardless of whether that conduct satisfies the definition of sexual harassment
set forth below.
b. Definition of Sexual Harassment: In Massachusetts, the following legal definition applies:
“Sexual harassment” means sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and verbal or physical
conduct of a sexual nature when:
(a) Submission to or rejection of such advances, requests or conduct is made either
explicitly or implicitly a term or condition of Employment or as a basis for Employment
decisions; or,
(b) Such advances, requests or conduct have the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual’s work performance by creating an intimidating, hostile,
humiliating or sexually offensive work environment.
Under these definitions, direct or implied requests by any person employed by the Town for
sexual favors in exchange for actual or promised job benefits such as favorable reviews, salary
increases, promotions, increased benefits, or continued Employment constitutes sexual
harassment.
In addition to the above examples, other sexually oriented conduct, whether it is intended or
not, that is unwelcome and has the effect of creating a workplace environment that is hostile,
offensive, intimidating or humiliating to the Town’s Employee or Employees may also
constitute sexual harassment.
While it is not possible to list all those additional circumstances that may constitute sexual
harassment, the following are some examples of conduct which if unwelcome, may constitute
sexual harassment depending upon the totality of the circumstances including the severity of
the conduct and its pervasiveness:
? Unwelcome sexual advances - whether they involve physical touching or not;
? Sexual epithets, jokes, written or oral references to sexual conduct, gossip regarding one’s
sex life, comment on an individual’s body, comment about an individual’s sexual activity,
deficiencies or prowess;
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-68-
? Displaying sexually suggestive objects, pictures, cartoons;
? Unwelcome leering, whistling, brushing against the body, sexual gestures, suggestive or
insulting comments related to sexual harassment;
? Inquiries into one’s sexual experiences; and,
? Discussion of one’s sexual activities.
All Employees should take special note that, as stated above, retaliation against an individual
who has complained about sexual harassment and retaliation against individuals for
cooperating with an investigation of a sexual harassment complaint is unlawful and will not be
tolerated by the Town.
c. Complaints of Sexual Harassment: If any Town Employee believes that he or she has been
subjected to sexual harassment, the Employee has the right to file a complaint with the Town.
The complaint should be in writing and submitted to the Town Administrator.
The Town Administrator is also available to discuss any concerns the Employee may have and
to provide information to the Employee about the Town’s policy on sexual harassment and its
complaint process.
d. Sexual Harassment Investigation: When the Town Administrator receives a complaint, the
Town Administrator shall report to the Chair of the Personnel Board that a complaint has been
made. The Chair and the Town Administrator shall jointly determine, on a case by case basis,
whether the Town Administrator will conduct the investigation. The complaint will be
promptly investigated. in a fair and expeditious manner. The investigation will be conducted
in such a way as to maintain confidentiality to the extent practicable under the circumstances.
The investigation will include a private interview with the person filing the complaint, the
person about whom the complaint has been made, if possible, and with witnesses as necessary.
When the investigation is completed, the Town Administrator may seek additional advice as
appropriate. The Town Administrator or designee shall present the findings and conclusions
about the facts of the matter in writing to the Employee and to the Chair of the Personnel Board.
Thereafter, the appropriate Department Head will, to the exent appropriate, be informed of the
complaint and the investigation results by the Town Administrator. The Town Adminstrator
will review recommended personnel actions, up to and including termination, with the
Department Head and appropriate parties involved in the complaint.
In the event the complaint filed pursuant to this section involves the Town Administrator, the
Employee will report the matter to the Chair of the Personnel Board. The Chair shall then
consult with Town Counsel and the Chair of the Select Board on a proper course of action,
which may include designating Town Counsel, an outside party, or other member of the
Personnel Board to promptly investigate the matter in a manner consistent with the procedures
set forth in the previous subsections of this section. The findings of the investigation shall be
submitted to the Chair of the Personnel Board and to the Chair of the Select Board.
If it is determined that the Town Administrator is in violation of the Town’s sexual harassment
policy, the Select Board will act promptly to eliminate the offending conduct, and if
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-69-
appropriate, the Select Board may also impose disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
e. State and Federal Remedies: In addition to the above, if an Employee believes that he or
she has been subjected to sexual harassment, the Employee may file a formal complaint with
either or both of the government agencies set forth below. Using the Town’s complaint process
does not prohibit Employees from filing a complaint with these agencies. Contact each agency
directly to get information on time constraints for filing a claim.
1. The United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC”)
For more information visit:
https://www.eeoc.gov/employees/charge.cfm/
1. The Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (“MCAD”)
For more information visit:
http://www.mass.gov/cad/filing-complaint/
For more information visit:
http://www.mass.gov/,cad/filing-complaint/
25. INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES
The Town complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and applicable state law
providing for nondiscrimination in Employment against qualified individuals with disabilities.
The Town also provides reasonable accommodation for such individuals in accordance with
disability laws. Qualified individuals with disabilities may make requests for reasonable
accommodation to the Town Administrator.
26. ABSENTEEISM AND TARDINESS
If an Employee is unable to work as scheduled, the Employee must notify his or her Supervisor
prior to the start of the work day whenever possible. Failure to properly notify your Supervisor
results in an unexcused absence. If an Employee is absent for more than three (3) consecutive
work days, a statement from the Employee’s physician may be requested by the Town
Administrator before the Employee will be permitted to return to work.
Absenteeism or tardiness that is unexcused or excessive in the judgment of the Appointing
Authority is grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. An Employee’s absence
from work without contacting his or her Supervisor for three (3) consecutive days may be
considered job abandonment and result in termination.
27. SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY
No Employee may work or be on Town premises in an official capacity if he or she is using or is
under the influence of alcohol, marijuana or drugs, unless such use involves prescription
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-70-
medication determined by the Town Administrator to be legal and permissible under the
circumstances. Employees also may not use alcohol, marijuana, or drugs when conducting Town
business away from the workplace. No Employee may possess, purchase, sell or distribute drugs
or marijuana during work hours, on Town property, or while representing the Town in any manner.
Violations of this substance abuse policy are grounds for disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
28. EMPLOYEE CONDUCT POLICY
All Employees must abide by the policies, practices and instructions of the Town and its
Supervisors and Department Heads. The Town expects Employees to treat co-workers and
Supervisors with respect. The Town does not tolerate conduct that is illegal or dishonest.
The Town cannot anticipate every form of misconduct that might call for discipline or dismissal.
In addition to the other sections of the Plan related to misconduct, the following are unacceptable
conduct:
i. Theft, destruction, misuse or willful abuse of property belonging to the Town or another
Employee.
ii. Possession of a weapon or misuse of an object of any kind in a manner to harm, threaten,
or intimidate other Employees.
iii. Insubordinate conduct (refusal or deliberate failure to comply with job-related
requirements given by an Employee’s Supervisor or Department Head).
iv. Falsification of any records or making a misrepresentation of authority.
v. Job abandonment.
vi. Violating the public trust to the extent that adversely affects the operation of the Town.
Although the Town reserves the right to decide appropriate discipline, any of the misconduct listed
above generally results in termination of Employment.
29. PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT PROCESS
Although the Town maintains the right to terminate an Employee’s Employment at any time and
to select the form of discipline it considers most appropriate at the time, the Town believes that
each Employee generally deserves the opportunity to improve his or her performance if his or her
Department Head has determined that his or her performance is unsatisfactory but has a likelihood
of improvement. The improvement process adopted by the Town consists of a Written Warning
Memorandum, which will be given to the Employee and will outline each job duty that requires
improvement. A Written Warning Memorandum must include the Personnel Action Form to
ensure it is added to the Employee’s personnel file.
If a Department Head believes that an Employee’s performance is unsatisfactory and determines
to use this performance improvement process, the Employee will be informed of the unsatisfactory
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-71-
performance, have an opportunity to discuss the situation with the Department Head, and be given
an appropriate time period (not to exceed 90 days) to demonstrate improvement.
If the Employee’s performance is still unsatisfactory after the end of the applicable time period,
the Employee may be terminated.
In some situations, termination of Employment may be warranted at any time during the
performance improvement process or without implementation of the performance improvement
process.
Nothing in this Plan should be construed to change an Employee’s status as an at-will Employee
whose Employment may be terminated at the will of the Appointing Authority.
30. SOCIAL MEDIA/SOCIAL NETWORKING POLICY
The Town recognizes that Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, blogs, web sites, YouTube, wiki, and
other social networking and online forums (collectively, “Social Media”) are an integral part of
how we communicate, both personally and professionally. The Town does not intend to infringe
on its Employees’ personal interaction or commentary using Social Media or restrict First
Amendment or other legal rights but the Town has an interest in protecting its reputation,
Employees and residents.
Employees are expected to comply with the Plan when using Social Media. For example, an
Employee’s use of Social Media violates the Plan when the Employee purposely posts misleading
commentary or misrepresentations; displays content or images that violate community standards
or are pornographic; or posts harassing or discriminatory comments that are sent to or discovered
by other Employees and could create a hostile work environment. Employees must know that their
Social Media activity, even when used personally may violate the Town’s Equal employment
opportunity policy or sexual harassment policy set forth in this Plan and may be grounds for
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-72-
Appendix A
Positions Within Job Classifications*
Exempt Positions
Job Classification I
Chief of Police
Fire Chief
Director of DPW
Job Classification II
Deputy Assessor
Town Accountant
Deputy Fire Chiefs
Library Director
Health Director
Police Lieutenant
Job Classification III
Facilities Manager
Clerk of the Works
Assistant Town Officers
Town Planner
Fire Captains & Lieutenants
Inspectors
Board of Health Administrator
Librarians
COA Director
Conservation Agent
Water Front Director
Non Exempt Positions
Job Classification IV
Administrative Assistants
Viewing/Assessors
Animal Control
Job Classification V
Head Life Guard
Life Guards
Reservation Ranger
Swim Instructors
Elder Advocate COA
Program Coordinator COA
Volunteer Coordinator COA
Library Senior Assistants
Job Classification VI
Clerks
Financial Clerks
Tax Clerk
Library Junior Assistants
Library Aides
Gate Guards
Farm Pond Aides
Town of Sherborn Personnel Administration Plan
-73-
Appendix B
TOWN OF SHERBORN
DAYS OF VACATION ACCUMULATION PER MONTH
FOR EACH FISCAL YEAR (BEGINNING WITH THE YEAR OF HIRE)
BASED ON MONTH OF HIRE
<-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------FISCAL YEAR---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MONTH 1 2,3,4 5 6 7,8,9 10 11 12+
OF HIRE ---------- -------- ------------------------- ----------------------- --------- ------------------------- ------------------------- ---------
(a) (b) (c) (b) (c) (b) (c) (b) (c)
------------ -------- --------- -------- -------- -------- -------- --------- ---------- --------
Jul 0.8334 0.8334 1.2500 0.8334 1.2500 1.2500 1.2500 1.6667 1.2500 1.6667 1.6667 1.6667
Aug 0.8182 0.8334 1.2500 0.8334 1.2500 1.2500 1.2500 1.6667 1.2500 1.6667 1.6667 1.6667
Sep 0.8000 0.8334 1.1667 0.8334 1.2500 1.1667 1.2500 1.5834 1.2500 1.6667 1.5834 1.6667
Oct 0.7778 0.8334 1.1667 0.8334 1.2500 1.1667 1.2500 1.5834 1.2500 1.6667 1.5834 1.6667
Nov 0.8750 0.8334 1.0834 0.8334 1.2500 1.0834 1.2500 1.5000 1.2500 1.6667 1.5000 1.6667
Dec 0.8572 0.8334 1.0834 0.8334 1.2500 1.0834 1.2500 1.5000 1.2500 1.6667 1.5000 1.6667
Jan 0.8334 0.8334 1.0000 0.8334 1.2500 1.0000 1.2500 1.4167 1.2500 1.6667 1.4167 1.6667
Feb 0.8000 0.8334 1.0000 0.8334 1.2500 1.0000 1.2500 1.4167 1.2500 1.6667 1.4167 1.6667
Mar 0.7500 0.8334 1.0000 0.8334 1.2500 1.0000 1.2500 1.4167 1.2500 1.6667 1.4167 1.6667
Apr 0.6667 0.8334 0.9167 0.8334 1.2500 0.9167 1.2500 1.3334 1.2500 1.6667 1.3334 1.6667
May 1.0000 0.8334 0.9167 0.8334 1.2500 0.9167 1.2500 1.3334 1.2500 1.6667 1.3334 1.6667
Jun 1.0000 0.8334 0.8334 0.8334 1.2500 0.8334 1.2500 1.2500 1.2500 1.6667 1.2500 1.6667
Vacation must be taken in full days which are determined by rounding accumulated days up or down. (.5 rounded up, less than .5
rounded down). For contracted employment at less than 40 hours per week, vacation days are determined by multiplying days
above by the ratio of contracted employment to 40 hours.
(a) Month of hire for which employee receives credit per Section 5(c)(i).
(b) Accumulation for determination of next July 1 entitlement. This entitlement will be reduced by any days earned and taken in
accordance with (c).
(c) Accumulation for determination of days earned since date of last July 1 entitlement and eligible to be taken and/or paid in
accordance with Section 5(c).
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-74-
SPECIAL ACTS OF THE GENERAL COURT
RELATING TO THE TOWN OF SHERBORN
1792 (3 Mass. Special Laws, 343) An Act ascertaining the boundary line between the Town
of Medway and the Town of Sherburne.
1819 Chapter 95. An Act to annex John W. Perry, with his family and estate to the Town
of Natick.
1852 Chapter 172. An Act to change the name of the Town of Sherburne.
1871 Chapter 141. An Act to incorporate the Sherborn and South Natick Railroad
Company.
Chapter 179. An Act to incorporate the Sawin Academy in Sherborn.
1874 Chapter 261. An Act in addition to an Act to incorporate the Sawin Academy in
Sherborn.
1875 Chapter 63. An Act to change the name of the Second Parish in Sherborn.
1877 Chapter 104. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to appropriate money in aid
of Sawin Academy.
1885 Chapter 215. An Act providing for the removal of the remains of the dead from the
cemetery on the Joseph Sanger estate in Sherborn.
1890 Chapter 273. An Act to annex part of the Town of Sherborn to the Town of
Framingham.
1893 Chapter 346. An Act to authorize the Natick Electric Street Railway Company to
extend its railway, increase its capital stock and acquire by purchase the railways,
franchises and property of certain railway corporations.
1908 Chapter 466. An Act relative to Farm Pond in the Town of Sherborn.
1909 Chapter 253. An Act relative to Farm Pond in the Town of Sherborn.
1911 Chapter 100. An Act relative to the maintenance of a high school in the Town of
Sherborn.
1913 Chapter 814. An Act to provide for the improvement of Beaver Dam Brook in the
Towns of Ashland, Framingham, Sherborn, and Natick.
Chapter 194. An Act to authorize the restoration by the Town of Sherborn of certain
funds for the perpetual care of cemetery lots.
Chapter 193. An Act to authorize payment of a certain note by the Town of Sherborn.
1914 Chapter 65. An Act to authorize the Town of Sherborn to reimburse George P. Carter
for loss sustained by the non-sale of milk.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-75-
Chapter 66. An Act to authorize the Town of Sherborn reimburse Irving C. Hildreth
for loss sustained by the non-sale of milk.
Chapter 117. An Act to authorize the Town of Sherborn to supply itself and its
inhabitants with water.
Chapter 463. An Act relative to the authority of the Town of Sherborn to supply itself
and its inhabitants with water.
Chapter 705. An Act to provide for the construction of a bridge and its approaches
over the Charles River in the Towns of Medfield and Sherborn.
Chapter 764. An Act to provide for the relocating of certain public ways in Sherborn
and Framingham near the reformatory for women.
1916 Chapter 355. An Act to authorize the Old Colony Railroad Company, the New York,
New Haven and Hartford Railroad Company, lessee, to construct and operate a railroad
upon the lands of the Commonwealth in Framingham and Sherborn.
1924 Chapter 235. An Act to annex a part of the Town of Sherborn to the Town of
Framingham. (Accepted May 31, 1924)
1927 Chapter 338. An Act relative to the use of the water of Farm Pond in the Town of
Sherborn by the Medfield State Hospital.
1935 Chapter 304. An Act relative to the control of Farm Pond in the Town of Sherborn.
1946 Chapter 354. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to use certain playground
property for fire station purposes.
Chapter 374. An Act providing for the laying out of an area for the parking of vehicles
contiguous to Farm Road in the Town of Sherborn and providing for the establishment
of a right of way for pedestrians and certain vehicles to Little Pond in said Town.
1950 Chapter 202. An Act to authorize the Town of Sherborn to borrow money for school
purposes.
1957 Chapter 472. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to transfer certain land parcels
held a public domain in exchange for certain other lands. (Accepted March 10, 1958)
1958 Chapter 683. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to refund a portion of the real
estate and personal property taxes assessed in the year Nineteen hundred and fiftyseven.
1960 Chapter 144. An Act relating to the Dover-Sherborn Regional School District and
validating proceedings relating thereto. (Accepted March 7, 1960)
1963 Chapter 200. An Act to authorize the Towns of Sherborn and Natick to enter into
agreements relative to dumping facilities.
1968 Chapter 616. An Act authorizing the Commissioner of Correction to transfer and
convey certain land to the Town of Sherborn.
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-76-
1971 Chapter 88. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to hold Town Meetings at the
Dover-Sherborn Regional School in Dover.
1973 Chapter 862. An Act relating to the Regional Vocational-Technical School District
and validating proceedings relating thereto. (Accepted Annual Town Meeting, May 14,
1973)
1975 Chapter 808. An Act regulating the Zoning Enabling Act. (3 year term)
1978 Chapter 283. An Act validating certain proceedings by the Town of Sherborn at the
1978 Town Meeting regarding the newspaper legal notice of the Public Hearing held
by the Planning Board on the Zoning By-Law amendments.
1979 Chapter 424. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to transfer certain land in said
Town to the control of the Select Board and to convey said land to Sherborn
Community Housing, Inc. for the purpose of providing certain elderly housing
facilities.
1981 Chapter 332. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to borrow money to provide
certain programs for elderly persons. (Woodhaven Bonding)
Chapter 548. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to establish a Special Fund
for the payment of accumulated, unused sick leave granted pursuant to collective
bargaining agreements entered into by the Town.
1986 Chapter 415. An Act authorizing the reimbursement of Call Fire and Call Ambulance
Personnel in the Town of Sherborn for Certain Medical Expenses.
1991 Chapter 456. An Act relative to the use of a certain parcel of land in the Town of
Sherborn. (Elderly & Affordable Housing)
1992 Chapter 43. An Act authorizing the town to permit the use of certain town land for
a communication system. (Brush Hill)
1995 Chapter 279. An Act relative to the use of a certain parcel of land in the Town of
Sherborn. (Sherborn Housing Partnership)
1997 Chapter 198. An Act authorizing Francis A. Heffron to extend his employment with
the Fire Department of the Town of Sherborn.
2000 Chapter 127. An Act validating the proceedings of the Annual Town Election in the
Town of Sherborn.
2001 Chapter 153. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to convey certain town forest
land. (140 Hunting Lane)
2001 Chapter 154. An Act relative to certain Conservation Lands in the Town of Sherborn.
(Ward Park/Laurel Farms)
2010 Chapter 212. An Act making a technical correction in a Special Act relative to
certain land in the Town of Sherborn. (Correction to Acts of 2001 Chapter 154)
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-77-
2009 Chapter 260. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to use certain Town Forest
Land. (Land swap for the Pine Hill Access Road)
2010 Chapter 279. An Act conveying certain property to the Town of Sherborn (Farm
Pond water rights)
2011 Chapter 96. An Act validating the Sherborn Annual Town Election.
2011 Chapter 179. An Act authorizing the Town of Sherborn to lease certain land in
Sherborn Town Forest for the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining a
wireless telecommunications facility. (Farm Road and Lake Street)
2012 Chapter 93. An Act authorizing the Select Board of the Town of Sherborn to enter
into an employment contract for the position of police chief. (term not to exceed five
years)
2014 Chapter 190. An Act authorizing the Town Administrator of the Town of Sherborn to
approve warrants for the payment of Town funds.
2014 Chapter 298. An Act increasing the number of Selectmen in the Town of Sherborn
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-78-
STATUTES OF THE COMMONWEALTH
ACCEPTED BY THE TOWN OF SHERBORN
Chapter 32, §§ 1-28 Relative to a contributory retirement for Town Employees.
(November 5, 1946)
Chapter 32B (excepting §§ 7 Relative to contributory group insurance for certain Town
A, 8A, 9A, 9C, 9D, 9E, employees and their dependents. (March 2, 1964)
11A, 11B, 11D, and 11E)
Chapter 32B, § 9A Relative to contributory group insurance for certain retired
Town employees. (March 4, 1974)
Chapter 32B, § 9D Relative to payment by the Town of a portion of the group
health insurance premium costs for surviving spouses of
employees and retired employees. (April 27, 1998)
Chapter 32B, § 9F Relative to increasing retired employees' Life Insurance from
$1,000 to $2,000. (October 31, 1972)
Chapter 32B, § 11A Relative to additional group insurance for Town employees.
(March 1, 1971)
Chapter 32B, § 11B Relative to group insurance for elderly government retirees
and their dependents. (March 3, 1969)
Chapter 32B §18 Relative to retiree Medicare benefits. (April 26, 2006)
Chapter 32B §20 Relative to establishing OPEB trust fund. (April 29, 2010)
Chapter 32, § 85 H1/2 Relative to providing for increased Town benefits for disabled
volunteer firefighters. (April 25, 2000)
Chapter 39 §23D Relative to Mullin Rule for adjudicatory hearings. (April 30,
2009)
Chapter 40, § 4G Relative to inviting proposals for contracts of $4,000 or more.
Chapter 40, § 4J Relative to a statewide public safety mutual aid agreement
(February 17, 2011)
Chapter 40, § 4K Allowing the Town to enter into mutual aid agreements with
other cities or towns, to provide mutual aid programs for public
works departments. (February 17, 2011)
Chapter 40, § 6M Relative to repair of private ways, used by the public for six
or more years. (May 17, 1976)
Chapter 40, § 8B Relative to the establishment of a Council on Aging.
(October 2, 1972)
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-79-
Chapter 40, § 8C Relative to the establishment of a Conservation Commission.
(March 13, 1961)
Chapter 40, § 8D Relative to the establishment of an Historical Commission.
(March 14, 1973)
Chapter 40, § 8G Allowing towns to enter into mutual aid agreements with other
cities or towns, to provide mutual aid programs for police
departments. (March 14, 1973)
Chapter 40, § 15A Relative to the transfer of the care, custody, management and
control of the Dowse Memorial Library and the land on which
it stands to the Select Board for use as Town Offices and for
the Sherborn Historical Society. (March 8, 1971)
Chapter 40 § 22F Relative to fixing fees for licenses and permits (April 27, 1992)
Chapter 40 § 57 Relative to enabling the Town of Sherborn to deny any
application for, or revoke or suspend a building permit, or any
license or permit including renewals and transfers by any board,
officer, or department for any person, corporation or business
enterprise, who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes,
fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges. (April
24, 2018)
Chapter 40C, § 4 Relative to the establishment of an Historic District
Committee. (March 11, 1974)
Chapter 41 Relative to establishment of a Planning Board (July 9, 1940)
Chapter 41, § 1 To change the term of the Town Treasurer from ONE year
to THREE years. (March 14, 1973)
Chapter 41, § 1 To change the term of the Town Clerk from ONE year to
THREE years. (April 30, 1980)
Chapter 41, §§ 1 and 2 To establish and elect a Board of Health. (March 11, 1957)
Chapter 41, §38A Tax Collector change to Town Collector (April 17, 2015)
Chapter 41, § 81A Relative to terms of office for members of the Planning Board.
(May 17, 1976)
Chapter 41, § 97A Establishing a police department. (March 11, 1957)
Chapter 41 §100G¼ Relative to police/firefighter funeral expenses. (April 30,
2008)
Chapter 41, § 108L Relative to the providing of a career incentive program for
regular full-time police officers and partial reimbursement by
the Commonwealth. (March 13, 1972) (Rescinded April 27,
1981)
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-80-
Chapter 41, §110A Close Town Offices on Saturday (April 29, 2014)
Chapter 41, § 111B Relative to sick leave for Town employees. (March 9, 1954)
Chapter 44, § 53C Relative to the payment of police officers for off-duty work
details and the depositing and expenditure of funds related
thereto. (March 14, 1973)
Chapter 44, § 53C Relative to establishment of fund for off-duty police officer
details. (January 14, 1986)
Chapter 44, § 53D Relative to the creation of a revolving fund for the conduct of
self-supporting recreation and park services. (April 28, 1981)
(Rescinded April 2019)
Chapter 44, § 53E Relative to the offset of departmental expenses by estimated
user fees (April 27, 1998)
Chapter 44, § 55C Relative to the establishment of an Affordable Housing Trust
Fund & creating a Board of Trustees (April 2019)
Chapter 46 §12, Acts of 2003 Relative to call firefighters’ health benefits. (April 27, 2004)
(amending MGL 32B:2)
Chapter 48, §§ 42-44 Relative to the establishment of a Fire Department. (March 9,
1942)
Chapter 48 § 59A Allowing the Town to enter into mutual aid agreements with
other cities or towns, to provide mutual aid programs for Fire
departments. (February 17, 2011)
Chapter 54, § 1A Emergency election workers (April 28, 2008)
Chapter 54 § 16A Relative to appointment of election workers (April 29, 2008)
Chapter 59, § 5, Relative to increasing the $175.00 exemption amount annually
by 100% of the cost of living adjustment for clauses 17C and/or
17E. (April 23, 2002)
Chapter 59, § 5N Veterans’ Tax Abatement Program (October 17, 2014)
Chapter 59, § 5, cl. 17C Relative to certain exemptions from real estate taxes.
(May 4, 1982)
Chapter 59, § 5, cl. 17D Providing certain exemptions from real estate taxes for
surviving spouses or minors. (April 29, 1987)
Chapter 59, § 5, cl. 17E Relative to annually increase by the cost of living adjustment the
asset level that certain applicants must have to qualify for an
exemption. (April 23, 2002)
Chapter 59, § 5, cl. 37A Relative to real estate tax exemptions for blind persons.
(April 24, 1984)
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-81-
Chapter 59, § 5 cl. 41A Increase eligibility limits for seniors to defer property taxes
(April 27, 2010)
Chapter 59, § 5, cl. 41B Relative to real estate tax exemptions for certain elderly
persons. (April 24, 1984)
Chapter 59, § 5, cl. 41C Providing certain exemptions from real estate taxes for the
elderly. (April 29, 1987)
Chapter 59, § 5, cl. 41D Relative to annually increase by the cost of living adjustment
the income and asset levels that certain senior citizens must
have to qualify for an exemption. (April 23, 2002)
Chapter 59, § 57A Relative to payment of interest on unpaid taxes under $25.00.
(April 28, 1986) (Revoked 1989)
Chapter 59, § 57B Relative to interest on unpaid taxes under $50.00. (April 1989)
Chapter 59, § 57C Relative to establishing quarterly tax payment system
(April 2019)
Chapter 60, § 3D Relative to establishing a fund to defray real estate taxes of
elderly and disabled persons of low income. (April 25, 2000)
Chapter 64G, § 3A Relative to excise tax on lodging in local hotel, lodging house
or motel. (April 28, 1986)
Chapter 64L, § 2 Local Meals Tax (April 26, 2011)
Chapter 67 An Act designating certain streets in the Town of Sherborn as
scenic roads. (March 11, 1974)
Chapter 71, § 14 Relative to the creation of a Regional School District Planning
Committee. (October 2, 1972)
Chapter 71, §§ 16-16L Relative to forming a regional school district. (May 12, 1953)
Chapter 71, §§ 16-16L Relative to the establishment of a regional technical and
vocational school district. (May 14, 1973)
Chapter 71, § 71E Community School programs funds expenditures
(April 25, 2006)
Chapter 73 §4, Acts of 1986 Relative to exemption increase. (April 23, 2002)
(as amended by Chapter 126 Acts of 1988)
Chapter 73 §4, Acts of 1986 Relative to exemption increase. (April 24, 2007)
Chapter 90, § 18A Relative to the use of public ways by pedestrians.
(March 8, 1965)
Chapter 90, § 17C Establish speed limits of 20 and 25 mph (April 17, 2017)
Town of Sherborn General By-Laws
-82-
Chapter 90, § 20A 1/2 Relative to collection of fines for parking tickets.
(May 3, 1982)
Chapter 90, § 20C Relative to the control of illegally parked vehicles.
(March 11, 1968)
Chapter 114, §§ 22-27 Relative to the election and duties of the Board of Cemetery
Commissioners. (April 2, 1984)
Chapter 140, § 147A Relative to the enactment by the Town of by-laws regulating
dogs. (April 27, 1998)
Chapter 143 §3Z Relative to part-time Building Inspector (April 27, 2004)
Chapter 149, § 31 Relative to the eight hour day for certain employees of the
Town. (March 3, 1913)
Chapter 152, § 69 Relative to workmen's compensation for Town employees.
(December 17, 1945)
Chapter 181, Acts of 1995 Relative to exemption increase. (April 23, 2002)
(amending MGL 59:5)
Chapter 184 §51, Acts of 2002 Relative to age, income, asset adjustment. (April 29, 2003)
(amending MGL 59:5)
Chapter 188, § 13 (Acts of 1985), relative to supplementing compensation of
teachers. (January 14, 1986)
Chapter 258, § 13 Relative to indemnification of municipal officers up to
$1,000,000. (May 12, 1981)
Chapter 291, Acts of 1990 Relative to enhanced 911 services. (April 29, 1991)
Chapter 597, Acts of 1982 Relative to exemption from motor vehicle excise taxes for
former POW's. (April 24, 1984)
ZONING BY-LAWS
OF THE
TOWN OF SHERBORN
Note: The Town of Sherborn originally adopted a Zoning By-Law in 1937.
The By-Laws were re-codified in 1969. This document is based on the 1969
re-codification, with the date or dates of subsequent amendments indicated in
parentheses following the section or sections.
(Including changes made at the 2019 ATM)
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-2-
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-3-
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 GENERAL
1.1 Authority ....................................................................................................................... 1
1.2 Purpose .......................................................................................................................... 1
1.3 Basic Requirements ...................................................................................................... 1
1.4 Nonconforming Uses or Structures- ........................................................................... 1
1.4.1 Purpose ...................................................................................................................... 1
1.4.2 Continuation of Nonconformity ................................................................................ 1
1.4.3 Restoration ................................................................................................................ 2
1.4.4 Temporary Uses ........................................................................................................ 2
1.4.5 (Deleted 1994; see section 5.5.2 b)) ......................................................................... 2
1.4.6 Change, Alteration or Expansion .............................................................................. 2
1.4.7 Procedure .................................................................................................................. 2
1.5 Definitions ..................................................................................................................... 3
Accessory Buildings and Uses .................................................................................. 3
Average Lowest Finished Grade ............................................................................... 3
Building..................................................................................................................... 3
Building Line ............................................................................................................ 3
Common Driveway ................................................................................................... 4
Day Care Center ........................................................................................................ 4
Dwelling .................................................................................................................... 4
Dwelling Unit............................................................................................................ 4
Exempted Professional Usage................................................................................... 4
Farm .......................................................................................................................... 4
Gross Floor Area ....................................................................................................... 4
Height of Building or Structure ................................................................................ 5
Home Occupation ..................................................................................................... 5
Housekeeping Unit.................................................................................................... 5
Lot ............................................................................................................................. 5
Lot Coverage ............................................................................................................. 5
Lot Line, Front .......................................................................................................... 5
Multidwelling ............................................................................................................ 6
Nonconforming Building or Structure ...................................................................... 6
Nonconforming Lot .................................................................................................. 6
Nonconforming Use .................................................................................................. 6
Parking Space............................................................................................................ 6
Personal Care Services .............................................................................................. 6
Premises .................................................................................................................... 6
Setback ...................................................................................................................... 6
Street ......................................................................................................................... 6
Structure .................................................................................................................... 6
Width, Lot ................................................................................................................. 7
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-4-
1.6 Prohibited Uses ............................................................................................................. 7
SECTION 2 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
2.1 Classes of Districts ........................................................................................................ 7
2.2 Incorporation of Zoning Map ..................................................................................... 7
2.3 District Boundaries ...................................................................................................... 8
2.4 Lots in Two Districts .................................................................................................... 8
SECTION 3 USE REGULATIONS
3.1 Basic Requirements ...................................................................................................... 8
3.2 Schedule Of Use Regulations ....................................................................................... 9
3.3 Living Accommodations In Non-residential Buildings ........................................... 18
3.4 Special Uses Relating to Agriculture, Horticulture and Floriculture.................... 18
SECTION 4 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
4.1 Basic Requirements .................................................................................................... 19
4.1.1 Small Accessory Shed Exception ................................................................................. 19
4.2 Schedule of Dimensional Requirements ................................................................... 20
4.3 Special Requirements ................................................................................................. 21
4.4 Street Frontage Special Permit ................................................................................. 22
4.4.1 Special Permit Required ......................................................................................... 22
4.4.2 Grant by Planning Board ........................................................................................ 22
4.4.3 Board of Appeals Comment.................................................................................... 22
4.4.4 Application .............................................................................................................. 22
4.4.5 Plans ........................................................................................................................ 23
4.4.6 Minimum Requirements ......................................................................................... 23
4.4.7 Additional Requirements ........................................................................................ 24
4.5 Open Space Special Permit ........................................................................................ 25
4.5.1 Purpose .................................................................................................................... 25
4.5.2 Special Permit for Open Space Subdivision ........................................................... 25
4.5.3 Minimum Requirements ......................................................................................... 25
4.5.4 Planning Board as Special Permit Granting Authority ........................................... 26
4.5.5 Contents of Application .......................................................................................... 26
4.5.6 Filing of Application ............................................................................................... 27
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-5-
4.5.7 Review and Comment by Advisory Boards............................................................ 28
4.5.8 Relationship to Subdivision Process ....................................................................... 29
4.5.9 Standard for Issuance of Special Permit ................................................................. 29
4.5.10 Conditions ............................................................................................................... 29
4.5.11 Definitions............................................................................................................... 30
4.6 Planned Unit Development Special Permit .............................................................. 30
4.6.1 Purpose .................................................................................................................... 30
4.6.2 Special Permit for Planned Unit Development ....................................................... 31
4.6.3 Minimum Requirements ......................................................................................... 31
4.6.4 Planning Board as Special Permit Granting Authority ........................................... 32
4.6.5 Contents of Application .......................................................................................... 32
4.6.6 Filing of Application ............................................................................................... 33
4.6.7 Relationship to Section 5.3.1(b) Special Permits3
for Site Changes in the Business District ................................................................ 34
4.6.8 Standard for Issuance of Special Permit ................................................................. 34
4.6.9 Conditions ............................................................................................................... 34
4.7 Registered Marijuana Dispensary ............................................................................ 34
4.8 Marijuana Not Medically Prescribed ....................................................................... 39
4.9 Temporary Moratorium on Marijuana Establishments ........................................ 39
SECTION 5 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
5.1 Off-street Parking ...................................................................................................... 40
5.1.1 Minimum Parking Requirements ............................................................................ 40
5.1.2 Nonconforming Parking Exemptions ..................................................................... 41
5.1.3 Parking Area Plans .................................................................................................. 41
5.1.4 Joint Use of Parking Facilities ................................................................................ 42
5.1.5 Screening of Parking Areas .................................................................................... 42
5.2 Signs ............................................................................................................................ 42
5.2.1 Prohibited Signs ...................................................................................................... 42
5.2.2 Definitions............................................................................................................... 42
5.2.3 General Regulation for Permanent Signs in All Districts ....................................... 43
5.2.4 General Regulations for Temporary Signs in All Districts ..................................... 44
5.2.5 Exempt Signs .......................................................................................................... 44
5.2.6 Specific Regulations for Residence District ........................................................... 45
5.2.7 Signs in Business District ....................................................................................... 46
5.3 Special Permits In Business District ......................................................................... 49
5.3.1.a Preliminary Site Plan Review ................................................................................. 49
5.3.1.b Special Permits for Site Changes ............................................................................ 50
5.3.1.c Amendment to Site Plan ......................................................................................... 52
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-6-
5.3.2 Special Permits for Business Use ........................................................................... 52
5.3.3 Site Plan Review for Certain Non-Residential Activities ....................................... 52
5.4 Material Removal ....................................................................................................... 53
5.5 Flood Plain District .................................................................................................... 53
5.5.1 Purpose .................................................................................................................... 53
5.5.2 Regulations ............................................................................................................. 53
5.5.3 Location of Flood Plain District ............................................................................. 54
5.5.4 Floodway and Base Flood Elevation Data .............................................................. 55
5.5.5 Notification of Watercourse Alteration .................................................................. 55
5.5.6 Use Regulations ...................................................................................................... 55
5.6 Residence EA District - Multidwelling Projects ...................................................... 56
5.6.1 Purposes .................................................................................................................. 56
5.6.2 Land Use and Dimensional Requirements .............................................................. 56
5.6.3 Town Meeting Presentation - Preliminary Development Plan ............................... 56
5.6.4 Special Permit Application - Final Development Plan ........................................... 57
5.6.5 Special Permit Requirements .................................................................................. 58
5.6.6 Planning Board Approval ....................................................................................... 60
5.6.7 Planning Board Denial ............................................................................................ 61
5.6.8 Additional Requirements ........................................................................................ 62
5.6.8 Procedural Requirements for Special Permits ........................................................ 63
5.8 Wireless Communications Facilities ......................................................................... 63
5.8.1 Purpose .................................................................................................................... 63
5.8.2 Definitions............................................................................................................... 63
5.8.3 Special Permit Granting Authority ......................................................................... 65
5.8.4 Use of Existing Structures ...................................................................................... 65
5.8.5 Wireless Communications Overlay Districts .......................................................... 66
5.8.6 Special Permit for Wireless Communications Facilities ........................................ 66
5.8.7 Minimum Requirements ......................................................................................... 66
5.8.8 Contents of Application .......................................................................................... 68
5.8.9 Filing of Application ............................................................................................... 69
5.8.10 Review and Comment by Board of Appeals and Others ........................................ 70
5.8.11 On Site Visit/Demonstration ................................................................................... 70
5.8.12 Conditions ............................................................................................................... 70
5.8.13 Special Permits for Wireless Communications Facilities
Outside Wireless Communications Overlay District .............................................. 71
5.8.14 Planning Board Decisions ....................................................................................... 72
5.9 Water Supply Protection District ............................................................................. 73
5.9.1 Purpose .................................................................................................................... 73
5.9.2 Regulations ............................................................................................................. 73
5.9.3 Location of Water Supply District .......................................................................... 73
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-7-
5.10 Large-Scale Ground Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Facilities .................................. 73
5.10.1 Purpose .................................................................................................................... 73
5.10.2 Definitions............................................................................................................... 74
5.10.3 Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District ........................................................................ 74
5.10.4 Siting Solar Photovoltaic Facilities ......................................................................... 74
5.10.5 Dimension and Density Requirements .................................................................... 75
5.10.6 Appurtenant Structures ........................................................................................... 75
5.10.7 Design Standards ................................................................................................... 75
5.10.8 Safety and Environmental Standards ...................................................................... 76
5.10.9 Monitoring and Maintenance .................................................................................. 76
5.10.10 Contents of Application .......................................................................................... 77
5.10.11 Review of Application ............................................................................................ 78
SECTION 6 SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY
6.1 General Authority and Conditions ........................................................................... 78
6.2 Procedures ................................................................................................................... 79
6.2.1 Rules for Special Permits ........................................................................................ 79
6.2.2 Review Boards ........................................................................................................ 79
6.2.3 Public Hearing ........................................................................................................ 79
6.2.4 Issuance of Permit Within 90 Days ........................................................................ 79
6.2.5 Effective Date of Special Permit............................................................................. 80
6.2.6 Denial of Special Permit ......................................................................................... 80
6.2.7 Moratorium Following Denial of Special Permit ................................................... 80
6.2.8 Withdrawal of Application Without Prejudice ....................................................... 80
6.2.9 Votes Required for Special Permit ......................................................................... 80
6.2.10 Failure to Take Final Action Within 90 Days ......................................................... 81
6.3 Appeal For Judicial Review ...................................................................................... 81
6.4 Lapse of Special Permit ............................................................................................. 81
SECTION 7 ADMINISTRATION
7.0 Procedure and Coordination ..................................................................................... 82
7.1 Enforcement ................................................................................................................ 82
7.2 Board Of Appeals ....................................................................................................... 83
7.2.1 Membership ............................................................................................................ 83
7.2.2 Appeals ................................................................................................................... 83
7.2.3 Special Permits........................................................................................................ 83
7.2.4 Variances................................................................................................................. 83
7.2.5 Hearings and Decisions........................................................................................... 84
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-8-
7.3 Subsequent Amendments .......................................................................................... 84
7.4 Penalty ......................................................................................................................... 84
7.5 Severability ................................................................................................................. 85
SECTION 8 HISTORIC DISTRICTS
8.1 Grant of Power ........................................................................................................... 85
8.2 Purpose ........................................................................................................................ 85
8.3 Definitions ................................................................................................................... 85
8.3.1 Altered..................................................................................................................... 85
8.3.2 Building................................................................................................................... 85
8.3.3 Commission ............................................................................................................ 85
8.3.4 Constructed ............................................................................................................. 85
8.3.5 Exterior Architectural Feature ................................................................................ 86
8.3.6 Structure .................................................................................................................. 86
8.4 Historic District Commission Review ...................................................................... 86
8.5 Owner's Application For Commission Review And Certification ......................... 87
8.6 Review Criteria ........................................................................................................... 88
8.7 Findings ....................................................................................................................... 88
8.7.1 Certificate of Appropriateness ................................................................................ 89
8.7.2 Notice of Disapproval ............................................................................................. 89
8.7.3 Certificate of Non-Applicability ............................................................................. 89
8.7.4 Certificate of Hardship ............................................................................................ 89
8.8 Appeals ........................................................................................................................ 90
SECTION 9 ZONING MAP .............................................................................................. 90
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-1-
SECTION 1 GENERAL
1.1 Authority
This zoning by-law is adopted in accordance with the provision of General Laws, Chapter 40A.
1.2 Purpose
The purpose of this by-law is to promote the health, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants
and to accomplish all other objects of zoning.
1.3 Basic Requirements (Old 1.3 deleted, new 1.3 added 1987, amended 1992, 2011,
2014)
Notwithstanding any other provision of these By-Laws, any building or structure or any use of
any building, structure or premises is prohibited if it is injurious, obnoxious, offensive,
dangerous, or a nuisance to the community or to the neighborhood by reason of the following:
Noise Gases
Vibrations Dust
Concussion Harmful fluids or substances
Odors Danger of fire or explosion
Fumes Smoke
Electronic interference Excessive drawdown of groundwater
Debris/Refuse Lighting
or if it discharges into the air, soil, water or groundwater any industrial, commercial or other
kinds of waste, petroleum products, chemicals, except pesticides registered and labeled under
provisions of F.I.F.R.A. and Chapter 132B of the Massachusetts General Laws, or pollutants
unless the same are so treated before discharge as to render them harmless, or has any other
objectionable feature detrimental to the neighborhood health, safety, groundwater,
convenience, morals or welfare.
1.4 Nonconforming Uses or Structures (Old 1.4 deleted, new 1.4 added 1987)
1.4.1 Purpose
It is the purpose of this By-Law to regulate the change, alteration, or expansion of any lawfully
existing nonconforming use or structure. This By-Law is intended to and should be construed
to restrict such changes, alterations, or expansions to the extent permitted under General Laws,
Chapter 40A, Section 6.
1.4.2 Continuation of Nonconformity
Any structure or use lawfully in existence (or lawfully commenced prior to the first publication
of notice of a public hearing concerning any adoption or amendment of a by-law affecting such
structure or use) may be continued; provided, however, that any structure or use that has been
discontinued or abandoned continuously for a period of two years or more may not be reestablished
and any future use of the buildings or land shall conform to this By-Law.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-2-
Construction or operations under a building or special permit shall conform to any subsequent
amendment of this By-Law unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of not
more than six months after the issuance of the permit and, in cases involving construction, is
continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
1.4.3 Restoration
A lawfully existing nonconforming structure or use, if damaged or destroyed by fire or other
accident, may be repaired or reconstructed within one year; provided, however, that such repair
or reconstruction shall be within the same portion of the lot and shall conform to the extent
possible with the requirements of the then existing By-Laws.
1.4.4 Temporary Uses
The Board of Appeals may permit a nonconforming temporary building or use incidental to
the development of a neighborhood, such permit to be issued for an initial period of not more
than two years and for renewal periods of not more than one year each.
1.4.5 (Deleted 1994; see section 5.5.2 b)
1.4.6 Change, Alteration, or Expansion (Amended 1989, 1992)
Preexisting nonconforming uses or structures may not be changed, altered, or expanded unless
there is a finding by the permit granting authority designated in Section 1.4.7 of this By-Law
that such change, extension or alteration is not substantially more detrimental to the
neighborhood; provided, however, that any change, alteration, or extension shall comply with
all existing setback, height, and dimensional requirements of this By-Law.
1.4.7 Procedure
The Board of Appeals shall be the permit granting authority for any application for a finding
under Section 1.4.6, except the Planning Board shall be the permit granting authority with
respect to applications concerning structures or uses in the Business District.
The applicant for a finding hereunder shall file the original and two (2) copies of his application
for said finding with the Town Clerk as filing agent for the appropriate permit granting
authority, and shall forthwith file a separate signed copy thereof for the records of the Town
Clerk as required under Chapter 40A, Section 9 of the General Laws. Upon its receipt of such
application, the permit granting authority shall submit one copy thereof to the Select Board
and one copy to either the Planning Board or the Board of Appeals, as the case may be, for
their review and written recommendations. Each such board shall make such
recommendations as it deems appropriate and shall send copies thereof to the permit granting
authority and the applicant. The failure of either Board to make written recommendations
within 35 days from its receipt of such application shall be deemed to be lack of opposition
thereto
Each application filed for a finding hereunder shall comply with the rules of the permit granting
authority relative to the granting of special permits. The permit granting authority hereunder
shall hear an application for a finding in full compliance with the time limitations and all other
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-3-
procedural requirements specified in Chapter 40A of the General Laws and Section 6 of these
By-Laws.
1.5 Definitions (Amended 1996)
Accessory Buildings and Uses (Amended 1973 and 1980) An accessory building or accessory
structure is a building or structure designed, constructed and/or devoted exclusively to a use
subordinate to and customarily incidental to the principal use. An accessory use is a
subordinate use of a building or other structure or of the premises which is customary in
connection with the principal use and clearly incidental thereto and which does not constitute
a conversion of the principal use of the premises to one not permitted.
Average Lowest Finished Grade (Added 1996) The average (mean) lowest elevation of the
ground adjacent to all the exterior walls of a building. It is calculated by determining the lowest
elevation adjacent to each wall, weighting that elevation by the length of its adjacent wall
(multiplying the elevation in feet by the length of the wall in feet), and dividing the sum of all
weighted elevation figures by the total length of all exterior walls. The elevation figure used
may be the height above mean sea level (msl), elevation relative to the top of the concrete
foundation, or some other appropriate fixed point in the discretion of the building inspector.
See illustration below:
A
30’
Low points at each wall (height above msl):
A = 100’
D 50’ 50’ B B = 90’
C = 90’
D = 95’
30’
C
Calculation: Weighted Elevations: A = 30 x100= 3000
B = 50 x 90 = 4,500
C = 30 x 90 = 2,700
D = 50 x 95 = 4,750
Total weighted elevation: 14,950
Total length of walls: 160
Average Lowest Finished Grade: 14,950/160 = 93.44
Building (Added 1980) A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a
roof supported by walls or columns and designed for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of
persons, animals or property of any kind. The word "building" shall be construed, where the
context so permits, as being followed by the words "or any part thereof".
Building Line (Amended 1996) A line which is the shortest distance from one side line of the
lot to any other side line of the lot and which passes through any portion of the principal
building and which differs by less than 45° from a line which connects the end points of the
side lot lines at the point at which they intersect the street right-of-way.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-4-
Common Driveway (Added 1996) A driveway, or segment of a driveway, that provides
access to two or more building lots by means of an easement, right-of-way or other mechanism
over one or more lots.
Day Care Center (Added 1973) A place, whether known as a day nursery, nursery school,
kindergarten, day camp, child play school, progressive school, pre-school or other similar
name, which receives for temporary custody, with or without stated educational purposes,
during part or all of the day apart from their parents, three or more children under seven years
of age and not of common parentage. The term shall not include kindergartens or nursery
schools operated as part of an organized educational system or by a stated agency and shall not
include a Sunday school conducted by a Church.
Dwelling (Amended 1979 and 1980) A building which is designed for or redesigned for and/or
used exclusively for human habitation, but not including a boarding house, a building devoted
to the use of transient or overnight occupants, or a mobile home (however mounted) except as
authorized by law.
Dwelling Unit (Added 1979, amended 1980) A room, group of rooms, or dwelling designed,
constructed and/or equipped exclusively for use as a complete living unit for one family
including living, sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities, and which is directly accessible from
the outside or through a common hall without passing through any dwelling unit.
Exempted Professional Usage (Added 1983) Any generally accepted professional or office
type occupation, including but not limited to accounting, advertising, architecture, engineering,
journalism, law, management consultation, sales representation, or stenography; but excluding
the practice of medicine or personal care in any form, or any profession or business excluded
from the definition of "Home Occupation" conducted only in a dwelling or building accessory
thereto, employing only the inhabitants of the premises exclusive of persons not related by
blood or marriage, and occupying no more than two hundred (200) square feet of floor space.
Farm An establishment devoted (apart from residential use) wholly or predominantly to the
commercial production of vegetables or other crops, fruit, dairy products, cattle, sheep, goats,
poultry, eggs, maple products, or honey, or any combination thereof, including as an incident
of the operation of such establishment the sale by its proprietor of its products only, either in
their natural state or forming the major ingredients of processed commodities.
The term "farm" does not include an establishment devoted (apart from residential use) wholly
or predominantly to processing or distributing farm products dissociated from their production,
and does not include a commercial greenhouse or fur farm or nursery or a piggery.
Gross Floor Area (Added 2011) The sum of the horizontal areas of the floor(s) of a building
measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, but excluding unoccupied basement and attic
space, and any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six feet.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-5-
Height of Building or Structure (Added 1996) The vertical distance between the average
lowest finished grade adjacent to the exterior walls of a building to the highest point of a roof,
as illustrated in the figure below:
Height Height
Average Lowest Finished Grade
Home Occupation (Amended 1973) Occupations such as dressmaking, handicraft, preserving
home cooking, conducted only in a dwelling or building accessory thereto by and employing
only the inhabitants of the premises, and occupying not more than two hundred (200) square
feet of floor area. The term "home occupation" does not include a beauty parlor, barber shop,
convalescent or rest home, tourist home, massage parlor or similar establishment offering
services to the general public.
Housekeeping Unit (Added 1973, amended 1982) A separate housekeeping unit contained
within a single family detached dwelling or in an accessory building which has separate kitchen
facilities for the storage, preparation or serving of food and separate living, sleeping or sanitary
facilities.
Lot (Amended 1981) A single area of land with definite boundaries ascertainable by recorded
deed or plan.
Lot Coverage (Added 1998) The percentage of building footprint within the area of a lot.
Lot Line, Front (Amended 1996) The line defining a street right-of-way, whether it be a
public way or private way, where a street layout exists. Where no street layout exists, it shall
be the line defining where the rights of others begin.
Front lot line
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-6-
Multidwelling (Added 1979) A building containing two or more dwelling units. A
multidwelling may be a series of attached or semi-detached town houses or row houses
(dwelling units sharing one or more party walls and each having at least one floor at ground
level with direct access to outside on two or more sides) or a garden apartment building
(dwelling unit sharing a common entry hall or stairway).
Nonconforming Building or Structure. A building, structure or portion thereof which does
not conform to the height and location regulations for the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Lot A lot which does not conform to the area, frontage, and width regulations
for the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use A use of a building, structure, or land which does not conform to the use
regulations of the district in which it is located.
Parking Space (Amended 1973) An area not less than 8 1/2 feet in width and 20 feet in length
for angle parking or 22 feet in length for parallel parking, exclusive of drives and maneuvering
space.
Personal Care Services (Added 1998) Assistance with one or more of those tasks related to
bathing, dressing/grooming, ambulation, eating, toileting, reminding/assisting residents in
taking medication and other similar tasks related to personal care needs either through physical
support or supervision. Supervision includes reminding and/or observing residents while they
perform activities.
Premises (Added 1980) A lot together with all buildings, structures, and uses thereon.
Setback (Amended 1996) The shortest distance from the corresponding lot line to any part of
a building or structure, including overhang but not including uncovered steps nor fences or
walls less than 6 feet in height.
Street Any public way or way opened and dedicated to the public use which has not become
a public way.
Structure (Added 1980) A combination of materials, other than a building, constructed or
placed in a fixed location on the ground or attached to anything having a fixed location on the
ground. The term structure shall include tennis courts, paddle tennis courts, and swimming
pools, but shall not include walls or fences six feet or less in height, or utility poles and guys.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-7-
Width, Lot (Added 1996) A line which is the shortest distance from one side line of a lot to
any other side line of such lot, provided that the extension of such line diverges less than 45o
from a line, or extension thereof, which connects the end points of the side lot lines where such
lines intersect the street right-of-way.
1) 2) 3)
A
A
B A B
B
A = Correct measurement of width
B = Line connecting end points of the side lot lines where such lines intersect the
street right-of-way.
In all three examples above, the extension of Line A diverges from the extension of Line B by
less than 45 degrees.
1.6 Prohibited Uses
Any building, structure, sign or any use of any building, structure or premises, not expressly
allowed, permitted or exempted by this By-Law is prohibited.
SECTION 2 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS
2.1 Classes of Districts
The Town of Sherborn is hereby divided into the following classes of district:
Residence District A
Residence District B
Residence District C
Residence District EA (added 1991)
Residence District M (added 1979)
Business District G (added 1983)
Business District P (added 1983)
Flood Plain District (added 1970)
2.2 Incorporation of Zoning Map
All districts are located and bounded as shown on a map entitled, "Zoning Map Town of
Sherborn" as amended, and on file in the office of the Town Clerk. The Zoning Map, with all
explanatory matter thereon, is hereby made a part of this By-Law.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-8-
2.3 District Boundaries
2.3.1 Where the boundary lines are shown upon the Zoning Map within the lines of public
or private ways, the center lines of the ways shall be the boundary lines.
2.3.2 Boundary lines located outside the lines of ways and shown approximately parallel
thereto shall be regarded as parallel thereto, and dimensions shown in figures placed upon the
Zoning Map between the boundary and the lines of ways are the distances in feet of the
boundary lines from the lines of ways, such distances being measured at right angles to the
lines of ways unless otherwise indicated.
2.3.3 In all cases which are not covered by other provisions of this subsection, the location
of boundary lines shall be determined by the distance in feet, if given, from other lines or points
on the Zoning Map, by the use of monuments or other identifiable points shown on the Zoning
Map, or by the scale of the Zoning Map.
2.3.4 Boundary lines of Flood Plain Districts are indicated by dotted lines on the Zoning Map
and where marked by a numerical figure followed by the letters msl, the location of the line
shall coincide with the contour line at that number of feet above mean sea level. (Added 1970)
2.4 Lots In Two Districts
Where a district boundary line divides a lot in a single or joint ownership at the time such line
is adopted, the regulations for the less restricted portion of such lot shall extend not more than
thirty feet into the more restricted portion, provided the lot has the required frontage on a street
in the less restricted district.
SECTION 3 USE REGULATIONS
3.1 Basic Requirements (Amended 1975, 1978, 1979, 1980, 1981, 1982, 1988)
Except as permitted by Section 3.4, no building, structure, or land shall be adapted, constructed
or used for any purpose or in any manner other than as permitted and set forth in Section 3.2,
Schedule of Use Regulations, of this By-Law.
Allowed Use allowed by right.
Permissive Use by special permit granted by The Board of Appeals, The Planning
Board, or other permit granting authority as provided in these By-Laws.
Prohibited Use prohibited by these By-Laws.
Allowed uses and permissive uses granted by the Board of Appeals shall be in conformity with
all dimensional requirements, off-street parking requirements, and any other pertinent
requirements of this By-Law.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-9-
3.2 Schedule of Use Regulations (Headings added 1988, amended 1990, 2007, 2014,
2017, 2018, 2019)
1) Single Family Home - This use is allowed in all districts.
Single family detached dwelling containing one housekeeping unit only, together with
accessory buildings not containing a housekeeping unit, including a garage for not more than
three automobiles. The number of such dwellings with such accessory buildings on any one
lot shall not exceed the number which can be located thereon in conformity to Section 4.2.
2) Apartment - This use is permissive in all districts.
a) Single family detached dwelling, together with accessory buildings, containing in the
dwelling or in an accessory building one additional housekeeping unit provided:
1. The owner(s) of the premises shall live in either such unit or the primary dwelling unit;
2. The special permit granting authority shall be satisfied that, upon the termination or
expiration of the special permit, the facilities of such unit can readily be removed or,
alternatively, reintegrated with the dwelling to produce an allowed use of the property
under Section 3;
3. The gross floor area of such unit shall not exceed 1200 square feet;
4. Any special permit granted shall specify that the external character of the premises shall
be that of a single family residence;
5. The installation of such unit and any use thereof shall be permitted only upon the
issuance of a special permit by the special permit granting authority in compliance with the
procedures set forth in Section 6;
6. The applicant for a special permit for such unit shall file with the special permit
granting authority such plans, specifications and other instruments concerning the
proposed unit and the subsequent use thereof as the special permit granting authority may
reasonably require by general rule or by request to the applicant;
7. No special permit for a unit shall be issued for a period of more than four years but may
be renewable for like periods thereafter in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Section 6.
8. Such unit may not be rented or licensed for occupancy for terms of less than 30 days,
whether through Airbnb or similar service or directly by or on behalf of the owner. The
intent of this article is to increase the diversity of housing stock in the Town that is available
for people who want to reside in Sherborn.
3) Renting Rooms - This use is allowed in all districts.
The renting of rooms or the furnishing of table board to not more than four persons not related
by blood or marriage residing on the premises. This does not include transients or tourists.
(Amended 1973)
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-10-
4) Home Occupation - This use is allowed in all districts.
Home occupation or exempted professional usage as defined in Section 1.5 conducted in a
dwelling or building accessory thereto by a person residing on the premises, provided that:
a) Such use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential
purposes;
b) No person other than a resident of the premises is employed thereon in connection
with such use, and no more than one member of the public is served at one time;
c) No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, fumes, odors, heat, glare or unsightliness
is produced;
d) There is no exterior storage of material or equipment, including the parking of
commercial vehicles, and no other exterior indication of such use or variation from
the residential character of the premises.
5) Professional Occupation - This use is permissive in all districts.
Professional occupation, trade or craft customarily conducted in a dwelling or building
accessory thereto by a person residing on the premises, provided that:
a) Such is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential
purposes;
b) One person other than a resident of the premises may be employed thereon in
connection with such use and no more than one member of the public is served at one
time, except as otherwise permitted by the Board of Appeals; (Amended 1997)
c) No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, fumes, odors, heat, glare or unsightliness
is produced;
d) There is no public display of goods or wares and there are no signs except as
permitted in Section 5.2;
e) There is no exterior storage of material or equipment, including the parking of
commercial vehicles and no other exterior indication of such use or variation from
the residential character of the premises. (Amended 1973)
6) Produce Farm - This use is allowed in all districts.
Farm as defined in Section 1.5 but only for production, whether or not for sale, of maple
products, honey, fruits, vegetables, hay, fodder, ensilage, and forest products. Roadside stands
are regulated under Use No. 9. (Amended 1973)
7) Farm, Non-Profit - This use is allowed in all districts.
Farm for the raising and keeping of animals and poultry for use of residents of the property
and not for profit. (Added 1973)
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-11-
8) Farm, For Profit - This use is allowed in all districts.
Farm as defined in Section 1.5 but only for the production of dairy products, cattle, sheep,
goats and poultry or eggs for profit or other than for the use of the occupants of the premises.
(Added 1973)
9) Roadside Stand - This use is permissive in all districts except that this use is allowed if it
satisfies all the requirements for the so-called agricultural exemption in Chapter 40A, Section
3 of the General Laws. (Amended 1992)
Roadside stand for sale of local farm product provided that at least fifty percent by dollar
volume is raised within the Town; such stand must be set back at least fifty feet from the center
line of the street pavement. (Added 1973)
10) Greenhouse - This use is permissive in all districts.
Commercial greenhouse or nursery.
11) Commercial Stable - This use is permissive in all districts. (Amended 1989)
Unless otherwise permitted pursuant to Section 3.4, commercial stabling of more than four
horses, whether for (1) the conduct of a riding academy to provide instruction in horsemanship
on, or off the premises under the direct supervision of an instructor, (2) boarding horses
belonging to persons other than the owner of the premises, whether ridden on or off the
premises, (3) boarding horses belonging to the owner or persons other than the owner and used
for hire, or (4) the breeding, raising and training of horses for sale, provided that:
a) The permit shall indicate which of the above mentioned uses is covered;
b) The permit shall indicate the number of horses which may be stabled on the premises
at any time;
c) The permit shall be limited to a maximum of two years, but may be renewed for like
periods, subject to application and hearing as in the case of the original permit;
(Amended 1985)
d) There shall be no sale of tack or other supplies;
e) A permit issued hereunder shall not relieve the owner from the necessity of obtaining a
license from the Selectmen under M.G.L., Ch. 111, sec. 158 (so long as the Town has
less than 5000 inhabitants) or from the Board of Health under sec. 155 (if the Town has
more than 5000 inhabitants), shall not limit the powers of the Board of Health under
M.G.L., Ch. 111, sec. 31, or other applicable statutes or regulations, and shall not affect
the power of the Department of Agriculture under M.G.L., Ch. 128, secs. 2A and 2B.
(Amended 1973)
11A) Commercial Stable - Four or Fewer Horses - this use is allowed in all districts. (Added
1989)
Commercial stabling of four or fewer horses, provided there is no sale of tack or other supplies.
12) Religious - This use is allowed in all districts.
Church or other religious purpose.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-12-
13) Educational - This use is allowed in all districts.
Educational purpose on land owned or leased by the Commonwealth or any of its agencies,
subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious sect or denomination or by a non-profit
educational corporation. (Amended 1973 and 1978)
14) Private School - This use is permissive in all districts.
Day care center, private elementary or secondary school, charitable or philanthropic institution,
but not a hospital, rest home or sanitarium (except as permitted by paragraph 13 above).
(Amended 1973 and 1978)
15) Club, Non-Profit - This use is permissive in all districts.
Any public or private social, recreational or athletic club not conducted for profit and not
containing sleeping quarters except for caretaker purposes. Miniature golf is prohibited.
(Amended 1973)
16) Club, For Profit - This use is prohibited in all districts.
Any public or private social, recreational or athletic club conducted for profit and not
containing sleeping quarters except for caretaker purposes. Miniature golf is prohibited.
(Amended 1973)
17) Office - This use is prohibited in all Residence A, B & C districts, permissive in all others,
provided that in the EA zone, Town Meeting Preliminary Development Plan Approval has
been granted.
Offices for Business or Professional Use. (Amended 1983, 2013)
18) Restaurant - This use is permissive in Business G district, prohibited in all others.
Restaurant or other place for serving food in premises designed for the service and
consumption of food and beverages inside a building or on an adjoining patio; subject to the
limitations as to hours, manner, and location of such outdoor service and consumption of any
license issued by the Selectmen pursuant to Chapter 140 of the General Laws. (Amended 1988,
2015, 2018)
19) Retail - This use is permissive in Business G district and in EA districts for which Town
Meeting Preliminary Development Plan Approval has been granted, prohibited in all others.
Bank or other financial institution, retail store or service establishment, the activities of which
are the offering within the building of goods or services at retail for use within the building or
off the premises. (Amended 1983, 2013)
20) Craft Shop - This use is prohibited in residence districts, permissive in all others.
Shop for crafts such as silver-smithing ceramics, woodworking, making or repairing
lampshades, jewelry, or other similar handwork, or shop for the sale of antiques, works of art
or craft material made on the premises, provided that no more than three persons are employed
on the premises at any one time. (Amended 1983)
21) Over 3 Cars - This use is permissive in all districts.
Garage space for more than three automobiles.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-13-
22) Service Station - This use is permissive in Business G district, prohibited in all others.
Gasoline service station or automotive repair garage, provided that repairs shall be performed
only indoors and that gasoline pumps and equipment shall be so located that vehicles to be
serviced are entirely upon the premises and provided further that all activities are conducted in
compliance with a site management plan prepared by the owner or operator of the site and
approved by the Sherborn Board of Health. (Amended 1973, 1992)
23) Repair Shop - This use is prohibited in residential districts, permissive in all others.
Repair shop for appliances and other light equipment, provided that no more than three persons
are employed on the premises at any one time. (Amended 1973)
24) Public Utility - This use is permissive in all districts.
Use of land for a public utility. (Amended 1973)
25) Prohibitions - These uses are prohibited in all districts.
In any district no use will be permitted that fails to comply with the basic requirements of
Section 1.3. (Old 3.2.25 deleted; new 3.2.25 added 1987)
26) Multi-Dwellings - This use is permissive in Residence EA districts, prohibited in all other
districts.
Multidwelling buildings must conform in all respects with the purposes and requirements set
forth in Section 5.6 or Section 5.7. (Added 1979, amended 1991)
27) Low or Moderate Income Apartment - This use is permissive in all districts.
a) Single family detached dwelling, together with accessory buildings, containing in the
dwelling or in an existing accessory building one additional housekeeping unit, or a building
designed or used for any non-residential purpose containing one additional housekeeping unit
physically separated within the building from the non-residential use, provided as follows:
b) Such unit shall meet the criteria for "Local Initiative Units" as defined in 760 CMR 45.03
(as the same may be amended from time to time), including the following:
i) The unit is to be a "Low and Moderate Income Unit" as defined in 760 CMR 45.02 (as
the same may be amended from time to time);
ii) The unit is not developed with, or is not proposed to be developed with, a
comprehensive permit within the meaning of Chapter 40B, sections 20-23 of the
General Laws;
iii) The unit is subject to Use Restrictions which, as a result of the Special Permit provided
by this Subsection 27 permitting such unit, are a condition for the installation of such
housekeeping unit (whether such installation results from new construction of the
housekeeping unit, building conversion, adaptive reuse to permit use of an existing
housekeeping unit, or substantial rehabilitation of the building for this purpose). Use
Restrictions means a contract, deed restriction, condition of the Special Permit provided
by this Subsection 27, or other legal instrument as may be required by the Special
Permit Granting Authority and as may be approved by the Department of Community
Affairs within the Executive Office of Communities and Development (which agency
has been established pursuant to Chapters 23B and 6A of the General Laws of the
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-14-
Commonwealth), which Use Restriction restricts occupancy of Low and Moderate
Income Units to persons with qualified incomes for a determinate period of time.
iv) The initial period of such Use Restrictions is as long as the unit is operated as an
apartment, but in no event less than five years; and
v) The owner(s) of the units agree to be subject to equal housing opportunity guidelines
established by the Department of Community Affairs.
c) The Special Permit Granting Authority shall be satisfied that, upon the termination or
expiration of the Special Permit, the facilities of such unit can readily be removed or,
alternatively, reintegrated with the dwelling to produce an allowed use of the property under
Section 3 of the By-Laws.
d) The gross floor area of such unit shall not exceed the lesser of 1200 square feet or 30
percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling (including any addition thereto for such unit).
e) The installation of such unit and any use thereof shall be permitted only upon the issuance
of a Special Permit by the Special Permit Granting Authority in compliance with the
procedures set forth in Section 6 of the Zoning By-Laws.
f) The Special Permit described in this Subsection 27 may be issued for the duration of such
occupancy, provided however that the Permit shall automatically expire on the second year
anniversary of its issuance unless the period is extended for one or more additional two year
periods upon the filing by the owner(s) of a sworn affidavit with the Town Clerk, with a copy
to the Zoning Board of Appeals, certifying occupancy consistent with the Special Permit and
this Subsection 27 of the By-Laws.
g) The Inspector of Buildings may, in addition to other remedies, order removal of the
separate kitchen facilities, equipment, fixtures, interior alterations, any separate metering of
utilities, and any structural changes, or any or all of them, that were installed to create such
unit, if the lawful use of such unit has expired or been terminated.
h) The applicant for a Special Permit for such unit shall file with the Special Permit Granting
Authority such plans, specifications and other instruments concerning the proposed unit and
the subsequent use therefor as the Special Permit Granting Authority may reasonably require
by general rule or by request to the applicant.
i) After issuance of any Special Permit pursuant to this Subsection 27, the Select Board shall
make application to the Department of Community Affairs for certification that the unit so
permitted is a "Local Initiative Unit", to count towards the Town's statutory obligations under
Chapter 40B of the General Laws of the Commonwealth, all in accordance with the application
procedures set forth in 760 CMR 45.00 (Local Initiative Program)." (Added 1991)
28) Off-site septic systems - This use is permissive in Residence EA district, prohibited in all
others.
The use of land for septic systems or leaching fields for municipally owned buildings located
beyond the boundaries of the lot or of the district. (Added 1991)
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-15-
29) The storage or parking of automobiles accessory to a business use, whether or not on the
same lot as such business use, shall be subject to the granting of a Special Permit by the
Planning Board, which may impose conditions on such use in addition to those required by
Sections 5.1.3 and 5.1.5 of these By-Laws. (Amended 1996)
30) Drive-Through Window - This use is permissive in the Business General District.
Any window, opening, chute, or other mechanism that is part of a building designed for the
service of food or beverages for consumption off the premises, or the provision of any other
goods or services, to retail customers while they remain in their motorized vehicle.
(Added 1997)
31) Municipal Use - This use is allowed in all districts.
Any building, structure or parcel owned and/or operated by the Town and used for
administration, public safety, recreation, health and welfare, or for any other public purpose
or service provided by the Town. Any new municipal structure or building in any district
shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with Section 5.3.1. (Added 1998)
31A) Accessory Municipal Use – This use is permissive in all districts.
The use of municipal property for private services through a lease, license or other contractual
arrangement provided that:
a) Such use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for municipal
purposes;
b) Such use occupies a maximum of 250 square feet;
c) The use provides a service that is necessary or convenient for Sherborn residents;
d) No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, fumes, odors, heat, glare or
unsightliness is produced;
e) There is no exterior storage of material or equipment, including the parking of
commercial vehicles;
f) Such use in any district shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with Section
5.3.1.
(Added 2007)
32) Assisted Living Facility - This use is permissive in the Business G District and in EA
districts for which Town Meeting Preliminary Development Plan Approval has been granted,
prohibited in all others.
A residential facility which provides a combination of housing and personal care services for
persons 55 years of age or older, but not providing the level of care of a skilled nursing
facility. (Added 1998, amended 2013)
33) Registered Marijuana Dispensary - This use is permissive in the B-G district, prohibited
in all others
A facility licensed under 105 CMR 725.100 that also meets the requirements of Section 4.7.
(Added 2017)
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-16-
34) Outdoor Entertainment - Outdoor entertainment in the Business General district is subject
to the granting of a Special Permit for a maximum of 2 years by the ZBA, which may impose
conditions in addition to the following:
a) Sound emitted from the event must cease promptly at 10:30p.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays and 9:00p.m Sunday. Sundays before a Monday holiday shall follow the Saturday
rules. Exceptions may be granted by the ZBA for weekdays during May-October as part of
the Special Permit.
b) The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound-level meter meeting the
standards prescribed by ANSI S1.4 - 1971 Type 1 or Type 2. The instrument shall be
maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be made of the
system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to
provide a proper representation of the noise source. During measurement, the microphone shall
be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured
noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. Traffic, aircraft and other
transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not be considered in taking
measurements except where such background noise interferes with the primary noise being
measured.
The maximum acceptable sound level shall be 75 dBA as measured at the complainant location
or that portion of the public way closest to the complainant.
c) The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt regulations specifying who provides the soundlevel
meter and the method of measurement, and may impose additional conditions on any
special permit.
(Added 2018)
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-17-
TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS1 (amended 2013, 2014, 2018)
Use2 District
RA RB RC REA BG BP
1) Single Family Home A A A A A A
2) Apartment P P P P P P
3) Renting Rooms A A A A A A
4) Home Occupation A A A A A A
5) Professional Occupation P P P P P P
6) Produce Farm A A A A A A
7) Farm, Non-Profit A A A A A A
8) Farm, For Profit A A A A A A
9) Roadside Stand P P P P P P
10) Greenhouse P P P P P P
11) Commercial Stable P P P P P P
11A) Commercial Stable (4 or fewer horses) A A A A A A
12) Religious A A A A A A
13) Educational A A A A A A
14) Private School P P P P P P
15) Club, Non-Profit P P P P P P
16) Club, For Profit X X X X X X
17) Office X X X P* P P
18) Restaurant X X X X P X
19) Retail X X X P* P X
20) Craft Shop X X X X P P
21) Over 3 Cars (Garage space) P P P P P P
22) Service Station X X X X P X
23) Repair Shop X X X X P P
24) Public Utility P P P P P P
25) Prohibitions (per Section 1.3) X X X X X X
26) Multi-Dwellings X X X P X X
27) Low or Moderate Income
Apartment P P P P P P
28) Off-site septic systems X X X P X X
29) Accessory Storage/Parking P P P P NA NA
of Automobiles
30) Drive-Through Window X X X X P X
31) Municipal Uses A A A A A A
31A) Accessory Municipal Use P P P P P P
32) Assisted Living Facility X X X P* P X
33) Registered Marijuana Dispensary X X X X P X
34) Outdoor Entertainment X X X X P X
1 This table is a summary of Section 3.2, Schedule of Use Regulations, and is not intended to make any substantive
change to the Zoning Bylaw.
2See Section 3.2, Schedule of Use Regulations, for definitions.
A = Allowed P = Permissive X = Prohibited NA = Not Applicable
P*=Provided Town Meeting Preliminary Development Plan Approval has been granted
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-18-
3.3 Living Accommodations In Non-residential Buildings (Amended 1973)
In a business district no living accommodations shall be permitted in a building designed or
used for any non-residential purpose except as expressly allowed or authorized by the Board
of Appeals or as may be permitted for Low or Moderate Income Apartments pursuant to
Subsection 3.2(27) entitled 'Low or Moderate Income Apartments - This use is permissive in
all districts'". (Amended 1991)
3.4 Special Uses Relating to Agriculture, Horticulture and Floriculture (Added 1978,
Amended 2011, 2018)
3.4.1 Purpose.
The purpose of this subsection is to encourage farming and agricultural operations within the
town by permitting, in addition to the principal agricultural activities conducted upon the site,
farm events using the farm grounds and accessory structures while also minimizing impacts
on abutting properties.
3.4.2 Buildings and Structures.
Uses that qualify for the exemption for parcels of 5 acres or more or 2 acres or more as
described in Chapter 40A, sec. 3 relating to agriculture, horticulture, silviculture, viticulture,
aquaculture or floriculture shall be uses allowed as of right provided that appropriate and
reasonable screening of buildings and structures, such as hedges or fences, as determined by
the Planning Board in light of the nature of the proposed use and the character of the
surrounding area be provided. Such determination shall be made within 30 days based on a
screening plan submitted as part of an application for a building permit, and referred to the
Planning Board by the Building Inspector, in connection with any buildings or structure to be
erected within 200 feet of a public way or lot line.
3.4.3 Farm Events
Farm structures and grounds may also be used for events including but not limited to,
educational conferences, fundraisers for nonprofit entities, weddings and other personal
recognition special events, as an accessory use clearly secondary and incidental to the principal
use of the premises for agricultural purposes. Such events and uses are subject to Site Plan
Review in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.3.1 of the Zoning Bylaw, and Section
3 of the Site Plan Rules and Regulations regardless of the zoning district Parking must be
provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 5.1 of the Zoning Bylaw. Such events
and uses shall comply with all applicable state and local regulations and licensing requirements
and the following:
a) Sound emitted from the event must cease promptly at 10:30 p.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays and 9 p.m. Sunday. Sundays prior to a Monday holiday shall follow the Saturday
rules. Exceptions may be granted by the Planning Board for weekdays during May-October
as part of the Site Plan Review.
b) The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound-level meter meeting
the standards prescribed by ANSI S1.4 - 1971 Type 1 or Type 2. The instrument shall be
maintained in calibration and good working order. A calibration check shall be made of the
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-19-
system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to
provide a proper representation of the noise source. During measurement, the microphone shall
be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured
noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used when required. Traffic, aircraft and other
transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not be considered in taking
measurements except where such background noise interferes with the primary noise being
measured.
The maximum acceptable sound level shall be 75 dBA as measured at the complainant location
or that portion of the public way closest to the complainant.
SECTION 4 DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
4.1 Basic Requirements (Amended 1975, 1980, 2017)
Except as provided in Section 4.4, every lot shall conform to the dimensional requirements set
forth in Section 4.2 and 4.3, and no building or structure, except fences six (6) feet or less in
height, in any district shall be built, located, enlarged or structurally altered which does not
conform to such dimensional requirements.
4.1.1 Small Accessory Shed Exception (Added 2018)
A reduction to one-half of the values shown in Section 4.2 for minimum required side and rear
setbacks in the Residence A, B and C districts shall apply to small accessory sheds provided
that they meet the following criteria:
a) The shed meets the minimum required front setback requirements shown in Section 4.2;
b) The shed is not permanent in nature (i.e. not on a foundation);
c) Its area is not more than 250 square feet;
d) Its maximum height is 1.5 stories to allow for a pitched roof, and its height shall not exceed
the distance to the nearest lot line;
e) The shed shall not be used for the parking or storage of automobiles;
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-20-
4.2 Schedule of Dimensional Requirements (Amended 1973, 1979, 1980, 1983, 1991, 1995, 1996)
District Minimum Lot Size (in acres) Minimum Continuous Frontage (in feet) 
Minimum Lot Width Lot Depth Front Side Rear Stories Feet  Maximum Maximum Lot Coverage  
Residence A 1 150 150* 60** 30 30 2.5 35
Residence B 2 200 200* 60** 40 30 2.5 35
Residence C 3 250 250* 60** 40 30 2.5 35
Residence EA*** 6 50 Not applicable 300 100** 60 60 2.5 35
Business G None 100 100* 150 60** 15+ -- 2.5 35 1/3
Business P None 100 100* 150 60 30 30 2.5 35 1/3
* Measured both at front setback line and at building line. At no point between the required frontage and the building line shall lot width
be reduced to less than 50 feet, without an exception from the Planning Board.
** Measured from Front Lot Line.
*** With a Special Permit for Multidwellings.
+ From abutting residence district.
If any dimensional requirement applicable to a residential district in the foregoing schedule shall be held by judicial process to be invalid with
respect to any property that property shall thereafter be subject to the comparable dimensional requirement applicable to the residence district
next preceding in the above alphabetical designation.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-21-
4.3 Special Requirements
4.3.1 Land located in a way, whether public or private, shall be excluded in computing any
lot area.
4.3.2 In the case of a lot abutting more than one street, the minimum requirements as to setbacks
from the street sideline shall be applicable with respect to each street. (Amended 1980)
4.3.3 In the case of a lot abutting more than one street, the lot must have the entire required
minimum frontage on one of the streets but need not have it on more than one.
4.3.4 Height Exceptions
Churches and municipal buildings may exceed the height limitation. Domes, cupolas, and
other ornamental features, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, tanks, bulkheads, machinery, and
other accessory features which are required above roofs may exceed the height limitation.
4.3.5 Corner Obstruction
In all districts, no building, fence or other structure shall be erected or installed, and no tree,
shrub or other growth shall be planted or permitted to grow or exist, which will dangerously
obstruct the view of traffic by operators of vehicles at street intersections.
4.3.6 Number and Location of Dwellings on One Lot (Amended 1979, 1991, 2009)
The number and location of dwellings (dwellings in this subsection including accessory
buildings) on any one lot shall be such that every dwelling thereon can be provided with
sufficient land to form a separate lot which will itself be in full conformity to the regulations
of this section and on which that dwelling will be in full conformity thereto; and upon
alienation of any dwelling, it shall be provided with such a lot and every remaining dwelling
on the original lot shall be left capable of being provided therewith. This section shall not
apply to multi dwelling projects in a Residence EA District for which a Special Permit has
been granted pursuant to Section 5.6.
4.3.7 Dwellings in Business Districts
No dwelling shall be erected on a lot in a business district unless the dwelling and lot conform
to the dimensional requirements for Residence A. as set forth in Section 4.2.
4.3.8 Location Of Farm Buildings (Amended 1980)
In a residence district no farm or poultry farm building shall be placed within one hundred
(100) feet of the street sideline, except that a permanent building or structure used solely in
connection with selling or offering for sale of farm products may be placed not less than thirty
(30) feet from the traveled portion of the street adjacent thereto.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-22-
4.3.9 Common Driveways (Added 1996)
Common driveways serving more than two building lots shall require a special permit from
the Planning Board. Minimum requirements are that they be constructed in compliance with
the Sherborn Driveway Bylaw, and each lot so served must have a common maintenance
agreement recorded at the appropriate registry. Common driveways in existence and use as of
September 30, 1995, shall not require a special permit unless the use is extended to one or more
additional building lots.
4.4 Street Frontage Special Permit (1987 version deleted, new 4.4 substituted 1994)
4.4.1 Special Permit Required. Persons seeking relief from the minimum street frontage
requirements of Section 4.2 for any lot in a residence district may petition for a special permit
granting same. For the purposes of this section, the lot having less than the minimum frontage
required by Section 4.2 is the "Section 4.4 lot". The remainder of the original lot must comply
with Section 4.2 (both before and after division) and is the "Complying Lot". No permit shall
be granted under this section which does not result in both a Section 4.4 Lot and a Complying
Lot.
4.4.2 Grant by Planning Board. The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting
authority for special permits authorized hereunder and shall hear and decide all properly
submitted applications in compliance with the time limitations and other procedural
requirements specified in Chapter 40A of the General Laws, these Zoning By-Laws (including
without limitation Section 6.2) and the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board.
4.4.3 Board of Appeals Comment. The Board of Appeals shall be the review board on all
applications under this section. The Board of Appeals shall make such recommendations on
each application as it deems appropriate, and shall send copies thereof to the Planning Board
and the applicant. The failure of the Board of Appeals to make written recommendations
within thirty-five (35) days of receipt of an application shall be deemed to be lack of opposition
thereto by the Board of Appeals.
4.4.4 Application. Applications for permit under this section shall be prepared in triplicate,
and filed with the Town Clerk as follows:
a) One (1) copy for the records of the Town Clerk as required under Chapter 40A, Section
9 of the General Laws.
b) One (1) copy for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Planning Board.
c) One (1) copy for the Town Clerk as filing agent for the Board of Appeals.
Upon receipt of said application, the Town Clerk shall forthwith transmit one (1) copy to the
Planning Board and one (1) copy to the Board of Appeals.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-23-
4.4.5 Plans. Each petition for a special permit under this section shall be accompanied by a
survey plan. Each survey plan submitted under this section shall:
a) Be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor in accordance with the rules of the
Planning Board in such form as will be required for recording with the Middlesex South
Registry of Deed or filing with the Land Court.
b) Show all lot lines, existing and proposed, all existing buildings, structures, walls, wells,
fences, rock ridges and outcroppings, water courses, wetlands, septic systems, and flood
plain areas, locations of all rights of way and easements on the lot and rights of way and
easements on abutting land which are appurtenant to the lot and contours of the existing
and finished grades of the access at two (2) foot intervals and contours of the balance of
the lot at not more than five (5) foot intervals.
c) Show the location, width and center line of all existing and proposed access roadways,
necessary drainage facilities, all filling, cutting and grading required for the construction
thereof, and shall include a profile sheet showing the present and finished grades of such
roadways.
d) Contain a locus plan showing the location of the proposed Section 4.4 and Complying
Lot with respect to surrounding lots and streets.
4.4.6 Minimum Requirements. The Planning Board shall not grant a special permit under
this section unless all of the following requirements are satisfied:
a) Frontage and Width The Section 4.4 Lot shall have at least 50 feet of frontage on a
public street and shall be at least 50 feet wide at every point.
b) Building Limitations Not more than one single family dwelling is to be located on
each of the Section 4.4 Lot and the Complying Lot. No such single family dwelling may
be located on the proposed Section 4.4 Lot at the time of application or approval of the
special permit. The special permit shall contain a recorded restriction against further
division of the Section 4.4 Lot creating any additional building lots.
c) Adequate Access There will be adequate actual access from the street to the single
family dwelling located or to be located on the Section 4.4 Lot and the Complying Lot,
respectively. The access to the Section 4.4 Lot shall be within the boundary lines of the
Section 4.4 Lot and not subject to any public or private easement or easements unless the
Planning Board finds that such easement or easements will have no effect or only minimal
effect on the proposed use of the access, in which case the Planning Board may waive the
foregoing provision and include a finding supporting such waiver in its decision hereunder.
d) Lot Size The Section 4.4 Lot shall contain at least twice the required minimum lot size
of the residence district in which it is located.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-24-
e) Additional Setbacks Each building greater than 160 gross square feet on the Section
4.4 Lot shall have the following minimum setback from each street and lot line (in lieu of
those specified in Section 4.2):
1) 100 feet in Residence A
2) 125 feet in Residence B
3) 150 feet in Residence C
The Planning Board may by special permit authorize an accessory structure having no
more than 160 gross square feet to be located closer to the side and rear setbacks, but not
closer than the setbacks specified in Section 4.2.
f) Underground Utilities All utilities will be installed underground unless the Planning
Board specifically finds that above ground utilities will have minimal impact on adjacent
lots.
g) Driveway By-law Compliance Both the Section 4.4 Lot and the Complying Lot
comply with the Sherborn Driveway By-Law.
4.4.7 Additional Requirements. In determining whether or not to grant a special permit
under this section and in determining what condition, if any, to impose on such a special permit,
the Planning Board may consider additional circumstances relating to soil conditions,
topography, lot history, wetlands, public safety and convenience, and public interest or other
matters affecting the Section 4.4 Lot and the Complying Lot, or the effect of the proposed
division on the surrounding area and its inhabitants, including without limitation:
a) Size, and regularity of shape of the Section 4.4 Lot and the Complying Lot.
b) Proximity of the access to the Section 4.4 Lot and the Complying Lot to each other and
to other roadways or driveway openings.
c) Adequacy of the street(s) on which the lots front for vehicular traffic, from the
standpoint of both capacity and safety.
d) The extent to which the frontage provided is less than that required by Section 4.2.
e) The extent to which the Section 4.4 Lot and the Complying Lot will be in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of the Zoning By-Laws.
f) The possibility of future division or subdivision of the Complying Lot.
g) The effect of the creation and development of the proposed Section 4.4 Lot on scenic
or natural qualities of the land in comparison to alternative possible plans for dividing or
subdividing the original lot. (Added 1996)
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-25-
4.5 Open Space Special Permit (Added 1996)
4.5.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to provide by special permit for an alternative to traditional
subdivision development that preserves open space by permitting greater flexibility in site
design than is otherwise allowed in this By-law for standard subdivision lots. The intent of
this zoning provision is to:
- encourage the conservation of open land for its scenic beauty and value to wildlife;
- preserve agricultural and forestry use of property;
- enhance recreational resources and use of property;
- protect ecological assets, including water supply, wetlands, wildlife corridors, and
uncommon geologic features;
- perpetuate the appearance of Sherborn's traditional small town New England
landscape;
- promote better building location and overall site planning than may be possible under
traditional zoning, while retaining standard setbacks from other properties not part of
the Open Space Subdivision;
4.5.2 Special Permit for Open Space Subdivision
Persons seeking to develop a parcel of land as an open space subdivision may apply for a
special permit under this Section 4.5 in accordance with General Laws Chapter 40A, Section
9. Applicants are strongly encouraged to meet with the Planning Board and other town boards
informally prior to submitting an application for special permit.
4.5.3 Minimum Requirements
a. Any parcel of land that is the subject of an application for special permit under this section
must have (i) at least four times the minimum area that would be required for a single family
residence in the most restrictive zoning district in which all or any part of the parcel lies, and
(ii) no less than six acres;
b. Under this section, the Planning Board may, by issuing a special permit, vary the otherwise
applicable dimensional requirements of this Zoning Bylaw, other than provisions as to height,
provided that the Planning Board may not issue a special permit for a proposed Open Space
Subdivision that shows any lot proposed for development with:
(i) a front yard setback of less than 30 feet;
(ii) an offset of less than 100 feet measured in a straight line between the principal
building on one lot within the Open Space Subdivision and the principal building on
an adjacent lot within the Open Space Subdivision;
(iii) frontage on a subdivision road or existing street of less than 50 feet;
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-26-
(iv) a driveway that does not meet the requirements of the Sherborn driveway by-law,
unless a waiver is granted pursuant to the terms of that bylaw;
(v) less than one acre in area.
c. The Planning Board shall not vary, and the proposed open space subdivision shall meet, all
dimensional requirements pertaining to setback of structures from properties not included as
part of the parcel proposed for open space subdivision.
d. With the exception of proposed subdivision ways and public access trails, sidewalks or
bicycle paths, there shall be a 100 foot buffer left in its natural condition along any Scenic
Road.
e. The Planning Board shall not approve a special permit under this section unless the
proposed open space subdivision includes an Open Space Parcel (as defined herein) and has
no more building lots than the number of Standard Subdivision Lots that would be allowed on
the parcel of land that is the subject of the application.
4.5.4 Planning Board as Special Permit Granting Authority
The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority for special permits
authorized in this Section, and shall hear and decide all properly submitted applications in
compliance with the time limitations and other procedural requirements specified in Chapter
40A of the General Laws, these Zoning Bylaws (including without limitation Section 6.2) and
the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board.
4.5.5 Contents of Application
An application for a special permit under Section 4.5. shall consist of:
(a) A locus plan clearly showing the location of the parcel with respect to all surrounding
properties and streets, and containing thereon, the location of all lot lines, structures and
driveways within 500 feet of the land that is the subject of the application.
(b) A preliminary subdivision plan prepared in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the Sherborn Planning Board and showing a traditional subdivision or approval not required
development meeting all dimensional requirements of the Sherborn Zoning By-law and all
applicable requirements of the Sherborn Subdivision Regulations, and indicating thereon the
number of Standard Subdivision Lots as defined in this section.
(c) An open space development plan consisting of one or more sheets showing:
i. all proposed building lots
ii. the location and configuration of the proposed Open Space Parcel, and calculations
demonstrating that the proposed Open Space Parcel satisfies the definition of an
Open Space Parcel in this section.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-27-
iii. building envelopes for all proposed principal and accessory structures with a
footprint in excess of 250 square feet on the building lots, and a statement of the
intended height and bulk of each proposed structure, and the number of bedrooms
and maximum square footage for each proposed residence
iv. proposed setbacks to all lot lines
v. street layout for all proposed subdivision ways
vi. the location of existing and proposed driveways, bicycle paths, sidewalks and
walkways
vii. topography, both existing and proposed, at two foot intervals.
viii. the location and results of all deep hole and percolation tests
ix. the location of all proposed wells and components of proposed subsurface disposal
systems, and existing wells and components of subsurface disposal systems on or
within 500 feet of the subject parcel.
x. the location of all components of any proposed fire protection system (e.g. storage
tanks, dry hydrants, emergency access easements)
xi. the location (both existing and proposed to be retained) of wooded areas, wetland
and buffer zone areas, stone walls, easements proposed or of record, trails or paths,
and the location of any trees over 12 inches in diameter proposed for removal;
xii. the location of any existing or proposed landscaping for the purpose of visually
distinguishing and enhancing the privacy of individual development lots.
(d) A brief written statement comparing the effect of the proposed open space development
to the traditional development that could be built on the parcel, in terms of expected impact on
tax base, town services, schools, traffic, wetlands, groundwater, views from public ways and
lands, historic structures, recreational, wildlife, agricultural and forestry uses of land, and other
relevant and applicable subjects.
(e) Such other information and materials as the Planning Board may, in its discretion, require
by regulation.
The Planning Board may, upon request of an applicant, and for good cause shown, waive or
modify any requirement of this subsection in connection with a particular application.
4.5.6 Filing of Application
Seven copies of applications for Special Permit under this Section shall be prepared and filed
with the Town Clerk as follows:
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-28-
a) One (1) copy for the records of the Town Clerk as required under Chapter 40A,
Section 9 of the General Laws;
b) Three (3) copies for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Planning Board;
c) One (1) copy for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Board of Appeals;
d) One (1) copy for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Board of Health;
e) One (1) copy for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Conservation
Commission.
Immediately upon receipt of an application under this section and the filing fee associated
therewith, the Town Clerk shall transmit three (3) copies to the Planning Board, one (1) copy
to the Board of Appeals, one (1) copy to the Board of Health, and one (1) copy to the
Conservation Commission.
4.5.7 Review and Comment by Advisory Boards
The Board of Appeals shall review all applications under this section. The Board of Appeals
shall make such recommendations on each application as it deems appropriate, and shall send
copies thereof to the Planning Board and the applicant. Board of Appeals review shall be
advisory and not directive. The failure of the Board of Appeals to make written
recommendations within thirty-five (35) days of its receipt of an application shall be deemed
to be lack of opposition thereto by the Board of Appeals.
The Conservation Commission shall review all applications under this section for the purpose
of advising the Planning Board as to what portion of the parcel is subject to jurisdiction under
the Wetlands Protection Act and the Sherborn Wetlands By-law. The Conservation
Commission may provide such additional comment to the Planning Board as it deems
appropriate. Conservation Commission review shall be advisory and not directive. Such
review by the Conservation Commission shall not substitute for or represent a waiver of the
exercise of the Conservation Commission's jurisdiction under other applicable laws and
regulations.
The Board of Health shall review all applications under this section for the purpose of advising
the Planning Board on the number and location of lots shown on the standard preliminary
subdivision plan required under 4.5.5 (b) and on the proposed Open Space Development Plan
required under 4.5.5(c) that could be developed on the parcel under applicable regulations of
the Sherborn Board of Health and Title 5 of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection regulations (310 C.M.R. 15.000). The Board of Health may provide such additional
comment to the Planning Board as it deems appropriate. Board of Health review shall be
advisory and not directive. Such review by the Board of Health shall not substitute for or
represent a waiver of the exercise of the Board of Health's jurisdiction under other applicable
laws and regulations.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-29-
The Planning Board may, by regulation or otherwise, solicit the comment of other town
officials or boards prior to or during the public hearing on the special permit application.
4.5.8 Relationship to Subdivision Process
Planning Board approval of a special permit hereunder shall not substitute for compliance with
the Subdivision Control Law, nor oblige the Planning Board to approve any related definitive
plan for subdivision, nor reduce any time periods for Planning Board consideration under the
law. However, in order to facilitate processing, the Planning Board, insofar as practicable and
allowed by law, may adopt regulations establishing procedures for submission of a combined
plan and application which shall satisfy this section and the Board's regulations under the
Subdivision Control Law.
4.5.9 Standard for Issuance of Special Permit
A special permit under this section shall be approved only if the requirements of Section 6.1
and 7.2.3.c of this Bylaw are met and if the Planning Board further determines that:
a. The proposed open space subdivision meets all the requirements of this section.
b. The proposed open space subdivision is in harmony with the general purpose of this
By-law, will further the purpose of this Section, and is superior for the Town in that
regard to a conventional development plan.
c. The creation of the development according to the plan will not result in a detrimental
impact to the neighborhood or the Town, and such development is designed with due
consideration for health and safety factors.
4.5.10 Conditions
a. Any special permit issued under this section shall include as a condition the requirement
that prior to the clearing of vegetation, the issuance of a building permit for, or the
commencement of any construction of buildings or other improvements within the Open Space
Subdivision, the Open Space Parcel be deeded in fee to the Town of Sherborn for open space
use, or to a specified non-profit conservation organization for use in perpetuity as public open
space, or to a corporation or trust owned by the owners of lots within the open space
subdivision with a permanent conservation restriction imposed thereon for the benefit of the
public in accordance with General Laws Chapter 184, Sections 31-33, and G.L. c. 40A, Section
9.
b. Any special permit hereunder shall include as a condition the requirement that no lot in the
Open Space Subdivision may be further divided or subdivided.
c. A special permit issued under this section shall incorporate such additional conditions as
are appropriate to further the purposes of this by-law. Without limiting the foregoing, the
Planning Board shall impose such conditions as may be necessary to ensure that the number,
type, size, arrangement, and design of proposed residences in the open space subdivision are
suitable for the neighborhood within which it is to be located.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-30-
4.5.11 Definitions
The following definitions apply to this section of the Zoning By-law only
i. Open Space Parcel: A parcel proposed for preservation as open space containing
contiguous undeveloped land amounting to at least 40 percent of the total area of the parcel
that is the subject of the application, at least half of which 40 percent minimum is Upland Area.
Such parcel shall be of a size, configuration and location having value to the public and the
Town for purposes of preserving or creating agricultural, open space, forestry or recreational
resources (including linkage to adjacent public lands or trails), water supply, wetlands, scenic
beauty, wildlife protection, wildlife corridors, or similar public purpose.
ii. Standard Subdivision Lot: A lot meeting all applicable dimensional and frontage
requirements of Sections 4.2 and 4.3 of the Sherborn Zoning By-law without variance, special
permit or exception, containing in the determination of the Planning Board with the advice of
the Conservation Commission, sufficient Upland Area with slope of less than 12 percent to
provide for a building envelope of at least 100 feet by 100 feet and uninterrupted access thereto
from an existing or proposed street or way which is at least 20 feet wide, and having suitable
soils of sufficient areal extent to accommodate an individual subsurface disposal system for a
house under the applicable regulations of the Sherborn Board of Health and Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection.
iii. Scenic Road: Any of the roads that have been or are hereafter designated by the Town
pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 15C.
iv. Upland Area: Area not subject to the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission
under the Massachusetts Wetland Protection Act, but which may include buffer zone to such
protected area
4.6 Planned Unit Development Special Permit
4.6.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to provide by special permit for an alternative to traditional business
development that enhances the rural, village atmosphere of the Town Center or otherwise
provides increased public benefits by permitting greater flexibility in site design and mix of uses
than is otherwise allowed in this By-law. The intent of this zoning provision is to:
- provide for greater integration of land uses within the Town Center;
- preserve historic buildings by providing economically viable uses for them;
- relieve congestion by providing linked access and parking;
- perpetuate and enhance the appearance of Sherborn's traditional small town New England
center; and
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-31-
- promote better building location and overall site planning than may be possible under
traditional zoning, while retaining standard setbacks from other properties not part of the
Planned Unit Development.
4.6.2 Special Permit for Planned Unit Development
Persons seeking to develop property as a Planned Unit Development may apply for a special
permit under this Section 4.6 in accordance with General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 9.
Applicants are strongly encouraged to meet with the Planning Board and other town boards
informally prior to submitting an application for special permit.
4.6.3 Minimum Requirements
(a) No property shall be the subject of an application for a special permit under this section
unless at least 25% of such property is within the Business G or Business P districts and unless
such property is at least sixty thousand square feet in total area and has frontage within a
Business G or Business P district.
(b) The Planning Board may, by issuing a special permit, vary the otherwise applicable
dimensional requirements of Section 4.2, other than provisions as to height and maximum lot
coverage, provided that a special permit may not issue for a proposed Planned Unit Development
unless the applicant shows:
(i) a front yard setback of at least 20 feet, or if less, no less than that of a preexisting nonconforming
building on the lot;
(ii) side and rear setbacks of at least 30 feet from any lot not part of the PUD and located
in a Residence district;
(iii) pedestrian linkage(s) to abutting properties that is (are) well defined and of a design
and quality that will encourage significant use;
(iv) vehicular linkage with abutting business parcels;
(v) significant public amenities on or off site which may include, but are not limited to
the following: landscaped open area with walkways, benches, fountains, monuments,
and/or other features; bike racks and/or separate bicycle access; hitching posts and/or
separate horse access; drinking fountains; awnings, or pavilions; or other suitable
amenity; and
(vi) building designs that are complementary in scale and style to those of abutting
properties and that are, in general, appropriate for a small New England village.
(c) Notwithstanding anything in Section 3.2 Schedule of Use Regulations to the contrary,
a Planned Unit Development may include anywhere within its boundaries any mix of uses
currently allowed or permitted in the Business G or Business P districts except
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-32-
(i) such mix may not include, by building square footage, more than 50% retail uses;
(ii) service stations shall be prohibited;
(iii) no individual retail outlet may exceed 2500 square feet of gross interior floor area,
which area shall not include mechanical, storage or kitchen space; and
(iv) each retail area shall have direct access to a sidewalk, plaza, common or similar
outdoor pedestrian connection to the other retail spaces on the site.
4.6.4 Planning Board as Special Permit Granting Authority
The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority for special permits authorized
in this Section, and shall hear and decide all properly submitted applications in compliance with
the time limitations and other procedural requirements specified in Chapter 40A of the General
Laws, these Zoning Bylaws (including without limitation Section 6.2) and the Rules and
Regulations of the Planning Board.
4.6.5 Contents of Application
An application for a special permit under Section 4.6 shall consist of:
(a) A locus plan clearly showing the location of the proposed PUD with respect to all
surrounding properties and streets, and containing thereon, the location of all lot lines, structures
and driveways within 500 feet of the land that is the subject of the application.
(b) A site plan for a Planned Unit Development prepared in accordance with the requirements
of Subsection 5.3.1 (b) (C) and including but not limited to:
(i) the boundaries of the property to be included within the Planned Unit Development;
(ii) building envelopes for all proposed principal and accessory structures, and a statement
of the intended height and bulk of each proposed structure, and the square footage
proposed for each use;
(iii) proposed setbacks from all lot lines;
(iv) the location of existing and proposed driveways, parking spaces, bicycle paths,
sidewalks and walkways;
(v) topography, both existing and proposed, at two foot intervals;
(vi) the location and results of all deep hole and percolation tests, and/or other evidence of
satisfying waste disposal requirements;
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-33-
(vii) the location of all proposed wells and components of proposed subsurface disposal
systems, and existing wells and components of subsurface disposal systems on or
within 150 feet of the subject parcel;
(viii) the location of all components of any proposed fire protection system (e.g., storage
tanks, dry hydrants, emergency access easements);
(ix) the location (both existing and proposed to be retained) of wooded areas, wetland and
buffer zone areas, stone walls, easements proposed or of record, trails or paths, and
the location of any trees over 12 inches in diameter proposed for removal;
(x) the location of any existing or proposed landscaping or other public amenities
proposed to be provided as part of the Planned Unit Development; and
(xi) proposed pedestrian and vehicular linkages with abutting properties including any
necessary easements or other agreements with abutting property owners that may be
necessary to make the linkages possible.
(c) A brief written statement comparing the effect of the proposed Planned Unit Development
to the conventional development that could be built on the parcel, in terms of expected impact on
tax base; town services; traffic; wetlands; groundwater; views from public ways and lands;
historic structures; recreational, wildlife, agricultural and forestry uses of land, and other relevant
and applicable subjects.
(d) Such other information and materials as the Planning Board may, in its discretion, require
by regulation.
The Planning Board may, upon request of an applicant, and for good cause shown, waive or
modify any requirement of this Subsection 4.6.5 in connection with a particular application.
4.6.6 Filing of Application
Seven copies of applications for Special Permit under this Section shall be prepared and filed with
the Town Clerk as follows:
a) One (1) copy for the records of the Town Clerk as required under Chapter 40A,
Section 9 of the General Laws;
b) Three (3) copies for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Planning Board;
c) One (1) copy for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Board of Appeals;
d) One (1) copy for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Board of Health; and
e) One (1) copy for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Conservation Commission.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-34-
Immediately upon receipt of an application under this section and the filing fee associated
therewith, the Town Clerk shall transmit three (3) copies to the Planning Board, and for their
review and comment, one (1) copy to the Board of Appeals, one (1) copy to the Board of Health,
and one (1) copy to the Conservation Commission.
4.6.7 Relationship to Section 5.3.1(b) Special Permits for Site Changes in the Business
District
Planning Board approval of a special permit hereunder shall be combined with site plan review
under Section 5.3.1(b). In reviewing any proposed Planned Unit Development, the Planning
Board and the review boards shall consider the criteria listed in Section 5.3.1(b) (D) as well as the
standards and minimum requirements contained herein.
4.6.8 Standard for Issuance of Special Permit
A special permit under this section shall be approved only if the requirements of Section 6.1 and
7.2.3.c of this Bylaw are met and if the Planning Board further determines that:
(a) The proposed Planned Unit Development meets all the requirements of this section;
(b) The proposed Planned Unit Development is sufficiently advantageous to render it
appropriate to grant special permission to depart from the normal requirements of the district; and
(c) The creation of the development according to the plan will not result in a detrimental impact
to the neighborhood or the Town, and such development is designed with due consideration for
health and safety factors.
4.6.9 Conditions
(a) Any special permit hereunder shall include as a condition the requirement that there be no
further subdivision of the portion of the lot subject to the Planned Unit Development;
(b) A special permit issued under this section shall incorporate such additional conditions as are
appropriate to further the purposes of this by-law; and
(c) It shall be a condition to the exercise and validity of any special permit under this section
that an as-built plan certifying conformance to the approved site plan be submitted to the Planning
Board and building department within 30 days after completion of the authorized site changes.
4.7 Registered Marijuana Dispensary
4.7.1 Purposes
4.7.1.1 To provide for the establishment of Registered Marijuana Dispensaries (RMD) in
appropriate places and under strict conditions in accordance with Chapter 369 of the Acts of
2012, and as further regulated under 105 CMR 725.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-35-
4.7.1.2 To minimize the adverse impacts of RMD’s on adjacent properties, residential
neighborhoods, schools, local historic districts, and other land uses potentially incompatible
with said RMD’s.
4.7.1.3 To regulate the siting, design, placement, security, safety, monitoring, modification,
and removal of RMD’s.
4.7.2 Applicability
4.7.2.1 The commercial cultivation, production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or
wholesale sale trade, distribution or dispensing of Marijuana for Medical Use is prohibited
unless permitted as a RMD under this Section 4.7.
4.7.2.2 No RMD shall be established except in compliance with the provisions of this Section
4.7.
4.7.2.3 Nothing in this Bylaw shall be construed to supersede federal and state laws
governing the sale and distribution of narcotic drugs.
4.7.2.4 If any provision of this Section or the application of any such provision to any person
or circumstance shall be invalid, the reminder of this Section, to the extent it can be given
effect, or the application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to
which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and to this end the provision of this
Section are severable.
4.7.3 Definitions
Registered Marijuana Dispensary – Shall mean a not-for-profit entity registered under 105
CMR 725.100, to be known as a registered marijuana dispensary (RMD), that acquires,
cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as edible
Marijuana Infused Products, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells,
distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related
supplies, or educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
Unless otherwise specified, RMD refers to the site(s) of dispensing, cultivation, and
preparation of marijuana.
Marijuana for Medical Use – Marijuana that is designated and restricted for use by, and for the
benefit of, Qualifying Patients in the treatment of Debilitating Medical Conditions as set forth
in Chapter 369 and 105 CMR 725
Marijuana – The same substance defined as “marihuana” under Chapter 94C of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
4.7.4 Eligible Locations for RMD’s.
RMD’s may be allowed by special permit in the Business General district only provided the
facility meets the requirements of this Section 4.7.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-36-
4.7.5 General Requirements and Conditions for all RMD’s.
4.7.5.1 All RMD’s shall be contained within a building or structure unless exempted under
G.L. c. 40A, §3.
4.7.5.2 No RMD shall be located within 500 feet of the property line of any school,
playground or athletic fields.
4.7.5.3 Size standards:
1) A standalone dispensary shall not exceed 1,500 sq. ft. for product display, client
dispensary, and patient consultation area.
2) A standalone cultivation facility shall not exceed 3,000 sq. ft.
3) A facility to manufacture/process marijuana infused products shall not exceed
3,000 sq. ft.
4) Any combination of the above three facilities shall not exceed 7,500 sq. ft.
5) The RMD shall be of adequate interior space to accommodate all activities inside
the building so as not to have outside patient queuing on sidewalks, in parking
areas, or in other areas outside the RMD.
4.7.5.4 A RMD shall not be located in buildings that contain any medical doctors’ offices or
the offices of any other professional practitioner authorized to prescribe the use of medical
marijuana.
4.7.5.5 The hours of operation of RMD shall be set by the Special Permit Granting Authority,
but in no event shall an RMD be open and/or operating between the hours of 8:00 PM and 8:00
AM.
4.7.5.6 No smoking, burning or consumption of any product containing marijuana or
marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the premises of a RMD.
4.7.5.7 No RMD shall be located inside a building containing residential units. All RMD’s
shall be contained within a permanent building or structure. No RMD shall be located inside a
movable or mobile structure such as a van, trailer, cargo container or truck.
4.7.5.8 Signage for the RMD shall include the following language: “Registration card issued
by the MA Department of Public Health required.” The required text shall be a minimum of
two inches in height.
4.7.5.9 RMD shall provide the Sherborn Police Department, Building Inspector and the
Special Permit Granting Authority with the names, phone numbers and email addresses of all
management staff and key holders to whom one can provide notice if there are operating
problems associated with the establishment.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-37-
4.7.6 Special Permit Requirements
4.7.6.1 A RMD shall only be allowed by special permit from the Sherborn Planning Board
in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §9, subject to the following statements, regulations,
requirements, conditions and limitations.
4.7.6.2 A special permit for a RMD shall be limited to one or more of the following uses that
shall be prescribed by the Special Permit Granting Authority:
a) Cultivation of Marijuana for Medical Use (horticulture) except that sites protected under
Chapter 40A Section 3 shall not require a special permit;
b) Processing and packaging of Marijuana for Medical Use, including Marijuana that is in the
form of smoking materials, food products, oils, aerosols, ointments, tinctures and other
products;
c) Retail sale or distribution of Marijuana for Medical Use to Registered Qualifying Patients:
4.7.6.3 In addition to the application requirements set forth in Sections 4.7.5 of this Bylaw,
a special permit application for a RMD shall include the following;
a) The name and address of each owner of the facility;
b) Copies of all required licenses and permits issued to the applicant by the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts and any of its agencies for the Facility;
c) Evidence of the Applicant’s right to use the site for the RMD, such as a deed, or lease;
d) A statement under oath disclosing all of the Applicant’s owners, shareholders, partners,
members, managers, directors, officers, or other similarly-situated individuals and entities and
their addresses. If any of the above are entities rather than persons, the Applicant must disclose
the identity of the owners of such entities until the disclosure contains the names of individuals;
e) A certified list all parties in interest entitled to notice of the hearing for the special permit
application, taken from the most recent tax list of the town and certified by the Town Assessor;
f) Proposed security measures for the RMD, including lighting, fencing, gates and alarms,
etc., to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.
g) A site plan showing the boundaries and topography of the parcel; the wetlands, ponds,
streams, or waterways within or adjacent to the land; the proposed location, bulk, types,
architectural character and floor plans for all buildings or structures; the proposed locations,
design and dimensions of all streets, walks, parking and other paved areas; the proposed
grading plan, drainage plan, and location of major utilities, wells and septic systems; and the
proposed open space.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-38-
h) A floor plan showing the total floor area and a site plan showing compliance with state
requirements for facilities and areas within an RMD building, a landscaping plan that complies
with state requirements that there are no trees, bushes or other foliage outside of the RMD that
could allow for a person or persons to conceal themselves from sight.
4.7.6.4 Mandatory Findings. The Special Permit Authority shall not issue a special permit
for a RMD unless it finds that:
a) The RMD is designated to minimize any adverse visual or economic impacts on abutters
and other parties in interest, as defined in G.L. c. 40A,§ 11;
b) The RMD demonstrates that it will meet all the permitting requirements of all applicable
agencies within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all
applicable state laws and regulations; and
c) The applicant has satisfies all of the conditions and requirements of Sections 4.7.5 and
4.7.6 herein:
4.7.6.5 Annual Reporting. Each RMD permitted under this Bylaw shall as a condition of its
special permit file an annual report with the Special Permit Granting Authority, Police Chief
and the Building Inspector no later than January 31st, providing a copy of all current applicable
state licenses for the RMD and/or its owners and demonstrate continued compliance with the
conditions of the special permit.
4.7.6.6 A special permit granted under this Section shall have a term limited to the duration
of the applicant’s ownership of the premises as a RMD. A special permit may be transferred
only with the approval of the Special Permit Granting Authority in the form of an amendment
to the special permit with all information required in this Section 4.7.
4.7.6.7 The Board shall require the applicant to post a bond at the time of construction to
cover costs for the removal of the RMD in the event the Town must remove the facility. The
value of the bond shall be based upon the ability to completely remove all the items noted in
4.7.7.2 and properly clean the facility at prevailing wages. The value of the bond shall be
developed based upon the applicant providing the Planning Board with three written bids to
meet the noted requirements. An incentive factor of 1.5 shall be applied to all bonds to ensure
compliance and adequate funds for the town to remove the facility at prevailing wages.
4.7.7 Abandonment or Discontinuance of Use
4.7.7.1 A special permit shall lapse if not exercised within one year, which shall not include
such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal referred to in chapter 40A,
§17, from the grant thereof if a substantial use has not sooner commenced except for good
cause or, in the case of a permit for construction, if construction has not begun by such date
except for good cause.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-39-
4.7.7.2 A RMD shall be required to remove all material, plants equipment and other
paraphernalia:
a) Prior to surrendering its state issued licenses or permits; or
b) Within six months of ceasing operations; whichever comes first
4.7.8 A RMD shall be subject to the Site Plan Review requirements of Section 5.3.
4.7.9 Hardship Cultivation
Hardship cultivation by qualifying patients registered with the Department of Public Health
pursuant to 105 CMR 725.015 shall be in accordance with 105 CMR 725.035 including the
requirement that cultivation and storage of marijuana shall be in an enclosed, locked area
accessible only to the registered qualifying patient or his or her personal caregiver(s), subject
to 105 CMR 725.650. Marijuana shall not be visible from the street or other public areas.
4.8 Marijuana not Medically Prescribed
Consistent with M.G.L. Chapter 94G, Section 3(a)(2), all types of marijuana establishments as
defined in M.G.L. Chapter 94G, Section 1, to include all marijuana cultivators, marijuana
testing facilities, marijuana product manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of
licensed marijuana-related businesses, shall be prohibited in the Town of Sherborn. This
Section shall be effective upon passage by the voters at a Town election.
4.9 Temporary Moratorium on Marijuana Establishments
Section 4.9.1 Purpose
On November 8, 2016, the voters of the Commonwealth approved a law regulating the
cultivation, processing, distribution, possession and use of marijuana for personal use (new
M.G.L. Chapter 94G, Regulation of the Use and Distribution of Marijuana Not Medically
Prescribed). The law, which allows certain personal use and possession of marijuana, is
effective on December 15, 2016 and (as amended on December 30, 2016; Chapter 351 of the
Acts of 2016) requires a Cannabis Control Commission to issue regulations regarding the
licensing of commercial activities by March 15, 2018 and to begin accepting applications for
licenses on or before April 1, 2018. Regulations to be promulgated by the Cannabis Control
Commission may provide guidance on certain aspects of local regulation of Marijuana
Establishments for non-medical marijuana. The regulation of marijuana for personal use raises
novel legal, planning, and public safety issues, and the Town needs time to study and consider
the regulation of Marijuana Establishments for non-medical marijuana and address such issues,
as well as to address the potential impact of the State regulations on local zoning and to
undertake a planning process to consider amending the Zoning Bylaw regarding regulation of
Marijuana Establishments for non-medical marijuana. The Town intends to adopt a temporary
moratorium on the use of land and structures in the Town for Marijuana Establishments for
non-medical marijuana so as to allow the Town sufficient time to address the effects of such
structures and uses in the Town and to enact bylaws in a consistent manner.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-40-
Section 4.9.2 Definition
"Non-medical Marijuana Establishment" shall mean a marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing
facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other type of licensed
marijuana-related business as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 94G.
Section 4.9.3 Temporary Moratorium
For the reasons set forth above and notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Bylaw
to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of land or
structures for a Non-Medical Marijuana Establishment and other uses related to personal use
of marijuana. The moratorium shall be in effect through June 30, 2018 or until such time as
the Town adopts Zoning Bylaw amendments that regulate Non-Medical Marijuana
Establishments, whichever occurs earlier. During the moratorium period, the Town shall
undertake a planning process to address the potential impacts of recreational marijuana in the
Town, consider the Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding Non-Medical
Marijuana Establishments, and shall consider adopting Zoning Bylaw amendments in response
to these new issues. This temporary moratorium shall not affect in any way the use of land or
structures for Registered Marijuana Dispensaries, (for medical marijuana), which are governed
by Section 4.7 of this Zoning By-law.
SECTION 5 SPECIAL REGULATIONS
5.1 Off-street Parking (Amended 1983, 1994, 2009)
5.1.1 Minimum Parking Requirements (Amended 1997, 2009)
In any district where permitted no use of premises shall be authorized or extended, and no
building or structure shall be erected or enlarged, unless there is provided for such extension,
erection or enlargement off-street parking facilities treated with a surface binder or crushed
stone, located within three hundred (300) feet of the principal building, structure or use of the
premises and containing not less than the number of parking spaces hereinafter specified or
such lesser number of spaces as the Planning Board may allow on an approved Parking Area
Plan under section 5.1.3.
a) Boarding or Rooming House
One space for each sleeping room.
b) Dwelling Used For Professional Occupation
Three spaces.
c) Roadside Stand, Commercial Greenhouse or Nursery
Six spaces plus one space for each two non-resident employees.
d) Commercial Stable
One space for each two employees and one space for every three horses to be stabled on the
premises.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-41-
e) Day Care Center, Nursery School, Private Elementary Or Secondary School, Charitable or
Philanthropic Institution
Ten spaces.
f) Social, Recreational or Athletic Club
One space for each five members.
g) Offices for Business or Professional Use
One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
h) Restaurant
One space for each three seats and for each 80 inches of standing counter space.
i) Bank or Other Financial Institution, Retail Store or Service Establishment
One space for each 200 feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
j) Shop for Crafts, Antiques or Art Objects
One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof.
k) Gasoline Service Station, Repair Garage or Repair Shop for Light Equipment
Adequate off-street space to accommodate customers and employees. (Frequent parking of
vehicles owned by such customers or employees on a public or private way adjacent to the
premises shall be considered evidence of the inadequacy of the off-street parking space
provided.)
l) Multidwelling Project in Residence EA District
One and one-half spaces for each dwelling unit. (Amended 1991)
5.1.2 Nonconforming Parking Exemptions
Permanent structures and land uses in existence at the time this section becomes effective, and
uses for which building permits have been approved at the time this section becomes effective,
shall not be subject to the requirements set forth in Section 5.1.1, provided that any parking
facilities now existing to serve such structures or uses shall not in the future be reduced, except
where they exceed such requirements, in which case they may not be reduced below such
requirements.
5.1.3 Parking Area Plans
There shall be submitted to the Planning Board, for approval, before a building permit shall be
issued, or a use permit granted, a plan of the proposed parking facilities showing area and
dimensions of the lot, locations, areas and sizes of the buildings, maximum area of building to
be used for selling, offices and other uses, maximum number of employees to be
accommodated at any one time, maximum seating and/or sleeping capacity where applicable.
The plan shall also show the number of parking spaces to be provided, their proposed layout
including access and egress, circulation, loading and unloading, maneuvering space, grading,
drainage provision for snow removal and disposal, safety precautions, and surfacing material.
The Planning Board may also require the plan to show any additional information necessary
to determine compliance with this by-law.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-42-
5.1.4 Joint Use of Parking Facilities
Joint off-street parking facilities may be provided for two or more separate buildings or uses
on the same lot or different lots, but in such case, the total spaces required shall be the sum of
the spaces required for the individual buildings or uses.
5.1.5 Screening of Parking Areas
All open off-street parking areas, permitted and/or required, which are located within a
Residence District, or adjacent to a Residence District, shall be screened from all adjoining
lots in the Residence District by:
a) a strip four (4) feet wide, densely planted with shrubs or trees at least four (4) feet in height;
or
b) a solid wall or fence not less than four (4) feet nor more than six (6) feet in height.
5.2 Signs (1990 version deleted, new section inserted 1994))
5.2.1 Prohibited Signs
The following sign prohibitions apply in all districts:
a) Any sign not expressly allowed or permitted or exempted under this By-Law is
prohibited.
b) No sign shall be erected at or near the intersection of any streets or a street and driveway
in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or erected at any location where for
any reasons it may interfere with or obstruct the view of or which by reason of its shape,
color, location or other characteristics could be confused with any traffic sign, signal or
device.
c) No sign shall be painted or posted directly on a window or affixed to an exterior wall
except as permitted under Section 5.2.7.e.3.
d) No sign shall be affixed in any way to or from a part of any cupola, tower, spire,
chimney, enclosure or other object or structure located on or above the roof of any building.
5.2.2 Definitions
The following terms shall be interpreted and defined as:
a) Sign
A sign shall include any lettering, word, numeral, emblem, design, devise, trademark,
drawing, picture, flag with commercial announcements or advertising thereon, pennant,
streamer, or other object of whatever material or method of construction and however
displayed, whether being a structure or any part thereof, or attached to or painted on or in
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-43-
any other manner represented on a building or other structure or object and used to indicate,
announce, direct, attract, advertise or promote.
b) Nonconforming signs
Any nonconforming sign legally erected prior to the adoption of this Section may be
continued to be maintained but not be enlarged, reworded, redesigned or altered in any
way, unless it is brought into conformity. Any such sign which has been destroyed or
damaged to such an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed one third of the
replacement value of the sign at the time of the destruction or damage shall not be repaired,
replaced or altered unless in conformity to Section 5.2. Any sign which has been
discontinued or abandoned (as provided in Section 1.4.2) or advertises any products,
business or activities which are no longer sold or carried on at the particular premises for
a period of two or more years shall cease to be a protected nonconforming sign and shall
be removed.
c) Primary Sign (formerly Accessory Sign)
Any sign which carries one or more of the following elements of general information about
the premises on which it is located:
1) Name of owner and/or occupant
2) Identifying name of the premises
3) Street address
4) Business, profession or other activity being lawfully conducted thereon
5) Advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part thereof
6) Identifying participants in construction work thereon.
A primary sign shall not carry any other advertising or information of any kind, except by
special permit.
d) Secondary Sign (Formerly Non-accessory Sign)
Any sign other than a primary sign as herein defined.
e) Ground Sign
Any sign other than a building sign as herein defined.
f) Building Sign
Any outdoor sign affixed to or painted on or in any manner supported by or forming a part
of the exterior of a building, or any sign visible through a window of a building.
5.2.3 General Regulation for Permanent Signs in All Districts
The following basic regulations apply to all signs unless otherwise provided by additional
requirements in Section 5.2.4 through 5.2.7.
a) Graphics
Sign graphics shall be painted, carved or otherwise permanently affixed with no moving,
movable or animated elements except that secondary signs may utilize changeable type or
messages, not of an electronic nature.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-44-
b) Illumination
Sign illumination is limited to a fixed white light from an external source either
incorporated in the sign structure or set in the ground nearby. Illumination shall not
incorporate tube-type gaseous or "neon" elements, nor internal light sources, and shall be
directed solely at the sign with glare shielded from the street or abutting premises. No sign
shall be illuminated between the hours of 10 o'clock p.m. and 6 o'clock a.m., except that if
the business establishment or office is open to the public after 10 o'clock p.m., the sign
may be illuminated until closing but not later than midnight.
c) Construction
All primary building signs shall be securely affixed to a substantial intermediary surface
which shall be securely yet removable affixed to the building and shall conform to the State
Building Code and all other applicable governmental requirements. Maximum area of such
signs shall be thirty (30) square feet. Area of signs composed of separate letters affixed to
the wall of a building shall be deemed to be the area of the smallest rectangle enclosing
and touching any parts thereof.
d) Location
All permanent signs shall be set back no less than ten (10) feet from the edge of the
pavement of any street. Traffic and parking signs shall be excluded.
e) Permit granting authority
The Board of Appeals is the permit granting authority for all signs except for those signs
allowed by Section 5.2.4.
5.2.4 General Regulations for Temporary Signs in All Districts
The Select Board may grant a special permit on property of the Town of Sherborn for the
erection and display of temporary signs for special messages or events.
a) Special permits for temporary signs shall conform to the applicable provisions of
Section 5.2.3 and these additional requirements.
b) Such signs shall be unlit.
c) The special permit granted for such signs shall specify the exact dimensions, type,
appearances and location of such sign, the period of display and such further restrictions
and conditions as deemed to be in the public interest.
5.2.5 Exempt Signs (Amended 1999)
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this By-Law.
a) Signs expressly protected by any constitution, or law of the federal or state government.
b) Signs erected on Town property under the authority of the Town of Sherborn.
c) Nonconforming signs as provided for in Section 1.4.5 of this By-Law.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-45-
d) Any sign, not exceeding four (4) square feet in area, limited solely to directing traffic
within a parking area or indicating parking restrictions in the use of such parking area.
e) Any sign not exceeding one (1) square foot in area, marking or identifying a foot or
bridle path over privately-owned land.
f) Customary signs on gasoline pumps and the price thereof.
g) Holiday decorations and lights in season.
h) Religious organization and non-profit educational organization are permitted to erect
and maintain on each lot upon which a church, synagogue, place of worship or other facility
used by the religious organization or non-profit educational organization directly to foster
its religious or educational purposes, a sign or signs meeting the following criteria:
1) One bulletin or announcement board sign or entrance sign for each public entrance,
up to but not exceeding a total of three such signs.
2) Each sign shall not exceed thirty five (35) square feet in area.
3) Each sign shall not exceed seven (7) feet in height above the ground level.
i) Any sign, not exceeding three square feet in area, that
1) is affixed to any building listed on the Sherborn Historical Resources Survey, as
maintained by the Sherborn Historical Commission, and indicates the construction
date and/or name of the building, as specified in the Survey, or,
2) is affixed to any building listed on the National Register of Historic Places, as
maintained by the National Park Service, and indicates the fact of such listing,
and/or the construction date and or/name of the building as listed on the Register.
5.2.6 Specific Regulations for Residence District
a) Allowed Permanent Signs
One (1) primary ground sign and one (1) primary building sign are allowed on any lot in a
Residence District. Such signs shall conform with all applicable provisions of Section
5.2.3 and the following additional requirements.
A primary ground sign shall have a maximum area of two (2) square feet, not to exceed six
(6) feet above ground level and having no illumination.
A primary building sign shall be affixed parallel to the wall of a building, shall have a
maximum area of one (1) square foot and a maximum height of five (5) feet above
entryway/threshold.
b) Specially Permitted Permanent Signs
The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for a primary ground sign for business,
professional or other lawful use allowed or permitted under Section 3.2.6 through 3.2.11, inclusive,
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-46-
Section 3.2.14, 3.2.15, and 3.2.26. Such sign shall conform with all applicable provisions of
Section 5.2.3 and the following additional requirements:
1) Maximum area shall be sixteen (16) square feet.
2) Maximum height shall be ten (10) feet above ground level.
3) The special permit for such sign shall specify its exact dimensions, type, location,
appearance, along with any other restrictions or conditions deemed to be in the public
interest.
c) Allowed Temporary Signs
One (1) temporary primary ground sign is allowed on any lot in a Residence District to
advertise the sale, rental or lease of the premises or any part thereof, or to identify owner,
architect, engineer, contractor and/or other participation in construction work thereon.
Such sign shall conform with all applicable provisions of Section 5.2.3 and the following
additional requirements:
1) Such sign shall not be illuminated, and shall be removed within one week following
completion of sale, rental or lease negotiation or construction work.
2) Maximum area shall be eight (8) square feet for signs advertising sale, rental or
lease, and twelve (12) square feet for signs identifying construction participants.
3) Maximum height shall be ten (10) feet above ground level.
d) Specially Permitted Temporary Signs for Subdivisions
The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for one (1) temporary primary ground
sign in each residential subdivision of six (6) or more approved lots for the purpose of
advertising the development and/or the sale, rental or lease of the individual lots thereon.
Such a sign shall conform to the applicable provisions of Section 5.2.3 and the following
additional requirements:
1) Such sign shall not be illuminated.
2) Maximum area shall be forty (40) square feet.
3) The special permit for such a sign shall specify its type, location, appearance, exact
dimensions along with any other restrictions or conditions deemed to be in the public
interest, shall be for a stated period of time not exceeding one (1) year and may be
renewed for successive periods, not exceeding one year (1) each.
5.2.7 Signs in Business District
All special permits for signs granted under Section 5.2.7 shall specify the exact type,
dimensions, location and appearance of such signs along with other conditions and restrictions
deemed to be in the public interest.
No sign shall be allowed in a Business District except those allowed in Residence Districts,
and/or primary signs or secondary signs complying with the following requirements.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-47-
a) Allowed Permanent Ground Signs
1) One primary ground sign on each lot indicating one or more of the following:
a) name of the owner and/or occupant
b) identifying name of the premises
c) street address
d) profession, business or other activity being lawfully conducted thereon.
e) advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part thereof
f) identifying participants in construction work thereon.
2) A primary ground sign shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
b) Specially Permitted Permanent Ground Signs
The permit granting authority may grant a special permit for one (1) primary ground sign
on a lot instead of the sign allowed in Section 5.2.7a and one (1) secondary ground sign if
it shall find that the nature and use of the premises or the location of the building with
reference to the street(s) is such that a ground sign(s) may be permitted in harmony with
the general purpose and intent of this By-Law, subject to the applicable provisions of
Section 5.2.3 and the following additional requirements:
1) A ground sign shall be located no less than ten (10) feet from the edge of the
pavement and no less than thirty (30) feet from a Residence District.
2) Primary ground signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area, nor six
(6) feet in any dimension nor twelve (12) feet in height above ground level.
3) Secondary ground signs shall not exceed twelve (12) square feet in area and the
maximum height of five (5) feet above ground level.
4) The special permit for such signs shall specify its exact dimensions, type, location,
appearance and any other restrictions and conditions as deem to be in the public
interest.
c) Allowed Permanent Building Signs
The following primary building signs are allowed in Business Districts, subject to the
applicable provisions of Section 5.2.3 and these additional requirements:
1) All building signs must be affixed parallel to a wall or building surface, shall not
extend from the face of such wall horizontally or vertically, and shall not project out
from such wall more than twelve (12) inches.
2) One (1) primary building sign for each business establishment consisting of a single
building except that if such building has more than one public entrance, a additional
sign may be affixed to each wall in which such entrance is located other than the wall
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-48-
on which the primary sign is affixed. The area of such an additional sign(s) shall not
exceed one-half (1/2) of the area of the allowable principal sign.
3) One (1) primary building sign for each business establishment in a building have
two or more such establishments, provided that such establishment has a separate
public entrance to its premises and that such a sign is affixed to that portion of a wall
which forms a part of the enclosure of such premises.
4) One (1) primary building directory sign of the business establishments occupying
a building having a common public entrance, such sign to be affixed to the wall of such
public entrance. The area of such signs shall not exceed one (1) square foot for each
establishment in the building.
d) Specially Permitted Permanent Building Sign
For a sign that would exceed the size of an allowed permanent building sign or a sign that
is to be perpendicular to the face of the wall:
1) The permit granting authority may grant a special permit for one (1) primary
building sign on each lot instead of the allowed permanent building sign if it shall find
that the nature and the use of the premises or the location of the building with reference
to the street(s) is such that a building sign may be permitted in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this By-Law subject to the applicable provisions of Section 5.2.3
and the following additional requirements:
2) Maximum area of such sign shall be sixty (60) square feet. Area of a sign composed
of separate letters affixed to the wall of a building shall be deemed to be the area of the
smallest rectangle enclosing and touching any parts thereof.
3) If a primary building sign is affixed perpendicular to the wall of a building, it shall
not extend above the top of such wall or shall it project from the face of the wall more
than six (6) feet.
e) Allowed Temporary Signs
1) One (1) temporary primary ground sign is allowed on any lot in a Business District
to identify participants in construction work thereon. Such sign shall conform with all
applicable requirements of Section 5.2.6.c, except that the maximum area shall not
exceed fifteen (15) square feet and the sign shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet
from any lot line.
2) The temporary signs allowed under Section 5.2.6 are also allowed in the Business
District.
3) Temporary secondary signs posted or painted directly on the inside of the windows
of businesses permitted in the Business District but covering no more than fifty percent
(50%) of any window surface.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-49-
f) Specially Permitted Temporary Secondary Sign
1) One (1) or more secondary building sign may be specially permitted which may be
constructed of flexible material but which must be affixed by at least its four (4) corners
to the wall and may be changed from time to time during the duration of the permit.
The sign shall be no larger than fifteen (15) square feet provide that a special permit
has been granted by the Board of Appeals. The special permit may impose conditions
upon this sign(s).
2) One or more secondary ground (sandwich board/A-frame, flag) sign/s which (i)
announces daily specials; ii) must be removed at the close of the business day; iii) may
not obstruct a public or private walkway, or be placed on public property. The
maximum area shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet, and the maximum height of
five (5) feet above the ground. The special permit may impose limiting conditions,
including among other matters the number allowed at each business property location.
5.3 Special Permits in Business Districts (Added 1981, amended 1987, 1994)
5.3.1 (1987 version deleted, new section substituted 1994)
a) Preliminary Site Plan Review
All applicants for a building permit in a Business District for exterior construction, or interior
construction to allow a change of use or an increase in an existing use and all applicants for a
special permit for a permissive use in a Business District shall be required to obtain a
preliminary site plan review by the Planning Board before applying to the Board of Appeals
for such special permit or, if no special permit is required, before applying to the building
inspector for such building permit. The applicant shall submit a drawing or drawings
adequately and accurately depicting the existing structures and any proposed alteration,
extension, change or additional structures, as well as any proposed change in landscaping,
signage, lighting, the location and layout of parking and vehicular and pedestrian access and
egress, and the location of surface water, sewerage, refuse or other waste disposal facilities. In
addition, the applicant shall submit a short narrative statement describing the nature of the
alteration, extension or change or additional structure and the reasons therefore.
The Planning Board shall review the preliminary site plan and may
(i) approve the plan as submitted;
(ii) approve the plan subject to such reasonable conditions as it deems necessary or
appropriate to maintain the public health, safety and well being and a consistent and attractive
visual appearance of the Business District, including but not limited to conditions relating to
pedestrian and vehicular access and egress, parking location and layout, the location and type
of signage, lighting and landscaping, including fences and the location of surface water,
sewerage, refuse or other waste disposal facilities.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-50-
(iii) conclude that a proposed alteration, extension or change or additional structure for
other than residential use will have a substantial impact on the Business District or adjoining
Residential Districts and that the preliminary site plan review is therefore denied without
prejudice and a site plan special permit pursuant to subsection 5.3.1(b) is required.
The Planning Board shall act upon a preliminary site plan submission within 21 days from the
date the submission is complete and presented to the Planning Board, and failure of the
Planning Board to act upon such submission within 21 days of such presentation shall be
considered unconditional approval. Any change to the preliminary site plan shall require
resubmission and review under this subsection.
Any applicant subject to site plan review in accordance with Section 5.3.1(b) shall be exempt
from the requirements of this Section.
b) Special Permits for Site Changes in the Business District.
A) A site plan review special permit from the Planning Board shall be required where
preliminary site plan review has been denied as set forth in 5.3.1(a)(iii) or where the existing
or proposed use of the lot or any portion thereof requires a special permit for a permissive use
in the Business District and the applicant proposes one or more of the following site changes:
i. The erection of a new building, any addition to an existing building or any change in
the location of the exterior walls so as to increase the building footprint by ten percent or
more, or any increase in the roof elevation of an existing building.
ii. An increase of the gross floor area of an existing business use by more than 25 percent,
whether accompanied by exterior construction or not.
B) The applicant for a site plan review special permit hereunder shall file the original and six
(6) copies of his application for such review with the Planning Board and shall forthwith file
an additional copy thereof with the office of the Town Clerk. Upon its receipt of such
application, the Planning Board shall submit one copy to the Select Board, one copy to the
Board of Health and one copy to the Board of Appeals for their review and written
recommendations as they deem appropriate and they shall send copies of such
recommendations to the Planning Board and the applicant. The failure of any such board to
make written recommendations within 35 days from its receipt of such application shall be
deemed to be lack of opposition thereto.
C) Each application and each copy thereof filed for a site plan review special permit hereunder
shall be accompanied by a site plan of the proposed use prepared by a registered professional
engineer, architect or landscape architect in compliance with the rules of the Planning Board
(if any) concerning the size, form, contents and style of plans and specifications required for
the granting of a special permit. Such site plan shall show among other things all existing and
proposed buildings with building elevations depicting architectural treatment thereof, all
structures, parking spaces, driveway openings, driveways, service areas and other open uses,
well locations, and all facilities for sewage, refuse and other waste disposal and for surface
water drainage, catch basins and drain pipes and all landscape features such as walkways,
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-51-
illumination systems, fences, planting areas, trees, shrubs and open areas on the lot. Said site
plan shall include a locus map (prepared in accordance with any Planning Board rules) showing
the site in relationship to the properties, easements and roadways in reasonable proximity
thereto including buildings, structures, driveway openings, off-street parking and all public or
private ways. Each application shall also include a short narrative statement describing the
nature of the proposed site changes and the reasons therefore.
D) In reviewing the application and the site plan, the Planning Board as the special permit
granting authority, and the Select Board, Board of Health and Board of Appeals, as the review
boards, shall consider among other things:
i. Compliance with the requirements for parking lot size, frontage, yards and heights, and
coverage of buildings, and all other provisions of the By-Laws;
ii. Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site and in
relation to adjacent streets, properties or improvements;
iii. Adequacy of the arrangement and number of parking spaces in relation to the proposed
uses of the premises;
iv. Provision for off-street loading and unloading of vehicles incidental to the servicing of
the buildings and related uses on the lot or tract;
v. Arrangement and appearance of proposed buildings, structures, illumination systems,
signs, screening and landscaping;
vi. Adequacy of methods for waste disposal, surface and subsurface drainage and lighting;
vii. Protection of adjoining premises and the general neighborhood from any detrimental
use of the lot or tract;
viii. Consideration of the natural characteristics of the site, including geological features,
soils, vegetation, slopes, watershed boundaries, scenic areas and views;
ix. Adequacy of all municipal facilities relative to fire and police protection and public
works and other municipal services required to meet the needs of the uses to be accommodated
on the site;
x. Description of the methods to be used during construction to control erosion and
sedimentation, to protect soil stockpiles and existing trees, and to insure the continuation of
the unique characteristics of the site;
xi. Whether the proposed location and exterior appearance of the buildings will promote
and preserve harmony in architectural treatment and avoid incongruous or inappropriate
architectural appearance and building arrangement detrimental to property values of the
adjoining owners or the community.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-52-
xii. Adequacy of methods to preserve and protect the quality and quantity of groundwater
at the site and neighboring locations.
E) It shall be a condition to the exercise and validity of any special permit under this section,
that an as-built plan certifying conformance to the approved site plan, be submitted to the
Planning Board and building department prior to the issuance of a permanent occupancy
permit.
c) Amendment to Site Plan
Any person to whom a site plan special permit has been granted shall submit to the Planning
Board any proposed change to such site plan prior to the commencement of any construction
in exercise of such permit. If within 30 days the Planning Board finds that such change is
inconsistent with the site plan special permit, the Planning Board may require the submission
of an application to amend the permit in which event the Planning Board shall hear and decide
the application to amend in full compliance with the procedural requirements specified in
Chapter 40A of the General Laws and Section 6 of these By-Laws.
Any change that would result in an increase in the height or dimensions or a diminution in the
setback of any proposed structure of ten percent or less may and any such change of more than
ten percent shall be presumed to be inconsistent with the site plan review special permit.
5.3.2 Special Permits for Business Use
The Board of Appeals shall be the special permit granting authority for any application for a
permissive use in a business district. The applicant for a permissive use hereunder shall file
the original and 2 copies of his application for such use with the Town Clerk as filing agent
for the Board of Appeals, and shall forthwith file a separate signed copy thereof for the records
of the Town Clerk as required under Chapter 40A, Section 9 of the General Laws. Upon its
receipt of such application, the Board of Appeals shall submit one copy thereof to the Select
Board and one copy to the Planning Board for their review and written recommendations. Each
such board shall make such recommendations as it deems appropriate and shall send copies
thereof to the Board of Appeals and the applicant. The failure of either board to make written
recommendations within 35 days from its receipt of such applications shall be deemed to be
lack of opposition thereto.
Each application filed for a permissive use hereunder shall comply with the rules of the Board
of Appeals relative to the granting of special permits. The Board of Appeals, as the special
permit granting authority hereunder, shall hear an application for a permissive use in full
compliance with the time limitations and all other procedural requirements specified in Chapter
40A of the General Laws and Section 6 of this by-law.
5.3.3 Site Plan Review for Certain Non-Residential Activities in a Residence District
(Added 1997)
a. Except as and to the extent exempted from local regulation by Chapter 40A, Section 3 of
the General Laws, all applicants for a building permit for interior or exterior construction in a
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-53-
Residence District in connection with a use included in the Schedule of Use Regulations under
Section 3.2.12 (Religious), or 3.2.13 (Educational) and all applicants for a driveway permit in
connection with such use or proposed use in a Residence District shall undergo site plan review
in accordance with the substantive and procedural requirements of Section 5.3.1 a) before a
driveway permit or building permit can issue. For review under this Subsection 5.3.3, the
Planning Board may either approve the plan as submitted, as provided by Section 5.3.1a) (i),
or approve the plan subject to conditions, as provided for by Section 5.3.1 a) (ii). Activities
on lots devoted to religious or non-profit educational use at the present time shall not be subject
to this provision.
b. The Planning Board shall be a review board as provided for in Section 6.2.2 for all
applications to the Board of Appeals for permissive uses in a Residence District.
5.4 Material Removal (Amended 1973, 2011)
The removal of sod, loam, clay, sand, gravel, stone (whether quarried or not), stone walls along
a public way, or other natural inorganic material from the premises in any residential or
business district is prohibited except in instances when such removal is (1) incidental to the
lawful construction or alteration of a building or structure (provided that such removal does
not exceed five hundred [500] cubic yards), or the lawful construction of a driveway on the
portion of the premises where the removal occurs (provided that such removal does not exceed
fifty [50] cubic yards), or (2) incidental to the construction or operation of public works by the
Town or other public body.
5.5 Flood Plain District (Added 1970, amended 1980, 2010, 2014)
5.5.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Flood Plain District is to provide that lands in the Town of Sherborn subject
to seasonal or periodic flooding as described herein shall not be used for residence or other
purposes in such a manner as to endanger public health and safety in any district.
5.5.2 Regulations
A Flood Plain District shall be considered to be superimposed over any other district
established by this by-law. Land in a Flood Plain District may be used for any purpose
otherwise permitted in the underlying district except:
a) No building or structure may be erected in a Flood Plain District; provided that the Board
of Appeals may grant a special permit in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.2.3 for
the construction or use of a building or structure which:
1) will not be used for sustained human occupancy;
2) will not substantially interfere with the natural water storage capacity of the land or the
natural flow of water;
3) will not constitute a danger to the public health or safety; and
4) will not cause any increase in the 100 year flood plain.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-54-
b) No dumping, filling, dredging, excavation, transfer or removal of any material which will
reduce the natural flood water storage capacity of the land or will interfere with the natural
flow of water over the land shall be permitted whether or not such land is within a “Regulatory
Floodway” designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
c) If any land included in a Flood Plain District is found by the Board of Appeals not in fact
to be subject to seasonal or periodic flooding, the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit
in accordance with the provisions of Section 6.2.3 for the use of such land for any purpose
permitted in the underlying district. The Board of Appeals may consider the elevation of the
particular land, its history of flooding and any other relevant evidence. The Board of Appeals
may request and consider information on the question from any other public official, board or
agency.
d) The portion of any lot in a Flood Plain District may be used to meet lot area requirements
for the Residential District over which the Flood Plain District is superimposed, provided that
such portion in the Flood Plain District does not exceed 25% of the minimum lot area in
Residence District A, 50% of the minimum lot area in Residence District B, and 60% of the
minimum lot area in Residence District C. Land in the Flood Plain District may not be used
to meet lot area requirements in Business Districts.
e) Whenever an application is made for a building permit, which the Building Inspector
believes may involve the use of land in the Flood Plain District, he shall require the applicant
for such permit to provide, as part of such application, a plan of the lot on which such building
is intended to be built showing the land contours at two foot intervals, related to elevations
above mean sea level, indicating the bench marks used and certified by a registered land
surveyor.
f) The provisions of Section 5.5 shall not apply to any building or structure in a Flood Plain
District that was in existence at the time of the adoption of Section 5.5 and notwithstanding
the provisions of Section 1.4, such buildings may be repaired, restored, altered, enlarged or
rebuilt in compliance with all other zoning laws and applicable state and municipal laws and
regulations, provided that any such altered, enlarged or rebuilt building shall not affect the
natural flow patterns of any watercourse.
5.5.3 Location of Flood Plain District
The Flood Plain District is herein established as an overlay district. The District includes all
special flood hazard areas within the Town of Sherborn designated as Zone A and AE on the
Middlesex County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by FEMA from the
administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Middlesex
County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Sherborn are panel numbers
25017C0518F, 25017C0519F, 25017C0538F and 25017C0631F dated July 7, 2014; and
25017C0539E, 25017C0632E, 25017C0633E, 25017C0634E, 25017C0651E, 25017C0652E,
25017C0653E, and 25017C0654E dated June 4, 2010. The exact boundaries of the District
may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined
by the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 7, 2014. The FIRM
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-55-
and FIS report are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board and Building Inspector and are
hereby made a part of the Zoning Map and are incorporated herein by reference.
5.5.4 Floodway and Base Flood Elevation Data
a) Floodway Data. In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory
floodway designated, the best available Federal, State, local, or other floodway data shall be
used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b) Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision
proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, within
unnumbered A zones.
5.5.5 Notification of Watercourse Alteration
In a riverine situation, the Conservation Commission Agent shall notify the following of any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
? Adjacent Communities
? NFIP State Coordinator
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
(or any successor agency or successor address)
? NFIP Program Specialist
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
(or any successor agency or successor address)
5.5.6 Use Regulations
a) The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other districts. All
development in the district, including structural and non-structural activities, whether
permitted by right or by special permit must be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section
40 of the Massachusetts General Laws and with the following:
? Sections of the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR) which address
floodplain and coastal high hazard areas;
? Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
(currently 310 CMR 10.00);
? Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00);
? Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP
(currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5);
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-56-
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above referenced state regulations
may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of these state
regulations.
b) In Zone AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway within the Town of
Sherborn designated on the Middlesex County FIRM encroachments are prohibited in the
regulatory floodway which would result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
c) All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
i) such proposals minimize flood damage;
ii) all public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage; and
iii) adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
5.6 Residence EA District – Multi-dwelling Projects (Added 1979, Amended 2008)
5.6.1 Purposes
The purposes of the Residence EA District are to provide for the demonstrated elderly housing
needs of the Town by making provision for appropriately located, specially designed and
reasonably priced housing for occupancy by elderly persons who otherwise would not have
such housing opportunities within the Town; to allow greater flexibility in land use planning
for the development of tracts of land in terms of density, preservation of open spaces,
utilization of natural features, provision of municipal services and provision of a variety of
housing types; to ensure that site development plans will be presented to the Town Meeting in
connection with a proposal to rezone a tract of land to Residence EA District; and to enable
the Planning Board to require adherence to such site development plans in the granting of a
special permit as hereinafter described.
5.6.2 Land Use and Dimensional Requirements
In the absence of a special permit for multi-dwelling project granted as hereinafter described,
land uses and dimensional controls in the Residence EA District shall be the same as those for
the district for which the land was zoned before the rezoning. Multi-dwelling projects which
have received such special permits must conform with the dimensional requirements set forth
in Section 5.6.5. The Planning Board may impose conditions limiting the uses allowed in a
multi-dwelling project pursuant to Section 5.6.6g.
5.6.3 Town Meeting Presentation - Preliminary Development Plan
Every proposal for the rezoning of land to a Residence EA District classification must be
presented to a Town Meeting for a two-thirds vote in accordance with Chapter 40A of the
General Laws. The initial proposal submitted to the Select Board for inclusion in the Town
Warrant need only include a description of the land proposed for rezoning and a brief
description of the proposed project, but every proposal must include a Preliminary
Development Plan when it is presented at the Planning Board public hearing required by said
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-57-
Chapter 40A prior to the Town Meeting, and later, as the plan may be amended after such
public hearing, at the Town Meeting. In addition to the requirements imposed by the rules and
regulations of the Sherborn Planning Board, adopted pursuant to said Chapter 40A, the
Preliminary Development Plan shall show in a general manner but drawn to scale, the
boundaries and topography of the parcel; the wetlands, ponds, streams, or waterways within or
adjacent to the land; the proposed location, bulk, types, architectural character and typical floor
plans for all buildings or structures; the proposed locations, design and dimensions of all
streets, walks, parking and other paved areas; the proposed grading plan, drainage plan, and
location of major utilities, wells and septic systems; and the proposed open space. The
Preliminary Development Plan shall also include, either on the plans or in other documentary
form, the name and address of the record owner, the proposed dwelling unit density, the total
floor area, proposed rents or sale prices, and any other information concerning the purposes
and nature of the proposed project which the proponent believes will assist the Planning Board
and Town voters in their deliberation. The Planning Board, in its report to the Town Meeting,
required by law, shall include its opinion on whether or not the proponent has prepared and
presented sufficient data to give reasonable assurance that the development will conform to the
Preliminary Development Plan with respect to the location, layout and design of proposed
buildings, drives and streets, to the density, type and design of floor plans and dwelling units,
and to any other material which the proponent has submitted with his proposal. At least two
weeks before the Town Meeting, one complete copy of all material to be presented to the Town
Meeting shall be filed with the Town Clerk for public inspection.
5.6.4 Special Permit Application - Final Development Plan
The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority for multi-dwelling projects
within a Residence District and all relevant requirements set forth in Section 6.2.3 and 6.2.5
with respect to special permits before the Board of Appeals shall apply to the Planning Board
herein.
The applicant shall file his application for a special permit with the Planning Board and
forthwith with the Town Clerk. Such application shall be accompanied by a Final
Development Plan which indicates full compliance with the requirements set forth in Section
5.6.5 below, and which includes at a minimum, the following plans and supporting materials:
a) Survey
A survey plan of the land by a registered land surveyor showing all metes and bounds,
prominent natural or man-made features, existing buildings or structures, tree lines, topography
in 2 foot contours in the portion developed with buildings and 10 foot contours elsewhere, the
location of land in the Flood Plain District, if any, all adjoining existing streets and all abutting
owners.
b) Site Development Plan
A plan or plans showing soil culture, proposed grading plans, drainage plans, the location of
buildings and other improvements, the landscaping plan, open space designation, the utilities
distribution plan, and the dimensions, materials and types of construction of all streets, roads,
parking, walkways and walls.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-58-
c) Architectural Plans
Preliminary plan or plans showing building locations, typical floor plans, elevations, sections,
important exterior details of the buildings and general massing.
d) Statistics
A tabulation of the proposed buildings by building type, size (showing number of rooms by
use, and total floor area), ground coverage, dwelling units per building, and dwelling units per
acre. There shall also be a summary of the percentages of the site covered by buildings,
covered by paved areas and designated for open space.
e) Developer Information
A legal description of the development entity with documented financial information sufficient
to establish the developer's capability to complete all aspects of the project; documentation
indicating a firm commitment from a recognized financial institution for construction financing
and, where appropriate, permanent mortgage financing; the approximate schedule of rents,
leases or sale prices; and where publicly financed, subsidized or otherwise publicly assisted
units are involved, written evidence of the receipt of such approvals and/or commitments as
may be required.
All application, plans and supporting materials for such special permits shall be submitted to
the Board of Health and the Conservation Commission by the Planning Board for their review
and written recommendations. Either such board or commission shall make such
recommendations as it deems appropriate and shall send copies thereof to the Planning Board
and to the applicant. The Failure of either such board to make recommendations to the
Planning Board within 35 days from the receipt thereof shall be deemed to be lack of opposition
thereto. Such a submission by the Planning Board and such recommendations by the Board of
Health and the Conservation Commission shall in no way relieve the applicant of any
obligations he may have to obtain permits or other approvals independently from those boards.
5.6.5 Special Permit Requirements (Amended 2008)
The Planning Board must hold a public hearing within 65 days after the filing of the application
with the Planning Board. In addition to the specific requirements set forth below, the Planning
Board may consider the probable impact of the proposed development upon Town services
and facilities, the compatibility of the project with the surrounding area and the consistency of
the proposed development with the Town's long range planning objectives. In order to approve
a proposed multi-dwelling project and grant a special permit therefore, the Planning Board
must find that all of the following requirements are met:
a) Lot Size
Only lots 6 acres or larger may be rezoned for Residence EA District use for multi-dwelling
projects.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-59-
b) Lot Location
No special permit shall be granted for any land which is more than one mile by public way
from the intersection of Main and Washington Streets unless at least 25% of such property is
within the Business G or Business P districts as shown on the Zoning Map of Sherborn.
Locations should be readily accessible to shopping, transportation, and other public facilities
and services used by the elderly.
c) Building Occupancy
Multi-dwelling developments in Residence EA Districts shall be designated either “agerestricted”
or “affordable”. If designated “age-restricted”, occupancy shall be limited to
families at least one member of which is 55 years of age or older; if “affordable”, a
minimum of 25% of the units within the entire development shall be restricted to
occupancy by persons eligible for Low or Moderate Income Housing as defined in 760
CMR 56 (as the same may be amended from time to time). (Amended 2015.)
d) Density
No more than 4 dwelling units per acre shall be permitted on any one lot approved for multidwelling
use. There shall be no more than 8 dwelling units in any one building and not more
than three bedrooms in any one dwelling unit. The minimum distance between buildings shall
be determined by the Planning Board as part of the Special Permit process.
In the case of multistory buildings containing single level dwelling units (flats) which require
an elevator to comply with ADA and handicapped access requirements, the Planning Board
may waive the 8 unit maximum for each building if they find the building is otherwise
harmonious and appropriate for the particular location and consistent with the architectural
traditions of the Town.
e) Special Needs Design
Building and site layout shall be specially designed for the needs of the elderly with particular
attention to appropriate floor plans, safe and convenient ingress and egress from buildings, and
parking, walks and ramps which meet current standards for the handicapped. Where possible,
special facilities for meeting and communal social activities shall be provided.
f) Architectural Design
The architectural scheme shall be harmonious within the project with respect to choice of
materials, colors, style, detailing and massing, but rigidity and monotony are to be avoided by
use of variations in building size, height, location, and rooflines and the judicious arrangement
of landscaping elements and site features. The project shall also be harmonious with the
surrounding buildings and insofar as is appropriate for the particular location, consistent with
the architectural traditions of the Town.
g) Landscaping
All improvements shall be placed so as to leave undisturbed, as far as possible, the special
environmental and historical features of the site including especially woodlands, wetlands,
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-60-
ponds, streams, waterways, marshes, hill tops, ravines, biological habitats of special interest,
views of unusual importance, continuous green belts, existing trails and bridle paths and
historical monuments. The required setback buffer shall consist of natural woodlands
wherever possible. Otherwise, indigenous trees and shrubs and other elements such as walls
and earth berms shall be used to create effective screening. The applicant must submit a
landscaping plan prepared by a registered architect or landscape architect which will be
reviewed by the Planning Board for aesthetic effect.
h) Open Space
At least 25 percent of the total area of all lots within a contiguous Residence EA district,
shall, except as provided below, remain unbuilt upon and set aside for conservation,
outdoor recreation or park purposes or buffer areas. Such open land shall be in addition to
required front, side and rear, setback areas except in cases where the total open space
including such, setback areas, but excluding any land within 30 feet of a dwelling unit,
exceeds 50% of the total lot area. The required open space may be in one or more parcels
of a size and shape appropriate for the intended use and may be conveyed either to and
accepted by the Town or its Conservation Commission, to a legal association comprised of
the homeowners within each such lot, or to a non-profit organization the principal purpose
of which is the conservation of open space. Such open land shall be included in the total
lot area for the purpose of computing the dwelling unit density of the lot. The future
ownership of such open land, which may differ from parcel to parcel, shall be specified by
the Planning Board as a condition of the special permit, but when such open land is
conveyed to persons other than the Town of Sherborn, the Town shall be granted an
easement over such land sufficient to insure its perpetual use as conservation, recreation or
park land or buffer area. (Amended 2015).
i) Utilities
All electrical, gas, telephone, water distribution and other utility and service lines shall be
placed underground in accordance with the regulations of the respective utility companies and
the rules and regulations of the Sherborn Planning Board adopted pursuant to Chapter 40A.
Adequate methods shall be provided on the site for waste disposal and for surface and
subsurface drainage in accordance with the Regulations of the Health Department.
j) Lighting
Lighting of parking and walkways shall be designed to provide sufficient uniform illumination
with a low glare factor. The mounting heights shall be as appropriate for the architectural
character and scale of the buildings, but all lights must be arranged and shielded to prevent
direct glare from the light source onto any street or adjacent property.
5.6.6 Planning Board Approval
The Planning Board may grant a special permit for a multi-dwelling project based on a
determination that the proposed development will be consistent with the development as
approved by the Town Meeting, consistent with the requirements set forth in Section 5.6.5 and
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-61-
consistent with the general purposes of the Residence EA District, subject to the following
standards:
a) The special permit shall incorporate by reference the Preliminary Development Plan
presented to the Town Meeting. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, permit deviations
from the Preliminary Development Plan presented to the Town Meeting, provided, however,
that the Board shall not permit any increase in the dwelling unit density, nor shall it permit an
increase greater than 10% in the total floor area. The Planning Board shall not authorize any
non-residential use other than shown in the Preliminary Development Plan presented to the
Town Meeting.
b) The Planning Board may require dwelling unit density to be less than that shown on the
Preliminary Development Plan presented to the Town Meeting, if the Board determines that
proper land use planning so requires, but in such event, the Board shall file with its decision
the basis for its determination, including, among other factors, soil conditions, drainage, traffic
or other neighborhood conditions brought to the Board's attention, and the provisions of the
usable open space.
c) The Planning Board may permit the construction and use of facilities such as a community
center or recreation center for the use of the elderly residents and their guests if the Board
determines that the inclusion of such facilities would be appropriate to the site and to the project
as designed.
d) In granting a special permit, the Planning Board shall impose as a condition thereof that
the installation of services and construction of interior drives within the development shall
comply with the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Sherborn Planning Board
adopted pursuant to Chapter 40A and may impose such additional conditions and safeguards
as public safety, welfare and convenience may require.
e) The Planning Board, upon application by the developer and after hearing, may amend a
special permit previously granted, but only in accordance with the standards hereinbefore set
out.
f) Subsequent to a special permit granted by the Planning Board under the provisions of this
section, minor revisions may be made from time to time in accordance with applicable laws,
by-laws and regulations, but the development under such special permit shall otherwise be in
accordance with the submission accompanying the developer's application for a special permit,
except as modified by the decision of the Planning Board of any such revision. If the Board
determines such revisions not to be minor it shall order a public hearing.
g) The Planning Board may impose such conditions on the permit which limit or otherwise
vary the allow ability of uses listed in Section 3.2 for Residence EA Districts where in its
judgment such uses would be inappropriate in a multi-dwelling project context.
5.6.7 Planning Board Denial (Amended 1980)
The Planning Board may deny an application for a special permit hereunder and base its denial
upon the failure of the proposal to meet the requirements established in Section 5.6.5 hereof, a
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-62-
finding that the development would not be consistent with the purposes of the Residence EA
District including, but not limited to, the absence of a demonstrated need for such housing or
a finding that the proposed development does not substantially conform to the Preliminary
Development Plan as approved by the Town Meeting in connection with the rezoning of the
land. Failure to so issue and file a decision within said 90 days shall be deemed a grant of the
permit in accordance with Chapter 40A of the General Laws.
5.6.8 Additional Requirements (Added 2008)
In addition to the foregoing, Low and Moderate Income Units shall meet the following
additional requirements:
a) Such housing must be either Subsidized Housing units as defined in Chapter 40B of the
General Laws of the Commonwealth or Local Initiative Units as defined in 760 CMR 45.03
(as the same may be amended from time to time), or affordable housing operated on the basis
of substantial similarity with the goals and policies of Local Initiative Program as defined in
760 CMR 45.00.
b) For Local Initiative Units, the following shall apply:
i) the units are to be “Low and Moderate Income Units” as defined in 760 CMR 45.02
(as the same may be amended from time to time);
ii) the project is not developed with, or is not proposed to be developed with, a
comprehensive permit within the meaning of Chapter 40B, Sections 20-23 of the
General Laws:
iii) the project is subject to Use Restrictions which, as a result of the Special Permit
provided by this Section, are a condition for the granting of the Special Permit: Use
Restriction shall mean a contract, deed restriction, condition of Special Permit provided
by this Section 5.6 or other legal instrument as may be required by the Special Permit
Granting Authority and as may be approved by the Department of Housing and
Community Development (which Agency has been established pursuant to Chapters
23B and 6A of the General Laws of the Commonwealth), which Use Restriction
restricts occupancy of Low and Moderate Income Units to persons with qualified
incomes for a determinate period of time.
iv) the period of such Use Restrictions is as long as the unit is occupied, but in no event
less than five years; and
v) the owner/developer of the units agrees to be subject to equal housing opportunity
guidelines established by the Department of Housing and Community Development.
vi) After issuance of any Special Permit pursuant to this Section 5.6, the Select Board shall
make application to the Department of Community Affairs for certification that the unit
so permitted is a “Local Initiative Unit” to count towards the Town’s statutory
obligations under Chapter 40B of the General Laws of the Commonwealth, all in
accordance with the application procedures set forth in 760 CMR 45.00 (“Local
Initiative Program”).
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-63-
5.6.9 Procedural Requirements For Special Permits (Added 1980)
The Planning Board, as the special permit granting authority for multidwelling projects within
a Residence EA District, shall hear and decide an application for a special permit or any
extension, modification or renewal thereof, in full compliance with the time limitations and all
other procedural requirements specified in Chapter 40A of the General Laws and Section 6 of
this By-Law.
5.8 Wireless Communications Facilities (Added 1997)
5.8.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to permit and regulate the use of commercial and municipal
personal wireless communications facilities within the Town of Sherborn and encourage their
location and use in a manner which minimizes negative visual and environmental impacts on
the residents of Sherborn. Wireless communications facilities include towers, antennas,
receiving or transmitting equipment of any kind, and any other equipment, or structure,
including access ways or landscaping, used to support wireless communications activities such
as cellular telephone service, personal communications service (PCS), enhanced specialized
mobile radio service, specialized mobile radio service, paging and any other functionally
equivalent service. It is intended that this Section be in compliance with the federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996. This provision does not apply to the construction or use of
an antenna structure by a federally licensed amateur radio operator, as exempted by M.G.L.
Chapter 40A, Section 3.
5.8.2 Definitions
Above Ground Level (AGL). The height of a tower as measured from a plane located at the
average elevation Above Mean Sea Level of the ground, within a 10-foot radius of the center
of the tower, prior to being altered for construction of the tower, to the uppermost point of the
tower.
Antenna. The surface from which wireless radio signals are sent and received by a personal
wireless communications facility.
Camouflaged. A personal wireless communications facility that is disguised, hidden, part of
a preexisting or proposed structure or placed within or on a preexisting or proposed structure
is considered to be "camouflaged."
Carrier. A company that provides wireless services.
Co-location. The use of a single mount on the ground by more than one carrier (vertical colocation)
and/or several mounts on a preexisting building by more than one carrier.
Environmental Assessment (EA). The document required by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) when a personal
wireless communications facility is placed in certain designated areas.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-64-
Equipment Shelter. An enclosed structure, cabinet, shed or box at the base of the mount
within which are housed batteries, electrical equipment or other equipment to support the
personal wireless communications facility.
Essentially Not Visible. A determination by the Planning Board that a wireless
communications facility is not easily noticeable to passersby, motorists, or adjacent residents
during their normal day to day activities.
Fall Zone. The area on the ground within a prescribed radius from the base of a mount. The
fall zone is the area within which there is a potential hazard from falling debris (such as ice) or
collapsing material.
FAA. Federal Aviation Administration, an independent agency of the federal government with
regulatory authority over aviation issues.
FCC. Federal Communications Commission, an independent agency of the federal
government with regulatory authority over communications issues.
Functionally Equivalent Services. Cellular, Personal Communication Services (PCS),
Enhanced Specialized Mobile Radio, Specialized Mobile Radio, and Paging.
Guyed Tower. A tower that is tied to the ground or other surface by diagonal cables.
Lattice Tower. A type of mount that is self-supporting with multiple legs and cross-bracing
of structural steel.
Licensed Carrier. A company authorized by the FCC to construct and operate a commercial
mobile radio service system.
Monopole Tower. The type of mount that is self-supporting with a single shaft of wood, steel
or concrete and a platform (or racks) for panel antennas arrayed at the top.
Mount. The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted, including the following
four types of mounts:
1. Roof-mounted. Mounted on the roof of a building.
2. Side-mounted. Mounted on the side of a building.
3. Ground-mounted. Mounted on the ground.
4. Structure-mounted. Mounted on a structure other than a building.
Omnidirectional (WHIP) Antenna. A thin rod that beams and receives a signal in all
directions.
Panel Antenna. A flat surface antenna, usually developed in multiples.
PCS. Personal Communications Services. Broadband radiowave systems that operate at a
radio frequency in the 1850 - 1950 megahertz range.
Personal Wireless Communications Facilities. Any device, instrument or other object used
for the provision of personal wireless communications services, as defined by the
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-65-
Telecommunications Act, including towers, antennas, receiving or transmitting equipment of
any kind, and any other related equipment or facility.
Radiofrequency (RF) Engineer. An engineer specializing in electrical or microwave
engineering, especially the study of radio frequencies.
Radiofrequency Radiation (RFR). The emissions from personal wireless communications
facilities.
Related Equipment or Facilities. Any equipment, building, structure, access way,
landscaping or other means used to support the operation, or disguise the appearance, of a
personal wireless communications tower, antenna, or transmitting or receiving equipment of
any kind.
Security Barrier. A locked, impenetrable wall, fence or berm, or combination thereof, that
completely seals an area from unauthorized entry or trespass.
Separation. The distance between one carriers array of antennas and another carriers array.
Utility. A system of wires or conductors and supporting structures that functions in the
transmission of electrical energy or communication services (both audio and video) between
generating stations, sub-stations, and transmission lines.
5.8.3 Special Permit Granting Authority
The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for site plan review for all
wireless communications facilities (except those that comply with Section 5.8.4).
5.8.4 Use of Existing Structures
It is the policy of the Town of Sherborn to encourage the location of personal wireless
communications facilities in existing structures. Therefore, the establishment of personal
wireless communications facilities shall not require any regulatory review or permits other
than a building permit, provided that:
(a) such facilities are proposed to be located on an existing commercial wireless
communications tower, or on an existing structure supporting electric utility transmission lines,
or, in the case of related equipment, adjacent to such tower or structure; or
(b) such facilities are proposed to be located entirely within, mounted on, or (in the case of
related equipment) adjacent to, structures or buildings existing as of November 18, 1997, in
such a manner that they are essentially not visible from a public street or from any dwelling;
and
(c) the applicant demonstrates that the installation will meet the Federal Communications
Commission standards for radiofrequency radiation emissions.
Additional facilities or equipment mounted on an existing commercial wireless communication
tower, or structure supporting electric transmission lines, shall not be required to meet the
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-66-
"essentially not visible" standard, provided that (a) such facilities do not increase the height of
the existing tower or structure beyond the height necessary to accommodate the dimensions of
the antenna array, (b) the related equipment on the ground does meet the "essentially not
visible" standard, and (c) the proposed access route already exists. Additional facilities or
equipment proposed to be located on an existing commercial wireless communications tower
that do not meet the standards of (b) or (c), shall undergo a Preliminary Site Plan Review in
accordance with the substantive and procedural requirements of Section 5.3.1.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, plans for the proposed wireless communication
facilities shall be submitted to the Planning Board in order that it may certify that the
"essentially not visible" standard will be met or determine that a Preliminary Site Plan Review
is necessary.
5.8.5 Wireless Communications Overlay Districts
In order to encourage any necessary new wireless communications towers or mounts to be
located in areas that will have the least visual and environmental impact on Town residents,
there are hereby created two Wireless Communications Overlay Districts as follows:
Wireless Communications Overlay District 1 - This district shall include all land used for
high tension electrical transmission facilities by Boston Edison or any successor, whether by
easement or in fee;
Wireless Communications Overlay District 2 - This district shall include that portion of
Parcel 174A of Assessors' Map 11 that is not used for cemetery purposes and has an elevation
greater than 70 meters above mean sea level, and that portion of Parcel 193 of Assessors' Map
12 that has an elevation greater than 70 meters above mean sea level.
5.8.6 Special Permit for Wireless Communications Facilities
Persons seeking to develop wireless communications facilities within the Wireless
Communications Overlay Districts shall apply for a Special Permit under Section 5.8 for site
plan review in accordance with General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 9, provided that proposals
which are certified by the Planning Board as being in compliance with the provisions of Section
5.8.4 are exempt from this provision.
5.8.7 Minimum Requirements
All wireless communications facilities to be located in the Wireless Communications Overlay
Districts shall comply with the following:
a. All applications for new tower locations within Wireless Communications Overlay
Districts are exempt from the height limitation of 35 feet specified in Section 4.2. However,
no tower shall be greater than 100' Above Ground Level or, in Wireless Communications
Overlay District 1 only, the elevation above mean sea level of the nearest electricity
transmission line tower, whichever is higher. Omnidirectional (whip) antennas shall not be
counted in the height calculation.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-67-
b. All proposed new towers, in appropriate locations, may be required to accommodate the
facilities of up to two carriers in addition to those of the applicant, depending on the resulting
visual and environmental impacts of such additional capacity. This requirement shall not apply
to "flagpole" type towers, or other camouflaged facilities, as applicable.
c. Wireless communications towers shall not be lighted unless the FAA requires such
lighting, or the Planning Board requires such lighting to ensure public safety upon the advice
of the Police and/or Fire Chiefs. Except in extreme circumstances, and in cases where the
Planning Board finds that alternative scenarios are more deleterious to the Town, no proposed
tower location shall be approved that requires lighting.
d. Each proposed new tower must include a "fall zone" equal to at least 100% of its height
Above Ground Level. If it is in the best interests of the Town to do so, this fall zone may be
reduced by the Planning Board to as little as 50% of height Above Ground Level. Generally,
this fall zone must be located within the boundaries of the parcel on which the tower is located.
However, at the discretion of the Planning Board, the fall zone may extend onto adjacent
property if the following three conditions are satisfied: a) doing so will result in a less intrusive
visual impact; b) the adjacent property is either Town-owned or the owner has granted written
permission for such use in the form of an easement that remains in effect for the life of the
tower; and c) it can be demonstrated that the use of such adjacent property does not pose an
undue safety risk. In all cases, the applicant shall submit information certified by a licensed
structural engineer demonstrating the structural integrity of the tower and that the design is
such that the tower will implode, rather than fall over, when experiencing undue stress, and
that the proposed fall zone is adequate for the design proposed.
e. All towers shall be of a design that minimizes the negative visual and environmental
impacts on the Town. Generally, this will be the monopole type or a camouflaged design.
f. No new towers within Overlay District 1 shall be located closer to another freestanding
wireless communications tower than the distance between three successive electric
transmission towers in the immediate area. This does not apply to antennas attached to existing
electrical transmission support towers.
g. All equipment proposed for a personal wireless communications facility shall be authorized
per the FCC Guidelines for Evaluating the Environmental Effects of Radiofrequency
Radiation. Demonstration of compliance shall be as specified in the Rules and Regulations of
the Planning Board, Section 2.3.6.
h. No new towers shall be visible from (1) the Farm Pond public beach or boat launch ramp,
or (2) the Historic Districts of Sherborn. The Planning Board may grant an exemption to clause
(2) above if the proposed facility is Town-sponsored or used for a municipal purpose and the
Board finds that the proposed facility will have a limited visual impact.
i. All applications for new tower locations shall be accompanied by a narrative statement
endorsed by a qualified radiofrequency engineer explaining why the proposed location (or
locations) was (were) selected. For any tower proposed to be located in Overlay District 2,
such statement shall include additional supporting documentation demonstrating that no
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-68-
feasible alternative location was available, including at least three alternative scenarios
utilizing existing structures and locations outside Overlay District 2.
j. All applications for towers with heights greater than 20 feet above the average tree line
within a 100' radius must include documentation as to why such greater height is necessary,
and why the proposed height is the minimum necessary at the proposed location, and shall
require findings by the Planning Board that both (l) such additional height is necessary to
accommodate additional carriers and (2) the additional height will result in a limited visual
impact. No tower in Overlay District 2 shall be greater than 100' in height Above Ground
Level. Omnidirectional (whip) antennas shall not be counted in the height calculation.
k. No new towers within Overlay District 2 shall be located closer to another freestanding
wireless communications tower than 1/2 mile.
l. Any wireless communications facility proposed to be located in Overlay District 2 shall
be, to the greatest practical extent, camouflaged in the manner set forth in Section 5.8.13 c.
5.8.8 Contents of Application
An application for a Special Permit under Section 5.8 shall consist of:
(a) A locus plan clearly showing the proposed location with respect to all surrounding
properties and streets and containing thereon the location of all lot lines, structures and
driveways within 500 feet of the location that is the subject of the application.
(b) A proposed development plan consisting of one or more sheets showing the proposed
location of the tower, support buildings, fences, driveway, parking spaces, utilities, and
landscaping; proposed setbacks from all lot lines; proposed setbacks from the nearest
residential building; proposed setback from, and height above mean sea level of, the nearest
electricity transmission tower; topography, both existing and proposed, at five foot intervals;
the location of wooded areas including the average and maximum heights of the tree line within
200 feet of the proposed tower site; the location of wetland and buffer zone areas, stone walls,
easements proposed or of record, trails and paths; the location of any trees over 12 inches in
diameter proposed for removal; and proposed locations of support equipment, additional
tower(s), and/or other facilities that may be needed in the future to accommodate one or more
additional carriers
(c) Narrative statements addressing each of the minimum requirements of Section 5.8.7
for the applicable Overlay District.
(d) A narrative statement and drawings describing and illustrating how the visual and
environmental impacts of the facilities will be minimized. With respect to Wireless
Communications Overlay District 2, factors addressed in this statement shall include the design
of structures housing support equipment (with adequate consideration given to the potential to
locate such structures underground, partially depressing such structures to reduce impact and
facilitate screening, and designing the exterior to blend with surroundings); the design, color
and location of proposed towers; the design of fencing and security barriers; the design of
access roads, parking and utilities; cable runs; and landscaping (with the objective being to
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-69-
minimize disturbance of natural vegetation and designing new landscaping to simulate a
natural appearance).
(e) Sight line representations of the site shall be provided illustrating views of the proposed
site from the nearest point of the nearest public way and the nearest facade of the nearest
residence (subject to the owner granting permission to use his property for such
representations). Photographs shall also be provided from the same viewpoints (again with
permission from the owner in the case of private property) to illustrate current views without
the proposed facilities. A second set of the same photographs shall also be provided with an
illustration of the proposed facilities superimposed on them. A maximum of two additional
viewpoints may be requested by the Planning Board. Such submissions may be submitted with
the initial application or after the on site visit/demonstration as provided for in Section 5.8.11.
(f) Documentation, certified by a licensed RF engineer, that the facility will not result in
interference with public safety communications, and that the facility will comply with FCC
radiofrequency radiation emissions standards.
(g) A statement addressing environmental impacts including stormwater runoff, the use of
hazardous materials, and noise. Such statement shall include existing conditions at the site,
current and projected ambient noise levels, hazardous materials that will be used at the site and
the methods proposed to ensure that no such materials are released into the environment. The
statement shall address both construction and permanent operation.
(h) A statement certified by a licensed structural engineer documenting that the design of
the structure is capable of withstanding conditions expected at the proposed location, and that
the design of the tower is such that excess stress will result in the collapse, not falling over, of
the tower.
(i) A copy of the certified abutters list obtained by the applicant from the Assessors Office.
(j) Such other information or materials that the Planning Board may, in its discretion,
require by regulation as specified in Section 2, Wireless Communications Facilities, of its
Rules and Regulation Governing Special Permits.
(k) In the case of applications respecting Wireless Communications Overlay District 2,
topography of the proposed site, both existing and proposed, at two foot intervals.
5.8.9 Filing of Application
Five copies of applications for Special Permits under this Section shall be prepared and filed
with the Town Clerk as follows:
(a) One (1) copy for the records of the Town Clerk as required under Chapter 40A, Section
9 of the General Laws;
(b) Three copies (3) for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Planning Board;
(c) One (1) copy for the Town Clerk as the filing agent for the Board of Appeals;
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-70-
Immediately upon receipt of an application under this section and the filing fee associated
therewith, the Town Clerk shall transmit three (3) copies to the Planning Board, and one (1)
copy to the Board of Appeals.
5.8.10 Review and Comment by Board of Appeals and Others
The Board of Appeals shall review all applications under this section. In the case of Special
Permit applications for Planning Board site plan review, the Board of Appeals shall make such
recommendations on each application as it deems appropriate and shall send copies thereof to
the Planning Board and the applicant. Board of Appeals review shall be advisory and not
directive. The failure of the Board of Appeals to make written recommendations within thirtyfive
(35) days of its receipt of an application shall be deemed to be lack of opposition thereto.
The Planning Board may, by regulation or otherwise, solicit the comment of other town
officials or boards prior to or during the public hearing on the Special Permit application. In
addition, the Planning Board may, at the expense of the applicant, consult with an independent
RF engineer to review and evaluate the information submitted by the applicant.
5.8.11 On Site Visit/Demonstration
Between the filing of the application and the public hearing date, a site visit shall be scheduled
to allow representatives of the Planning Board, Board of Appeals, and other interested persons
to view stakes or other means to illustrate the footprint locations of the tower, equipment
building, access way, fencing, and any other proposed facilities. On the day of the visit, a
balloon, crane or other representative object shall be placed at the height of the proposed tower
in order to demonstrate the visual impact on the surrounding area, and other measures must be
used to illustrate the height of the equipment building. The day and time of the site
visit/demonstration shall be advertised in a local newspaper a minimum of one week in
advance. At least one alternate date shall be also be announced in the event of inclement
weather. The Planning Board may, at its discretion, waive the requirement for a newspaper
advertisement if unfavorable weather conditions result in the cancellation of the site
visit/demonstration on both the primary and alternate dates.
5.8.12 Conditions
Any Special Permit issued under this section shall include as conditions the following:
a. All towers and other wireless communications facilities shall be kept in good condition
with regular maintenance for the duration of the use.
b. Wireless communications facilities must be regularly updated in accordance with current
technology if such updates will decrease the visual impact or other intrusive aspects of the
facility. Such updates shall undergo a Preliminary Site Plan Review in accordance with the
substantive and procedural requirements of Section 5.3.1 (a).
c. All wireless communications facilities, or components thereof, must be removed within 12
months of the cessation of use. The area in which such facilities are located shall be restored
to a natural condition, and as close to its original condition, to the maximum extent practicable.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-71-
d. To insure such regular maintenance as well as removal after the cessation of use, a
performance bond, in an appropriate amount set by the Planning Board, shall be posted by the
applicant prior to the issuance of a building permit for the wireless communications facility.
Such bond shall be available for maintenance, removal and disposal of the facilities, and
restoration of the site to near its original condition in the event these activities are not
performed or completed by the Special Permit holder.
e. The Special Permit shall specify any conditions related to future co-location of additional
wireless communications facilities at the approved location.
f. The initial term of any Special Permit issued under this section shall not exceed five years.
Such Special Permits may be renewable for additional maximum terms of five years upon
application by the Special Permit holder at least 90 days prior to the expiration of a current
term. Renewal applications shall contain documentation that the conditions of the original
Special Permit (or any previous renewals) were met and maintained during the previous term.
5.8.13 Special Permits for Wireless Communications Facilities Outside Wireless
Communications Overlay District
a. Planning Board Special Permit - Wireless communications facilities outside the Wireless
Communications Overlay District (except those allowed under Section 5.8.4) shall be limited
to the flagpole type or others that conform to the camouflaging standards listed below. Such
facilities shall be subject to all dimensional requirements of Section 4.2, and must be clearly
secondary and incidental to the primary use of the property.
The provisions of 5.8.6 through 5.8.12 (except the height limit exception of Section 5.8.7 a.
and j.) as they apply to Wireless Communications Overlay Districts shall apply to applications
for locations outside the Overlay Districts with four added requirements as follows:
(1) the contents of the application to the Planning Board shall include documentation that at
least three alternative scenarios utilizing existing structures and the Overlay Districts to
provide comparable service to that of the proposed location or locations were considered and
rejected;
(2) topography of the proposed site, both existing and proposed, shall be submitted at two foot
intervals;
(3) all equipment and facilities shall meet the camouflaging standards outlined below; and
(4) A narrative statement and drawings describing and illustrating how the visual and
environmental impacts of the facilities will be minimized shall be submitted. Factors
addressed in this statement shall include the design of structures housing support equipment
(with adequate consideration given to the potential to locate such structures underground,
partially depressing such structures to reduce impact and facilitate screening, and designing
the exterior to blend with surroundings); the design, color and location of proposed towers; the
design of fencing and security barriers; the design of access roads, parking and utilities; cable
runs; and landscaping (with the objective being to minimize disturbance of natural vegetation
and designing new landscaping to simulate a natural appearance).
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-72-
b. Board of Appeals Special Permit for Wireless Communications Use in a Residence District
In addition, a Special Permit from the Board of Appeals shall be required for the wireless
communications towers in a residence district in excess of 35 feet. Such Special Permits may
allow a height up to a maximum of 20 feet above the average tree height within a 100-foot
radius of the proposed site (but in no event in excess of 100 feet Above Ground Level) if
sufficient justification is submitted by the applicant.
c. Camouflaging Standards - Personal wireless communications facilities shall be
camouflaged as follows:
(1). Camouflage by Location - A personal wireless communications mount is considered
camouflaged by location if it is (a) essentially not visible from any public way or existing
dwelling within 1000 feet of the proposed location (provided that such distance may be reduced
by the Planning Board to 500 feet on a case-by- case basis), and (b) not visible from, nor
located within, any of the Scenic-Historic Resources defined in Map 4-9 and Appendix D of
the 1996 Open Space and Recreation Plan; or
(2). Camouflage by Design - A personal wireless communications mount is considered
camouflaged by design if it is disguised as a building or structure, either existing or new,
appropriate in type and scale to its location (e.g., a silo or barn in a field, a light standard
adjacent to a recreational area or parking lot, a fire tower in a forest, flagpole in a park or
cemetery), and the antennas are hidden within or mounted on the structure in a manner which
is "essentially not visible."
(3). Equipment Shelters - Equipment shelters for personal wireless communications
facilities shall be designed and constructed consistent with one of the following:
(a) Located in underground vaults; or
(b) Designed consistent with traditional materials, color and design of the area; or
(c) Camouflaged behind an effective year-round landscape buffer, equal to the height
of the proposed building, and/or wooden fence; or
(d) Wholly enclosed within an existing or new building that would otherwise be
allowed or permitted.
d. Density - No Tower outside the Overlay District which is camouflaged by location shall
be located closer than 1/2 mile from any other tower. Antennas within existing structures and
camouflaged facilities appropriate to the area (for example towers disguised as light standards
adjacent to a playground, or silos in a field) shall not be included in this calculation.
5.8.14 Planning Board Decisions
In order to encourage the location of wireless communications facilities within the Overlay
Districts, the Planning Board shall vote on applications for locations within the Overlay
Districts within 45 days of receiving a completed application (unless such time is extended by
agreement between the Planning Board and applicant).
The Planning Board shall file its decision with the Town Clerk within 15 days of the vote.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-73-
5.9 Water Supply Protection District (Added 1995)
5.9.1 Purpose
The purpose of the Water Supply Protection District is to provide that lands in the Town of
Sherborn functioning as recharge areas for community and non-transient non-community
water supply wells shall not be used in such a manner as to endanger the public health and
safety in any District. Improper land uses in these sensitive recharge areas can cause
contamination of drinking water supplies.
5.9.2 Regulations
A Water Supply Protection District shall be considered to be superimposed over any other
District established by this By-Law. Land in a Water Supply Protection District may be used
for any purpose otherwise permitted in the underlying district except: underground storage
tanks of any kind of construction, holding any petroleum products of any kind whatsoever,
including gasoline, are prohibited.
5.9.3 Location of Water Supply District
The location of the Water Supply Protection District shall be those areas heretofore and
hereafter designated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection approval process for community and non-transient non-community water supply
wells as "Zone I" or "Zone II" or "Interim Wellhead Protection Area" or "Preliminary Zone I
or Zone II", for any such water supply well, irrespective of whether such well is physically
located within or without the limits of the Town of Sherborn, and shall include those such
Zones as are described on a certain map entitled "South West Water Supply Protection Plan,
Map 1, Water Supply Study Area", issued by the Metropolitan Area Planning Council GIS
Lab, dated September, 1993, on file with the office of the Town Clerk.
5.10 Large-Scale Ground Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Facilities (Added 2011)
5.10.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Section is to promote and regulate the use of commercial and municipal
solar photovoltaic facilities within the Town of Sherborn and encourage their location and use
in a manner which minimizes negative visual and environmental impacts on scenic, natural
and historic resources and to the residents of Sherborn. The purpose is also to provide adequate
financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations. Large-scale solar
photovoltaic facilities include photovoltaic panels, mounting structures, transmission lines and
any other equipment, or structure, including access ways or landscaping, used to support solar
photovoltaic activities with a rated nameplate capacity of at least 250 kW (DC). This provision
does not apply to the construction or use of any solar energy systems or the building of
structures that facilitate the collection of solar energy, as exempted by M.G.L. Chapter 40A,
Section 3.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-74-
5.10.2 Definitions
As-of-Right Siting: As-of-Right Siting shall mean that development may proceed without the
need for a special permit, variance, amendment, waiver, or other discretionary approval. Asof-
right development may be subject to site plan review.
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation: A solar photovoltaic
system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a minimum
nameplate capacity of 250 kW DC.
On-Site Solar Photovoltaic Installation: A solar photovoltaic installation that is constructed
at a location where other uses of the underlying property occur.
Rated Nameplate Capacity: The maximum rated output of electric power production of the
Photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC).
Related Equipment or Facilities. Any equipment, building, structure, access way,
landscaping or other means used to support the operation, or disguise the appearance, of a solar
photovoltaic tower, antenna, or transmitting or receiving equipment of any kind.
Security Barrier. A locked wall, fence or berm, or combination thereof, which seals an area
from unauthorized entry or trespass.
Utility. A system of wires or conductors and supporting structures that functions in the
transmission of electrical energy or communication services (both audio and video) between
generating stations, sub-stations, and transmission lines.
5.10.3 Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District
In order to allow new solar photovoltaic facilities to be located efficiently and in areas that will
have the least visual and environmental impact, there is hereby created the following Solar
Photovoltaic Overlay Districts (SPOD):
Solar Photovoltaic Overlay District - This district shall include all land within the parcels
shown on Assessors Map 10, Parcels 1 and 1A.
5.10.4 Siting Solar Photovoltaic Facilities
It is the policy of the Town of Sherborn to encourage the location of ground-mounted large
scale solar photovoltaic facilities within the SPOD. Therefore, the establishment of such
facilities shall be allowed by right and subject to site plan review in accordance with Section
5.3.1(a) and a building permit, provided that the following minimum requirements are met:
Site Control
The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or prospective access and control
of the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar
photovoltaic installation.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-75-
(a) Operation & Maintenance Plan
The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the large- scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation, which shall include measures for maintaining
safe access to the installation, storm water controls, as well as general procedures for
operational maintenance of the installation.
(b) Utility Notification
No large- scale ground–mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed until
evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the utility company that operates the
electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of the solar photovoltaic
installation owner or operator’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
5.10.5 Dimension and Density Requirements
For large - scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, parcels must have a
minimum area of 5 acres and front, side and rear setbacks shall be 100 feet.
5.10.6 Appurtenant Structures
All appurtenant structures to large- scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations,
including but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers and
substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other. Whenever reasonable,
structures should be screened from view from abutting properties and public ways by
vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts on abutting properties or
public ways.
5.10.7 Design Standards
(a) Lighting
Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with local, state and federal law.
Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to
that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from
abutting properties. Lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation shall be directed downward
and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(b) Signage
Signs on large- scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall comply with the
sign bylaw (Section 5.2), except that one additional sign no more than 1 square foot in area
shall be required to identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact telephone
number. Solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising except
for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the solar photovoltaic
installation.
(c) Utility Connections
All utility connections from the solar photovoltaic installation shall be underground, provided
however that the Planning Board may waive this requirement as part of its site plan review
based on soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and/or any requirements of the
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-76-
utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if
required by the utility provider.
5.10.8 Safety and Environmental Standards
(a) Emergency Services
The large scale solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the
project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the fire chief. Upon request the owner
or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency
response plan. All means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly
marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries
throughout the life of the installation.
(b) Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction,
operation and maintenance of the large – scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and bylaws.
5.10.9 Monitoring and Maintenance
(a) Solar Photovoltaic Installation Conditions
The large - scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall
maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be
maintained to a level acceptable to the local Fire Chief and Emergency Medical Services.
The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar
photovoltaic installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
(b) Modifications
All material modifications to a solar photovoltaic installation made after issuance of the
required building permit shall require approval by the Planning Board in accordance with
Section 5.3.1 (a).
(c) Removal Requirements
Any large- scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation which has reached the end
of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with Section 5.10.9 (d) of this bylaw
shall be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more
than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify
the Planning Board by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and
plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
i. Physical removal of all large- scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines from
the site.
ii. Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and
federal waste disposal regulations.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-77-
iii. Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion. The
Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated
below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
(d) Abandonment
Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written notice of extenuating
circumstances, the solar photovoltaic installation shall be considered abandoned when it fails
to operate for more than one year without the written consent of the Planning Board. If the
owner or operator of the large- scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation fails to
remove the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days of
abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the town may take appropriate
enforcement action including pursuing all available civil or criminal penalties.
(e) Financial Surety
Proponents of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic projects shall provide a form of
surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal and
remediation of the landscape, in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the
Planning Board, but in no event to exceed more than 125 percent of the cost of removal and
compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the project
proponent. Such surety shall remain in force for so long as the project is in existence, and the
owner shall annually provide the Planning Board with proof that the surety continues in effect.
Lapse of surety shall be a violation of this bylaw and the town may take appropriate
enforcement action. Such surety will not be required for municipally- or state-owned facilities.
The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with
removal, prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for
calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
5.10.10 Contents of Application
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, plans for the proposed facilities shall be submitted
to the Planning Board for site plan review. In addition to the requirements of Section 5.3.1(a)
for Site Plan Review, applications for a large-scale solar photovoltaic facility shall also
include:
(a) A site plan showing:
i. Property lines and physical features, including access roads for the project site;
ii. A locus map showing the site in relationship to the properties, easements, and
roadways in reasonable proximity thereto including buildings, structures driveway
openings, off-street parking and all public or private ways;
iii. Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation clearing and
planting, exterior lighting, screening vegetation and structures;
iv. Elevations and/or photo simulations of the proposed facility from the nearest
public way and possibly other locations at the discretion of the Planning Board;
v. Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation signed by a
Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the system and any potential
shading from nearby structures
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-78-
vi. One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic
installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection methods,
with all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent
devices;
vii. A stormwater management plan;
viii. An erosion and sedimentation control plan;
ix. Documentation of the major system components to be used, including the PV
panels, mounting system, and inverter;
x. Name, address, and contact information for proposed system installer;
xi. Name, address, telephone number and signature of the project proponent, as
well as all co-proponents and/or property owners, if any;
xii. The name, contact information and signature of any agents representing the
project proponent; and
(b) Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site
(c) An operation and maintenance plan;
(d) A decommissioning plan in compliance with Section 5.10.9 (c);
(e) Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising the project site
(submission of a copy of a zoning map with the parcel(s) identified is suitable for this
purpose);
(f) Proof of liability insurance; and
(g) Description of financial surety as required by Section 5.10.9(e).
5.10.11 Review of Application
Notice of application to Planning Board shall be filed by the applicant with the Town Clerk,
who shall date stamp it and forward a copy of the notice to the Planning Board. Upon receipt
of an application, the Town Planner shall review it for completeness and file a determination
of completeness or a notice of missing items with the Town Clerk within 21 days of the date
stamped on the notice by the Town Clerk unless an extension of time is agreed to in writing
by the applicant. A copy of this notice shall also be sent to the applicant.
Following the procedures and review criteria of Sections 5.3.1(a) and the requirements of this
section, the Planning Board shall review the application and file its site plan decision with the
Town Clerk within 180 days of a determination of completeness by the Town Planner. Failure
by the Planning Board to take final action and file its decision with the Town Clerk within the
allotted time, unless an extension of time is agreed to in writing by the applicant, shall be
deemed to be approval of the site plan.
SECTION 6 SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY
(Added 1981)
6.1 General Authority and Conditions
As required by Chapter 40A of the General Laws, this Zoning By-Law provides for specific
types of uses which are only permitted in specific districts upon the granting of a special permit
by the Special Permit Granting Authority (hereinafter referred to as the Authority) in the
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-79-
manner provided herein. Special permits may be granted only for uses which are in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of this By-Law and shall be subject to general and specific
provisions set forth herein; and such permits may also impose conditions, safeguards and
limitations on time and use, and may require reasonable security for their observance, including
the giving of a bond to insure performance of the permit by the holder of the permit, in order
thereby to further the objects of this By-Law.
6.1.1 The Planning Board, when acting as the Authority, shall have one (1) Associate
Member. The Associate Member shall be appointed by the Moderator for a term of two (2)
years. The Associate Member shall act in the case of absence, an inability to act, or conflict
of interest on the part of any member of the Planning Board or in the event of a vacancy on the
Board.
6.2 Procedures
6.2.1 Rules for Special Permits
Each authority designated in this By-Law shall adopt and from time to time amend rules
relative to the granting of special permits and shall file a copy of said rules in the office of the
Town Clerk. Such rules may prescribe the size, form, contents, style, plans and specifications,
and the procedure for a submission and approval of such permits.
6.2.2 Review Boards
Upon the filing of an application for a permissive use hereunder, the Authority shall submit
copies thereof to each Town board designated as a review board under the provisions of this
By-Law applicable to such use. Each such board shall review such application and make such
written recommendations as it deems appropriate and shall send copies thereof to the applicant.
The failure of any such board to make such written recommendations within 35 days from its
receipt of such applications shall be deemed to be lack of opposition thereto.
6.2.3 Public Hearing
Special permits shall only be granted following a public hearing held within sixty-five (65)
days after the filing of an application with the Authority, a copy of which shall forthwith,
within two (2) business days, be filed by the applicant with the Town Clerk. Notice of such
public hearing shall be given by publication, by posting and by mailing to "Parties in Interest"
in full compliance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 40A, Section 11 of the General
Laws.
6.2.4 Issuance of Permit within 90 Days
The Authority shall act within ninety (90) days following said public hearing and shall, within
said 90 days, issue to the owner, and to the applicant if other than the owner a copy of its
decision granting the special permit, or any extension, modification or renewal thereof,
certified by the Authority, containing the name and address of the owner, identifying the land
affected, setting forth compliance with the statutory requirements for the issuance of such
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-80-
special permits and certifying that copies of the decision and all plans referred to in the decision
have been filed with the Planning Board and the Town Clerk.
6.2.5 Effective Date of Special Permit
No special permit nor any extension, modifications or renewal thereof shall take effect until
the date that a copy of the decision bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that twenty (20)
days have elapsed after the decision was filed in the office of the Town Clerk and that no appeal
had been filed, or if filed has been dismissed or denied, is recorded with the Registry of Deeds
for the Southern District of Middlesex County and indexed in the grantor index under the name
of the owner of record or is registered and noted on the owner's certificate of title. The fee for
recording or registering shall be paid by the owner or the applicant.
6.2.6 Denial of Special Permit
The Authority may render a decision denying an application for a special permit and base such
denial upon the failure of the proposed use to meet all applicable provisions of Chapter 40A
of the General Laws and/or applicable provisions of this by-law. In the event of such denial
the Authority shall within 90 days following the aforesaid public hearing, issue to the owner
and to the applicant if other than the owner, a copy of its decision denying the special permit
or any extension, modification or renewal thereof, certified by the Authority, containing the
name and address of the owner, identifying the land affected, setting forth the reasons for
denying such special permit and certifying that copies of the decision and all plans referred to
in the decision have been filed with the Planning Board and the Town Clerk.
6.2.7 Moratorium Following Denial of Special Permit
Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 40A, Section 16 of the General Laws, no application
for a special permit hereunder which has been denied by the Authority in accordance with
Section 6.2.6 shall be acted favorably upon within two (2) years after the Authority has issued
a copy of its adverse decision to the owner and to the applicant if other than the owner in the
manner provided in Section 6.2.6.
6.2.8 Withdrawal of Application without Prejudice
Any application for a special permit which has been filed with the Authority may be withdrawn
without prejudice by the applicant prior to the publication of the notice of a public hearing
thereon, but thereafter withdrawn without prejudice only with the written approval of the
Authority.
6.2.9 Votes Required for Special Permit
Special permits granted by an Authority designated by this by-law shall require a vote of at
least four (4) members of a five (5) member board and a unanimous vote of a three (3) member
board.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-81-
6.2.10 Failure to Take Final Action within 90 Days
Failure by the Authority to take final action upon an application for a special permit in the
manner provided in this section within ninety (90) days following the date of the required
public hearing thereon, shall be deemed to be a grant of the special permit subject to the
following requirements:
a) The applicant, after the expiration of said ninety (90) day period, shall file with the office
of the Town Clerk a copy of his application for the special permit together with an affidavit of
the applicant stating the name and address of the record owner of the land affected by the
granting of the special permit, the name and address of the applicant if he is not the record
owner, the date of the public hearing held on such application and the failure of the Authority
to issue a certified copy of its decision to the owner and to the applicant, if not the record
owner, within the ninety (90) day period following the date of said public hearing.
b) Upon receipt of the application and affidavit from the applicant, the Town Clerk shall give
notice forthwith of such filing by mailing certified copies of said application and affidavit to
those persons entitled to notice of a decision under Chapter 40A, Sections 11 and 15 of the
General Laws. Such notice shall show the date on which the application and affidavit were
filed with the Town Clerk and shall specify that an appeal may be made to the Superior Court
for Middlesex County pursuant to Chapter 40A, Section 17 of the General Laws within twenty
(20) days from the date the application and affidavit were filed with the Town Clerk. The
filing of such application and affidavit in the Office of the Town Clerk shall be deemed the
equivalent of the filing of a decision by the Authority for purposes of the provisions of General
Laws, Chapter 40A, Section 11, 15 and 17, applicable to special permits.
c) If no appeal has been filed within the required statutory period, or if filed has been
dismissed or denied, the Town Clerk shall issue to the owner and to the applicant, if other than
the owner, a certified copy of the application and affidavit bearing the certification of the Town
Clerk that no appeal has been filed, or if filed has been dismissed or denied, and the special
permit shall take effect on the date such document is recorded with said registry of deeds in
lieu of the document required to be recorded under Section 6.2.5.
6.3 Appeal for Judicial Review
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Authority or by failure of the Authority to file a
decision within the statutory time period as set forth in Section 6.2, may appeal to the Superior
Court for the County of Middlesex by bringing an action within twenty (20) days after the
applicant files with the office of the Town Clerk his application and affidavit pursuant to the
provisions of Section 6.2.10. Any such appeal may be made by following the judicial review
requirements set forth in Chapter 40A, Section 17 of the General Laws.
6.4 Lapse of Special Permit
A special permit shall lapse after a period of two years from the effective date of the grant
thereof, if substantial use of such permit has not sooner commenced except for good cause or,
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-82-
in the case of a permit for construction, if construction has not begun by such date except for
good cause.
SECTION 7 ADMINISTRATION
7.0 Procedure and Coordination (Amended 2011)
1. All applications for the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, demolition, removal
or change in use or occupancy of buildings and structures shall be submitted to the Building
Commissioner in accordance with the State Building Code 780 CMR.
2. Such applications for a new structure or the expansion of an existing structure shall be
accompanied by either a) an Order of Conditions issued by the Sherborn Conservation
Commission (or a Superseding Order of Conditions from the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection) or b) a Negative Determination of Applicability issued by the
Sherborn Conservation Commission or its Agent. See M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40.
3. If the application is for a new structure, or the expansion of an existing structure, or the
renovation of an existing dwelling the application shall be accompanied with an approval from
the Board of Health with respect to the on-site septic or a notation from the Board of Health or
its administrative staff, that no further Board of Health action is required. See Rules and
Regulations of the Sherborn Board of Health.
4. The Inspector of Buildings shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for
permits and amendments thereto within thirty days after filing thereof. If the application and/or
the required construction documents do not conform to the requirements of the State Building
Code or do not contain the Sherborn Conservation Commission or Board of Health approvals
as set forth above in subparagraph 2 and 3, the Building Commissioner shall reject such
applications in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the Building Commissioner is satisfied
that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of the State Building Code and this
section, the Building Commissioner shall issue a permit therefore.
7.1 Enforcement
The Inspector of Buildings shall be charged with the enforcement of this zoning by-law and
shall withhold a permit for the construction, alteration or moving of any building or structure
if the building or structure as constructed, altered or moved would be in violation of this bylaw;
and no permit or license shall be granted for a new use of a building, structure or land
which use would be in violation of this by-law. If the Inspector of Buildings is requested in
writing to enforce this zoning by-law against any person allegedly in violation of the same and
said Inspector declines to act, he shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such enforcement
of any action or refusal to act, and the reasons therefore, within 14 days of receipt of such
request. (Amended 1981)
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-83-
7.2 Board of Appeals (Amended 1987)
7.2.1 Membership (Added 1987, Amended 1988)
There shall be a Board of Appeals of three members and two associate members to be
appointed and designated as provided by the zoning statutes.
7.2.2 Appeals (Added 1987)
In addition to the appeals provided for by the zoning statutes, appeals may be taken to the
Board of Appeals by any officer or board of the Town, or by any person aggrieved by any
order or decision of the Inspector of Buildings or other administrative official in violation of
the zoning statutes or this by-law. An appeal to the Board of Appeals shall be taken within
thirty (30) days after the date of the order or decision appealed from, by filing a notice of appeal
specifying the grounds therefore with the Town Clerk, who shall forthwith transmit copies of
the notice of appeal to the officer or board from whose order or decision the appeal is taken
and to the members of the Board of Appeals.
7.2.3 Special Permits (Added 1987)
a) Authority
The Board of Appeals is designated as the special permit granting authority for the issuance of
special permits authorized by this by-law except where this by-law expressly designates other
special permit granting authorities to issue special permits for particular uses specified in this
by-law. Each application to the Board of Appeals for a special permit shall be filed by the
applicant with the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk, acting as the filing agent for the Board of
Appeals, shall forthwith transmit the application to said Board. The applicant shall also file
with his application a separate signed copy thereof for the records of the Town Clerk as
required under Chapter 40A, Section 9 of the General Laws.
b) Procedural Requirements
The Board of Appeals shall hear and decide an application for a special permit in full
compliance with the time limitations and all other procedural requirements specified in Chapter
40A of the General Laws and Section 6 of this by-law.
c) Basic Requirements (Amended 1987)
No special permit shall be granted by the Board of Appeals or other special permit granting
authority unless it shall be determined that the proposed use complies with the basic
requirements of Section 1.3.
7.2.4 Variances (Added 1978, Amended 1981, 1987)
a) Authority and Procedures
The Board of Appeals shall have the authority to grant variances from the provisions of this
by-law provided, however, that the Board of Appeals shall not grant a use variance. Each
petition for a variance shall be filed by the petitioner with the Town Clerk in the same manner
as provided in Section 7.2.3 for the filing of an application for a special permit.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-84-
b) Required Findings
In order to grant such variance, the Board of Appeals must, after public hearing specifically
find that circumstances relating to soil conditions, topography, or the shape of the land or
structures which especially affect the particular land or structure but do not generally affect the
zoning district in which it is located are such that a literal enforcement of the terms of the bylaws
would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise to the applicant for the variance
and that desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent and purpose of this by-law.
c) Conditions
The Board of Appeals may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations both of time and use,
including the conditions on the continued existence of particular structures but excluding any
condition, safeguard or limitation upon the ownership of the land or structures to which the
variance pertains.
d) Lapse Of Rights
If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one year of the date the variance
was granted, such rights shall lapse and may be reestablished only if a new variance is granted
pursuant to this section.
7.2.5 Hearings And Decisions (Added 1978, amended 1981)
The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing upon each application for a special permit or
variance and shall issue its decision within such time limits as are specified from time to time
in G.L. Chapter 40A. Subject to the procedural requirements for special permits set forth in
Section 6.2, failure to take final action within such specified time periods shall be deemed to
be a grant of the special permit or variance applied for and the applicant shall be entitled to
whatever documents are necessary to evidence such special permit or variance.
7.3 Subsequent Amendments (Added 1978)
Construction authorized by a building permit or special permit shall conform to any subsequent
amendment of this zoning by-law unless the construction is commenced within six months of
the issuance of the permit and is continued through to completion as continuously and
expeditiously as is reasonable. Any operation or use authorized by a building or special permit
shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this zoning by-law unless such use is
commenced within six months of the issuance of the permit. Once construction has been
completed or a use has commenced as authorized by a building or special permit, subsequent
amendments shall not affect the terms of the permit except through the general provisions of
this by-law governing nonconforming structures and uses.
7.4 Penalty (Amended 1978)
Any person violating the provisions of this by-law shall be fined not more than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-85-
7.5 Severability
The invalidity of any part or provision of this by-law of the application hereof to any particular
subject matter shall not invalidate any other part or provision hereof or affect the application
hereof to any other subject matter.
SECTION 8 HISTORIC DISTRICTS (Added 1983)
8.1 Grant of Power
Historic Districts in the Town of Sherborn shall be created and maintained in every respect
under and according to the provisions of General Laws of the Commonwealth, Chapter 40C,
and all amendments thereto, and this Section shall be in every respect controlled by and subject
to the provisions of said Chapter 40C and all amendments thereto. The boundaries of Historic
Districts are shown on a map of the Historic Districts which is filed with the Clerk of the Town
of Sherborn and recorded in the Registry of Deeds. The Historic Districts are indicated on the
Zoning Map of the Town of Sherborn. The Historic Districts shall be considered as overlaying
other zoning districts.
8.2 Purpose
The purpose of the Historic Districts is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and
general welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive
characteristics of buildings and places significant in the history of the Town of Sherborn and
the Commonwealth, or their architecture, and through the maintenance and improvement of
settings of such buildings and places and the encouragement of design compatible therewith.
This Section is not intended to conflict with any other section of this Zoning By-Law or any
other by-law of the Town of Sherborn. The requirements established herein do not relieve any
persons from also satisfying any and all applicable rules, regulations and laws.
8.3 Definitions
For the purpose of this Section, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
8.3.1 Altered
Includes the words "rebuilt", "reconstructed", "restored", "removed", and "demolished" and
the phrase "changed in exterior color".
8.3.2 Building
A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals, or property.
8.3.3 Commission
The commission acting as the Historic District Commission.
8.3.4 Constructed
Includes the words "built", "erected", "installed", "enlarged", or "moved".
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-86-
8.3.5 Exterior Architectural Feature
Such portion of the exterior of a building or structure as is open to view from a public way,
public park, or public body of water, including but not limited to the architectural style and
general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind, color and texture of exterior building
materials, the color of paint or other materials applied to the exterior surfaces and the type and
style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures.
8.3.6 Structure
A combination of materials other than a building including a sign, fence, wall, terrace, walk or
driveway.
8.4 Historic District Commission Review
8.4.1 Except as this Section may otherwise provide in Paragraph 8.4.2, no building or structure
within the Historic Districts shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects exterior
architectural features unless the Commission shall first have issued a Certificate of
Appropriateness, a Certificate of Non-Applicability, or a Certificate of Hardship with respect
to such construction or alteration.
8.4.2 Exception
a) The authority of the Commission shall not extend to the review of the following categories
of buildings or structures or exterior architectural features in the Historic Districts, and the
buildings or structures or exterior architectural features so excluded may be constructed or
altered within the Historic Districts without review by the Commission:
1) Temporary structures or signs subject to the applicable sections of the Zoning By-Laws.
2) Walks, walls, fences, terraces, and driveways serving dwellings in areas zoned for
single family residences.
3) Storm windows, storm doors, screen doors, window screens, window air conditioners,
antennas for communications equipment, solar panels, greenhouses, and windmills.
4) Buildings which do not require a building permit.
5) Signs in conformity with the Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws.
6) Color of paint on previously painted surfaces.
7) The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a building, structure or
exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster,
provided such reconstruction is begun within one year after such damage or destruction
and carried forward with due diligence.
b) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or
replacement of any exterior architectural feature within an Historic District which does not
involve a change in design, material, color or the outward appearance thereof, nor to prevent
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-87-
the landscaping with plants, trees, or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of
requirements certified by a duly authorized public officer to be necessary for the public safety
because of an unsafe or dangerous condition, nor construed to prevent any construction or
alteration under a permit duly issued prior to the adoption of this Section.
8.5 Owner's Application For Commission Review And Certification
8.5.1 No building permit for construction of a building or structure or for alteration of an
exterior architectural feature within an Historic District, excepting only work specifically
exempted under Paragraph 8.4.2, and no demolition permit for the demolition, removal from
or relocation of any building or structure within an Historic District shall be issued by the
Board of Appeals or by the Building Inspector until a Certificate of Appropriateness, of Non-
Applicability or of Hardship has been issued by the Commission upon proper application by
the owner or the owner's agent.
8.5.2 The applicant for a Certificate of work subject to review by the Commission shall,
before commencing any such work, inform the Commission of the intended work and file with
the Commission, in such form and such detail as the Commission shall reasonably require, an
application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, of Non-Applicability, or of Hardship, as
appropriate. The Commission shall assist the applicant to conform the work, the application
and other submission materials to the requirements for Certification.
8.5.3 The Commission may require of the applicant such drawings, specifications material
and other information, including, in the case of demolition or removal a statement of the
proposed condition and appearances of the property thereafter, as may be reasonably required
to permit a determination on the application by the Commission.
8.5.4 The Commission shall determine promptly, and in all events within fourteen days after
the filing of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, a Certificate of Non-
Applicability or a Certificate of Hardship, as the case may be, whether the application involves
any exterior architectural features which are subject to approval by the Commission.
8.5.5 Hearings and Notices
a) If the Commission determines that such application involves any features which are subject
to approval by the Commission, the Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application
unless such hearing is dispensed with as hereinafter provided. The Commission shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing on any application and shall give public notice of the time,
place and purposes thereof at least fourteen days before said hearing in such manner as it may
determine, and by mailing, postage prepaid, a copy of said notice to the applicant, to the owners
of all adjoining property and any other property deemed by the Commission to be materially
affected thereby as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list, to the Building Inspector,
to the Planning Board of the Town and to any person filing written request for notice of such
hearing, such request to be renewed yearly in December, and to such other persons as the
Commission shall deem entitled to notice.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-88-
b) As soon as convenient after such public hearing but in any event within sixty days after the
filing of the application, or within such further time as the applicant may allow in writing the
Commission shall make a determination on the application. If the Commission shall fail to
make a determination within such period of time the Commission shall thereupon issue a
Certificate of Hardship.
c) A public hearing on an application need not be held if such hearing is waived in writing by
all persons entitled to notice thereof. In addition, a public hearing may be waived by the
Commission if the Commission determines that the exterior architectural feature involved is
so insubstantial in its effect on the Historic District that it may be reviewed by the Commission
without public hearing on the application, provided however, that if the Commission dispenses
with a public hearing on an application, a notice of the application shall be given to the owners
of all adjoining property and other property deemed by the Commission to be materially
affected thereby as above provided, and ten days shall elapse after the mailing of such notice
before the Commission may act upon such application.
8.6 Review Criteria
The Commission shall not make any recommendations or requirements except for the purpose
of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects or the architectural
characteristics of the surroundings of the Historic Districts. In passing on matters before it the
Commission shall consider, among other things, the following:
a) The historic and architectural value and significance of the site, building or structure.
b) The general design, arrangement, texture and material of the features involved.
c) The relationship of features involved to similar features of buildings and structures in the
surrounding area.
d) In the case of new construction or additions to existing buildings or structures, the
Commission shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the building or
structure both in relation to the land area upon which the building or structure is situated and
to buildings and structures in the vicinity.
e) In appropriate cases the Commission may impose dimensional and setback requirements
in addition to those required by other applicable by-laws.
The Commission shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject
to view from a public way.
8.7 Findings
At the conclusion of its review, the Historic District Commission shall issue in writing one of
the following:
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-89-
8.7.1 Certificate of Appropriateness
If the Commission determines that the alteration for which an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness has been filed will be appropriate for, or compatible with, the preservation or
protection of the Historic District, the Commission shall cause a Certificate of Appropriateness
to be issued to the applicant.
8.7.2 Notice of Disapproval
a) In the case of disapproval of an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the
Commission shall place upon its record the reasons for such determination and shall forthwith
cause a notice of its determination, accompanied by a copy of its reasons therefor as set forth
in the records of the Commission, to be issued to the applicant, and the Commission may make
recommendations to the applicant, with respect to appropriateness of design, arrangement,
texture, materials and other features.
b) Prior to the issuance of any disapproval, the Commission may notify the applicant of its
proposed action accompanied by recommendations of change in the applicant's proposal
which, if made, would make the application acceptable to the Commission.
c) If within fourteen days of receipt of such notice the applicant files an acceptable written
modification of his/her application, the Commission shall cause a Certificate of
Appropriateness to be issued to the applicant.
8.7.3 Certificate of Non-applicability
In the case of a determination by the Commission that an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness or for a Certificate of Non-Applicability does not involve any exterior
architectural feature which is not then subject to review by the Commission in accordance with
the provisions of 8.4.2, the Commission shall cause a Certificate of Non-Applicability to be
issued to the applicant.
8.7.4 Certificate of Hardship
If the construction or alteration for which an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness
has been filed shall be determined to be inappropriate, or in the event of an application for a
Certificate of Hardship, the Commission shall determine whether, owing to conditions
especially affecting the building or structure involved, but not affecting the Historic District
generally, failure to approve an application will involve a substantial hardship, financial or
otherwise, to the applicant and whether such application may be approved without substantial
detriment to the public welfare and without substantial derogation from the intent and purpose
of this Section. If the Commission determines in either instance that owing to such conditions
failure to approve an application will involve substantial hardship to the applicant and approval
thereof may be made without such detriment or derogation, or if the Commission fails to make
a determination on an application within the time specified in Section 11 of Chapter 40C of
the General Laws the Commission shall cause a Certificate of Hardship to be issued to the
applicant.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-90-
8.8 Appeals
Any applicant aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may, within twenty days after
the filing of the notice of such determination with the Town Clerk, file a written request with
the Commission for a review by a person or persons designated by the Metropolitan Area
Planning Council.
SECTION 9 ZONING MAP (Added 1991, Amended 1997, 2000, 2001, 2002,
2006, 2013, 2017)
Zoning districts are hereby established as shown on a map entitled “Zoning Map of the Town
of Sherborn” (hereafter referred to as the Zoning Map), dated April 17, 2002 and prepared by
the Planning Board, or as hereafter amended. The Zoning Map by this reference and all
boundaries, notations, and other data shown thereon, are made as much a part of these By-
Laws as if fully described in detail herein. Any change in the location or boundaries of zoning
districts shall be by the same procedure as amendments to the text of the Zoning By-Laws.
Town of Sherborn Zoning By-Laws
-91-
1
SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE SCENIC
ROAD ACT
(MGL CH. 40, SEC. 15C)
Adopted April 22, 1991
Revised April 14, 1994
1. STATUTORY PROVISIONS OF THE SCENIC ROAD ACT - M.G.L. CHAPTER 40,
SECTION 15 C
"Upon recommendation or request of the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, or Historical
Commission of any city or town, such city or town may designate any road in said city or town other than
a numbered route or state highway, as a scenic road.
After a road has been designated as a scenic road, any repair, maintenance, reconstruction, or paving work
done with respect thereto shall not involve or include the cutting or removal of trees, or the tearing down
or destruction of stone walls, or portions thereof, except with prior written consent of the Planning Board,
or if there is no planning board, the Selectmen of a town, or the city council of a city, after a public
hearing duly advertised twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area, as to time, date, place and
purpose, the last publication to occur at least seven days prior to such hearing; provided, however, that
when a public hearing must be held under the provisions of this section and under section three of Chapter
eighty-seven prior to the cutting or removal of a tree, such hearings shall be consolidated into a single
public hearing before the Tree Warden and the Planning Board, or if there is no planning board, the
Selectmen of a town, or the city council of a city, and notice of such consolidated public hearing shall be
given by the Tree Warden or his deputy as provided in said section three of Chapter eighty-seven.
Designation of a road as a scenic road shall not affect the eligibility of a city or town to receive
construction or reconstruction aid for such road pursuant to the provisions of Chapter ninety."
2. PURPOSE
The Sherborn Planning Board has adopted these regulations with the following objectives:
a. To maintain the natural beauty that currently exists along scenic roads in Sherborn.
b. To maintain and enhance the rural character of the Town and encourage compatibility with
existing roadside features.
c. To implement more fully the provisions of the Scenic Road Act, with acknowledgement that
the roads serve a transportation function for pedestrians, equestrians and non-motorized as
well as motorized vehicles.
2
3. SHERBORN STREETS SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE SCENIC ROAD ACT
Designated as scenic roads at the Annual Town Meeting held on March 11, 1974:
Apple Street Ash Lane Brush Hill Road Cross Street
Curve Street Farm Road Forest Street Goulding Street East
Goulding Street West* Green Lane Greenwood Street Hollis Street
Hunting Lane Lake Street Maple Street Mill Street
Nason Hill Road Perry Street Pleasant Street Prospect Street
Rockwood Street Snow Street South Street Western Avenue
Whitney Street Woodland Street
*Designated at Town Meeting held on April 24, 2001.
4. PROCEDURE TO DESIGNATE ROADS AS A SCENIC ROAD
The Planning Board, the Board of Selectmen, the Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission,
or by petition of citizens of the Town (consistent with petition requirements to place an article on the
warrant) may propose "scenic road" status for any road in Sherborn other than a numbered route or state
highway as a scenic road. The Planning Board shall hold a Public Hearing on the petition, notifying the
Selectmen, the Tree Warden, the Superintendent of Highways, the Conservation Commission, and the
Historical Commission, and advertising twice in a newspaper of general circulation, the first
advertisement at least fourteen days prior to the date of the public hearing.
The Planning Board shall make a recommendation to the Town Meeting on the merits of designation of
the proposed road as a scenic road.
A majority vote of Town Meeting is required for designation. Such designation shall be effective as of
the date of Town Meeting action. Any work on any portion of the right-of-way of a scenic road which
was not physically commenced at the time the road was designated as a scenic road shall conform to these
regulations.
5. DEFINITIONS
In the absence of contrary meaning established through legislation or judicial action pursuant to MGL
Chapter 40, Sec. 15C, these terms contained in that statute shall be construed as follows:
"Road" shall mean a vehicular traveled way plus its necessary appurtenances within the right-of-way
including bridge structures, drainage systems, retaining walls, traffic control devices, pedestrian facilities,
and the air space above them, but not intersecting streets or driveways.
"Cutting or removal of trees" shall not be construed to include clearing of nuisance growth, routine or
emergency tree maintenance which removes only permanently diseased or damaged limbs, trunks or roots
and dead whole trees, or thinning out of overcrowded trees as determined by the Tree Warden, but shall
include such cutting or removal done in contemplation of, or following, repair, maintenance,
reconstruction or paving work for a road.
"Repair, Maintenance, Reconstruction, or Paving-work" shall mean any such work done within the
right-of-way by any person or agency, public or private. Construction of new driveways or alterations of
existing ones is also included to the extent such work takes place within the right-of-way. Except as
3
allowed in the preceding paragraph, roadside cutting for clearance for vehicles or for improvement of
line-of-sight shall also be included within this definition.
"Trees" shall mean any trees (not bushes) having a trunk diameter of one and one half inches or larger at
one foot above the ground. All trees within the right-of-way of a scenic road or on the boundaries thereof
shall be subject to these regulations; if for whatever reason, it is uncertain whether the tree is within the
right-of-way of the scenic road, it shall be taken to be within the coverage of these rules and regulations
until the contrary is shown.
"Stone walls" shall not be construed to include assemblages of stone involving less than one cubic foot of
wall material per linear foot nor totaling less than five feet in length. All stone walls within the entire
right-of-way of a scenic road or on the boundaries thereof shall be subject to these regulations; if for
whatever reason, it is uncertain whether the stone wall is within such right-of-way of the scenic road, it
shall be taken to be within the coverage of these rules and regulations until the contrary is shown.
"Tearing down or destruction of stone walls" shall not be construed to include temporary removal and
replacement within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed six months, at the same location with the
same materials according to the original character.
6. CONSTRUCTION AND APPLICABILITY OF THE RULES AND REGULATIONS
CONTAINED HEREIN
The Planning Board authority and jurisdiction shall be consistent with MGL Ch. 40, Sec. 15C. These
rules and regulations shall be controlling and may be amended from time to time.
7. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR DRIVEWAYS
7.1 Curb Cuts
The driveway standards shall be consistent with the regulation for curb cuts contained in the
Planning Board Subdivision Regulation Section 4.3.6.
7.2 Stone Wall Removal Limitations
Where stone walls exist, the maximum amount of stone wall to be removed shall be the width of
the driveway or new road at the location of the stone wall plus three feet on each side.
a. Unless otherwise waived, removed stone shall be used to repair other sections of the wall
along the road.
b. No wall shall be cut without construction of an appropriate terminus. Appropriate end points
are shown in the Appendix, Figures 1 & 2, and consist of stone piers, granite posts, stone
walls with tapered ends turning back onto the lot along the drive, or wooden posts with or
without a gate.
7.3 Tree Removal Limitations
No tree with a trunk exceeding 8" in diameter four and one half feet above ground level shall be
cut for a driveway or new road unless the curb cut cannot be safely located otherwise. Unless
4
otherwise waived, whenever trees are removed, trees in a species and location suitable to the
Planning Board and the Tree Warden shall be planted.
8. PROCEDURES
8.1 Filing Instructions
Any person or organization seeking consent of the Planning Board under MGL Ch. 40, Sec. 15C
(the Scenic Road Act) regarding the cutting or removal of trees or the tearing down or destruction
of stone walls, or portions thereof, in connection with the Repair, Maintenance, Reconstruction or
Paving-work (as defined in Section 5) on Scenic Roads, shall submit a request to the Planning
Board together with the following:
a. A plan showing the location and the nature of the proposed action and a description of the
proposed changes to trees and stone walls;
b. A statement of the purpose(s) for the change;
c. A list of owners of property located in whole or in part within 500 feet of the proposed
action;
d. Except in the case of town agencies, a filing fee of $25.00 shall be paid; and
e. Any further explanatory material useful to adequately inform the Planning Board prior to the
public hearing.
Notice of submittal shall be filed with the Town Clerk and a copy of the submittal transmitted to
the Tree Warden after it is accepted and signed for by the Planning Board or its staff.
8.2 Tree Warden
Planning Board hearings shall be held in conjunction with those held by the Tree Warden acting
under MGL Ch. 87. Consent to an action by the Planning Board shall not be construed as inferring
consent by the Tree Warden or the reverse, nor shall execution of these rules and regulations in any
way lessen the Tree Warden's duties under MGL Ch. 87.
8.3 Notice
The Planning Board shall, as required by statute, give notice of its public hearing by advertising
twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area, the last publication at least seven days prior
to the public hearing.
This notice shall contain a statement as to the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing with a
description of the action proposed by the applicant. Copies of this notice shall be sent to the
applicant, the Selectmen, the Tree Warden, the Superintendent of Highways, the Conservation
Commission, the Historical Commission, and the owners of property located within 500 feet of the
proposed action.
In the event that the Planning Board holds a joint hearing with the Tree Warden acting under MGL
Ch. 87, the advertisement shall be made by the Tree Warden.
5
8.4 Timing
The Planning Board shall hold a Public Hearing as soon as practical but in no event later than forty
five days from the date on which notice of submittal is received by the Town Clerk unless a longer
time is agreed to by the applicant.
8.5 Decision
a. The Planning Board shall make a decision as soon as practical but in no event later than 15
days from the hearing unless a longer time is agreed to by the applicant.
b. In rendering its decision, the Planning Board shall consider the application based on
compliance with the "Scenic Road Act" and the considerations listed in Section 9.
c. The Planning Board may require sufficient bond to be posted to cover the costs of required
work within the road right-of-way and to protect existing vegetation and stone walls. Such
bonding shall be specified in the Board's decision.
d. The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed within fifteen days of the close of the Public
Hearing with the Town Clerk unless a longer time is agreed to by the applicant; copies of
which shall be sent to the applicant, the Selectmen, the Tree Warden, the Superintendent of
Highways, the Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission, and those persons who
have requested a copy of the decision.
e. The approval by the Planning Board under these regulations of a proposed action shall be
valid for two years, after which it shall be void.
9. CONSIDERATIONS
In acting in regard to a Scenic Road request, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
a. Scenic and aesthetic characteristics;
b. Public safety;
c. Accident history within 500 feet of tree(s) and stone walls at issue;
d. Location and setback of telephone poles in relation to the pavement, trees and stone walls (in
no case shall a tree be removed for safety purposes which is as far as or further from the
center of the paved right-of-way than a utility pole within 500 feet thereof);
e. Traffic volume, congestion and posted speed limit;
f. Preservation of natural resources;
g. Environmental and historical values;
h. Recreational uses of road, taking into account the nature and extent;
6
i. Relationship of the road design to the standards of the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules
and Regulations but recognizing that a variance from standard should be allowed when a road
has been designated scenic by the Townspeople;
j. Compensatory actions proposed, such as replacement of trees or walls;
k. Financial and other consequences of design revision to avoid or reduce damage to trees or
stone walls;
l. Evidence contributed by abutters, town agencies, and other interested parties; and
m. Other sound planning principles.
10. ENFORCEMENT
10.1 Remedy for Failure to File
Failure to file with the Planning Board for permission to cut or remove trees or for destruction of
any portion of a stone wall within the layout of the scenic road will require an immediate filing as
detailed above and shall be subject to restoration of the features. Unless waived, this restoration
shall consist of replacing the stone wall on a square-foot per square-foot basis as necessary and
replacing the trees cut on a diameter-inch per diameter-inch basis at locations specified by the
Planning Board and the Tree Warden. A diameter-inch per diameter-inch replacement means that
the combined diameter of the replacement trees measured one foot above ground level for trees up
to 8" in diameter and four and one half feet above ground level for trees in excess of 8" diameter
must equal the total diameter of the original tree trunks.
10.2 Compliance
Failure to comply with the duly issued decision of the Planning Board shall be subject to
restoration as detailed above and other remedial measures the Planning Board deems necessary,
including, but not limited to the enforcement of the bonding and restoration as detailed above.
10.3 Authority
The Planning Board and the Tree Warden shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
these Regulations.
RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD
Including amendments approved through February 9, 2011
RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD
Sherborn Planning Board Members:
Tom Urmston, Chairman
John Higley
Eric Johnson
Robin Perera
John Stevens
Susan Spence, Associate
Town Planner: Gino Carlucci
Questions about these Rules and Regulations or other Planning Board activities or
issues may be directed to the Planning Office at (508) 651-7855.
February 9, 2011
1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING SPECIAL PERMIT REQUESTS
SECTION 1: INSTRUCTIONS . . . 6
SECTION 2 PERSONAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES . . 6
2.1 Determination of Exemption From Special Permit Requirement
2.2 Pre-Application Conference . . . 6
2.3 Application Filing Requirements . . . 7
2.4 Co-location . . . . 10
2.5 Modifications . . . . 11
2.6 Monitoring and Maintenance . . . 11
2.7 Abandonment or Discontinuation of Use . . . 11
2.8 Reconstruction or Replacement of Pre-Existing Nonconforming Personal
Wireless Service Facilities . . . . 12
2.9 Performance Guarantees . . . . 12
2.10 Color . . . . 13
2.11 Equipment Shelters . . . . 13
2.12 Lighting and Signage . . . . 13
2.13 Historic Buildings . . . . 13
2.14 Comments From Other Boards . . . 13
2.15 Term of Special Permit . . . 14
SECTION 3: SITE PLAN REVIEW . . . . 15
3.1 Authority . . . . 15
3.2 Precedence . . . . 15
3.3 Applicability . . . . 15
3.4 Requirements . . . . 15
3.5 Submission . . . . 20
3.6 Site Plan Submittal Fee . . . . 21
3.7 Hearing . . . . 21
3.8 Decision . . . . 21
3.9 General . . . . 22
3.10 One Year Limitation of Grants . . . 22
3.11 Appeal of decision . . . . 22
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
SECTION 1: GENERAL . . . . 23
1.1 AUTHORITY . . . . 23
1.2 PURPOSE . . . . 23
1.3 DEFINITIONS . . . . 23
1.3.1. Subdivision . . . 23
1.3.2. Applicant . . . . 23
1.3.3. Owner . . . . . 23
1.3.4 CMD . . . . . 23
1.3.5 Board . . . . . 23
1.4 SUBDIVISION . . . . 23
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Continued)
SECTION 2: PLANS NOT REQUIRING APPROVAL UNDER THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL
LAW . . . . . 25
2.1. SUBMISSION OF PLAN . . . . 25
2.2. CONTENTS OF PLAN . . . 25
2.3. ENDORSEMENT . . . . 26
SECTION 3: PLANS REQUIRING APPROVAL UNDER THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL
LAW . . . . . 27
3.1. PRELIMINARY PLAN . . . . 27
3.1.1. Preliminary Conference . . . . 27
3.1.2. Filing Procedure for Preliminary Plan . . . 27
3.1.3. Contents of Preliminary Plan . . . 27
3.1.4. Groundwater Impact Assessment . . . 28
3.1.5. Approval or Disapproval of Preliminary Plan . . 28
3.2. DEFINITIVE PLAN . . . . 28
3.2.1. General . . . . . 28
3.2.2. Filing Procedure for Definitive Plan . . . 29
3.2.3. Contents of the Definitive Plan . . . 30
3.2.4. Contents of Plans and Profiles . . . 32
3.2.5. Drainage Calculations and Run-off Plan . . . 33
3.2.6. Groundwater Impact Assessment . . . 33
3.2.7. Accompanying Documents . . . 33
3.2.8. Review by Other Boards and Commissions . . 34
3.2.9. On-Site Inspection. . . . . 34
3.2.10.Public Hearing . . . . 34
3.2.11.Action . . . . . 35
3.2.12.Street Names . . . . 39
3.2.13.Performance Guarantee . . . . 39
3.3. UTILITY PLANS . . . . 40
SECTION 4: DESIGN STANDARDS . . . . 41
4.1. GENERAL . . . . . 41
4.1.1. Basic Requirements . . . . 41
4.1.2. Conformance to Master Plan . . . 41
4.1.3. Lot Size and Frontage . . . . 41
4.1.4. One Dwelling Per Lot . . . . 41
4.1.5. Protection of Natural Features . . . 41
4.1.6. Groundwater Protection . . . . 41
4.2. GRADING . . . . 42
4.2.1. Minimum Disturbance . . . . 42
4.2.2. Stabilization . . . . 42
4.2.3. Landscape Plan . . . . 42
4.2.4. Slope Easements . . . . 42
4.3. STREETS & DRIVEWAYS . . . 42
4.3.1. Location . . . . 42
4.3.2. Alignment . . . 42
3
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Continued)
4.3.3. Width . . . . . 43
4.3.4. Grade . . . . . 43
4.3.5. Street Trees and Planted Shrubs . . . 43
4.3.6. Curb Cuts . . . . 43
4.3.7. Dead-end Streets . . . . 44
4.4. DRAINAGE DESIGN . . . . 44
4.4.1. General . . . . . 44
4.4.2. Lot Drainage . . . . 45
4.4.3. Drainage Calculations . . . . 45
4.4.4. Drainage Criteria . . . . 45
4.4.5. Retention/Detention Basins . . . 46
4.4.6. Protection . . . . 46
4.5. EASEMENTS . . . . 47
4.5.1. Layout of Utility & Drainage Easements . . . 47
4.5.2. Water Course Easements . . . . 47
4.5.3. Slope Easements . . . . 47
4.5.4. Pedestrian Ways and Bridle Paths . . . 47
4.5.5. Conservation Restrictions . . . . 47
4.6. OPEN SPACE . . . . 47
4.6.1. Parks . . . . . 47
4.6.2. Topsoil and Grading Limitations . . . 48
4.7 SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS . . 48
4.7.1. General . . . . . 48
4.7.2. Design . . . . . 48
4.8. UTILITIES. . . . . 48
4.8.1. General . . . . . 48
4.8.2. Installation . . . 49
4.8.3. Protection . . . 49
SECTION 5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS . . . 50
5.1 BASIC REQUIREMENTS . . . . 50
5.2 GENERAL . . . . . 50
5.2.1. Standard Specifications . . . . 50
5.2.2. Survey of Improvements as Installed . . . 50
5.2.3. Acceptance of Streets by the Town . . . 50
5.3 STREETS . . . . 51
5.3.1. General . . . . . 51
5.3.2. Clearing and Grubbing of Streets . . . 51
5.3.3. Excavation and Subgrade Preparation . . . 51
5.3.4. Gravel Base . .. . 52
5.3.5. Pavement . . . . 52
5.3.6. Street Embankments and Retaining Walls . . . 52
5.3.7. Curbs and Berms . . . . 53
5.3.8. Fire Protection . . . . 53
5.4 STORM AND SURFACE DRAINAGE . . . 53
5.4.1. General . . . . . 53
5.4.2. Pipes, Culverts and Drains . . . 54
4
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Continued)
5.4.3. Catch Basins and Manholes . . . 54
5.4.4. Responsibility for Subdivision Drainage . . . 54
5.4.5. Extension of Drains to Adjacent Properties . . 55
5.5 SIDEWALKS . . . . 55
5.5.1. Location and Width . . . . 55
5.5.2. Sidewalk Drainage . . . . 55
5.5.3. Sidewalk Base . . . . 55
5.5.4. Sidewalk Pavement . . . . 55
5.5.5. Loaming and Seeding . . . . 55
5.5.6. Sidewalk Pavement at Street Intersections . . . 55
5.6 UTILITIES. . . . . 55
5.7 GUARD RAILS . . . . 55
5.8 GRASS STRIPS . . . . 55
5.9 TREES . . . . . 55
5.10 STREET SIGNS . . . . 56
5.11 BOUNDARY MARKS AND MONUMENTS . . 56
5.12 STREET LIGHTING . . . . 56
5.13 FINAL CLEANING . 56
SECTION 6.0 ADMINISTRATION . . . . 57
6.1 AUTHORITY . . . . 57
6.2 WAIVER OF COMPLIANCE . . . 57
6.3 INSPECTIONS . . . . 57
6.3.1. General . . . . . 57
6.3.2. Required Inspections . . . . 57
6.4 REVIEW FEES . . . . 58
6.5 BUILDING PERMITS . . . . 59
6.6 MAINTENANCE . . . . 59
6.7 CHANGES IN THE DEFINITIVE PLAN . . . 59
6.7.1. Modifications . . . . 59
6.7.2. Minor Revisions . . . . 60
6.7.3. Reference and Dating Requirements for Revised Plans. . . 60
6.8. RESCISSION AFTER TWO YEARS . . . 60
6.9 SEPARABILITY . . . . 60
6.10 AMENDMENTS . . . . 60
5
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Continued)
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE ADMINISTRATION OF SCENIC ROADS
SECTION 1: STATUTORY PROVISIONS . . . 61
SECTION 2: PURPOSE . . . . 61
SECTION 3: STREETS SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS OF SCENIC ROAD ACT . 62
SECTION 4: PROCEDURE TO DESIGNATE SCENIC ROADS . . 62
SECTION 5: DEFINITIONS . . . . 62
SECTION 6: CONSTRUCTION AND APPLICABILITY OF RULES . . 63
SECTION 7: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR DRIVEWAYS . . 63
7.1. Curb Cuts . . . . 63
7.2. Stone Wall Removal Limitations . .. . 63
7.3. Tree Removal Limitations . . . 64
SECTION 8: PROCEDURES . . . . 64
8.1. Filing Instructions . . . 64
8.2. Tree Warden . . .. . 64
8.3. Notice . . . . 64
8.4. Timing . . . . 65
8.5. Decision . . . . 65
SECTION 9: CONSIDERATIONS . . . . 65
SECTION 10: ENFORCEMENT . . . . 66
10.1. Remedy for Failure to File . . . 66
10.2. Compliance . . . . 66
10.3. Authority . . . . 66
APPENDICES AND FORMS . . . . 67
6
SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING SPECIAL PERMIT REQUESTS
AND SITE PLAN REVIEW
SECTION 1. INSTRUCTIONS
All applicants for a site plan review under Section 5.3 of the Zoning Bylaws or an exemption on
minimum street frontage requirements under Section 4.4 of the Zoning Bylaws or other special
permit requests from the Planning Board shall submit to the Planning Board a completed Petition
for Special Permit on the form annexed hereto.
Applicants are required to pay for all associated and related costs, including, but not limited to,
advertising, abutter notification and outside consultants including engineers, planners, architects,
landscape architects, attorneys or other professionals, which the Planning Board determines are
needed to review the plans and make recommendations thereof.
SECTION 2. PERSONAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
2.1 DETERMINATION OF EXEMPTION FROM SPECIAL PERMIT REQUIREMENT
a. In accordance with Section 5.8 of the Zoning By-Laws, all applications for the installation of
wireless communications facilities shall be submitted to the Planning Board for either a Special
Permit or a determination that the proposal qualifies for a lesser level of review and permitting as
follows:
1. Whether the proposal needs only a building permit by virtue of meeting the standards
specified in Section 5.8.4 of the Zoning Bylaw; or
2. Whether the proposal requires a Preliminary Site Plan Review as provided for in
Section 5.8.4 of the Zoning By-Law;
b. Applicants seeking a Determination of Exemption From Special Permit shall submit sufficient
architectural and/or engineering drawings to the Planning Board to demonstrate that they meet the
standards of Section 5.8.4. Such plans must include (but are not limited to) elevations indicating
the planned exterior alterations to any existing building or structure and/or the elevations of any
new building or structure; a site plan indicating the size and location of existing and proposed
buildings or structures including any support equipment, fencing, landscaping, lighting, parking,
access ways, etc.; a narrative description describing the proposed changes and explaining how
they meet the standards of Section 5.8.4 of the Zoning By-Law; and the Form entitled
Determination of Exemption From Special Permit for Wireless Communications.
2.2 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
Prior to the submission of an application for a Special Permit under Section 5.8 of the Zoning
Bylaw, the applicant is strongly encouraged to meet with the Planning Board at a public meeting
to discuss the proposed personal wireless communications facility in general terms and to clarify
the filing requirements. The purpose of the conference is to inform the Planning Board as to the
nature of the proposed personal wireless communications facility. As such, no formal filings are
required for the pre-application conference. However, the applicant is encouraged to prepare
sufficient preliminary architectural and/or engineering drawings to inform the Planning Board of
the location of the proposed facility, as well as its scale and overall design.
7
2.3 APPLICATION FILING REQUIREMENTS
The following shall be included with an application for a Special Permit for all personal wireless
communications facilities:
2.3.1 General Filing Requirements
a. Name, address and telephone number of applicant and any co-applicants as well as any agents
for the applicant or co-applicants. A 24-hour emergency telephone contact number shall be
included.
b. At least one licensed carrier and the landowner(s) of the proposed site of the personal wireless
communications facility shall be applicants or co-applicants.
c. Original signatures are required for the applicant and all co-applicants applying for the Special
Permit. If the applicant or co-applicant will be represented by an agent, original signature
authorizing the agent to represent the applicant and/or co-applicant is required. Photo
reproductions of signatures will not be accepted.
2.3.2 Locus Plan Requirements
a. Identification of the subject property including the name of the nearest road or roads, street
address, if any, and Assessors Map and Parcel number of subject property.
b. A map to scale prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor
showing the subject property and all properties (including lot lines) within 500 feet and the
location of all buildings, including accessory structures, and driveways on all properties shown to
the extent observable or determinable by Town or other records.
c. A map showing the locations of all pre-existing and proposed future personal wireless
communications facilities in Sherborn and abutting towns for the applicant carrier, and all other
pre-existing and proposed (to the extent determinable through public records) personal wireless
communications facilities of other carriers in Sherborn and abutting towns.
2.3.3 Site Plan Filing Requirements
a. A vicinity plan prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor at
a scale of 1”=40’ (or at an alternate scale appropriate for the size of the property as may be
approved by the Planning Board) showing the following:
1. Property lines for the subject property.
2. Property lines of all properties adjacent to the subject property within 500 feet.
3. Tree cover on the subject property and abutting properties distinguishing between
coniferous and deciduous species, and indicating average height as measured by or
available from a verifiable source, for a distance of 500 feet
4. Outline of all pre-existing buildings, including purpose (e.g. residential buildings,
garages, accessory structures, etc.) on subject property and all properties adjacent to the
subject property to the extent observable or determinable by Town or other records.
b. A Proposed Development Plan prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer or
land surveyor including the following:
1. Proposed location of antenna, mount, equipment shelter(s) and other appurtenant
facilities.
2. Proposed security barrier around tower and/or equipment shelter, indicating type and
extent as well as point of controlled entry.
8
3. Location of all roads, public and private, and utility easements on the subject property
and on all properties adjacent to the subject property including driveways proposed to
serve the personal wireless communications facility.
4. Distances, at grade, from the proposed personal wireless communications facility to
each building on the vicinity plan.
5. Contours at each two feet above mean sea level for a distance of 500 feet around
the proposed site.
6. All proposed changes to the pre-existing property, including grading, vegetation
removal and planting, and temporary or permanent roads and driveways.
7. Representations, dimensioned and to scale, of the proposed mount, antennas,
equipment shelters, cable runs, parking areas and any other construction or
development attendant to the personal wireless communications facility.
8. Lines representing the sight line showing viewpoint (point from which view is taken)
and visible point (point being viewed) from “Sight Lines” subsection below.
9. All conservation lands and conservation easements on the subject property or within
1000 feet of the proposed site.
c. Sight lines and photographs as described below:
1. Sight line representation. A sight line representation shall be drawn from the nearest
point of the nearest public way within 500 feet and the closest facade of each residential
building (viewpoint) within 500 feet (subject to the owner’s permission to do so) to the
highest point (visible point) of the personal wireless communications facility. Each sight
line shall be depicted in profile, drawn at one inch equals 40 feet. The profiles shall show
all intervening trees and buildings. In the event there is no residential building or public
way within 500 feet, there shall be at least two sight lines from the closest habitable
structures or public roads, if any.
2. Pre-existing (before condition) photographs. Each sight line shall be illustrated by
one four-inch by six-inch color photograph of what can currently be seen from any public
road and any residential building within 300 feet.
3. Proposed (after condition). Each of the pre-existing condition photographs shall have
the proposed personal wireless communications facility superimposed on it to show what
will be seen from public roads and residential buildings if the proposed personal wireless
communications facility is built.
4. Siting elevations. Elevations shall be at either one-quarter inch equals one foot or
one-eighth inch equals one foot scale and show the following:
(a). Antennas, mounts and equipment shelter(s), with total elevation
dimensions and AGL of the highest point.
(b). Security barrier. If the security barrier will block views of the
personal wireless service facility, the barrier drawing shall be cut away to
show the view behind the barrier.
(c). Any and all structures on the subject property.
(d). Pre-existing trees and shrubs at current height and proposed trees
and shrubs at proposed height at time of installation, with approximate
elevations dimensioned.
(e). Grade changes, or cuts and fills, to be shown as original grade and
new grade line, with two-foot contours above mean sea level.
5. Photographs, from multiple viewpoints, of any crane or balloon used to test
visibility or viability of any proposed site.
2.3.4 Design Filing Requirements
9
a. Materials of the proposed personal wireless communications facility specified by generic type
and specific treatment (e.g. anodized aluminum, stained wood, painted fiberglass, etc.). These
shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters, cables as well as cable runs, and
security barrier, if any.
b. Colors of the proposed personal wireless communications facility represented by a color board
showing actual colors proposed. Colors shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment
shelters, cables as well as cable runs, and security barrier, if any.
c. Dimensions of the personal wireless communications facility specified for all three directions:
height, width and breadth. These shall be provided for the antennas, mounts, equipment shelters
and security barrier, if any.
d. Landscape plan including pre-existing trees and shrubs and those proposed to be added,
identified by size of specimen at installation and species.
e. During the application process the applicant shall schedule with the Planning Board a balloon
or crane test at the proposed site, at the expense of the applicant, to illustrate the height of the
proposed facility. The date, time and location of such test shall be advertised, at the expense of
the applicant, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town at least one week in advance of
the proposed date. At least one alternate date shall be published in the event inclement weather
requires rescheduling. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, waive the advertising
requirement if adverse weather conditions result in the cancellation of the test on both the
original and alternate dates.
f. If lighting of the site is proposed, the applicant shall submit documentation from an engineer
that the foot-candle level at the property lines shall not exceed 0.0.
2.3.5 Noise Filing Requirements
The applicant shall provide a statement certified by an acoustical engineer that the facility will
comply with the noise standards of Section 2.6 (b).
2.3.6 Radiofrequency Radiation (RFR) Filing Requirements
The applicant shall provide the following:
a. A statement signed by a licensed RF engineer that the proposed or existing transmitting facility
does or will comply with FCC radiofrequency emission guidelines for both general
population/uncontrolled exposures and occupational/controlled exposures as defined in FCC rules
(as they may be amended or updated from time to time).
b. A statement or explanation as to how the personal wireless service provider determined that the
transmitting facility will comply, e. g., by calculation methods, by computer simulations, by
actual field measurements, etc. Actual values for predicted exposure should be provided to further
support the statement. An exhaustive record of all possible exposure locations is not necessary,
but, for example, the “worst case” exposure value in an accessible area could be mentioned as
showing that no exposures would ever be greater than that level. Reference should be given to the
actual FCC exposure limit or limits relevant for the particular transmitting site.
c. An explanation as to what, if any, restrictions on access to certain areas will be maintained to
ensure compliance with the public or occupational exposure limits. This includes control
procedures that are established for workers who may be exposed as a result of maintenance or
other tasks related to their jobs.
10
d. A statement as whether other significant transmitting sources are located at or near the
transmitting site, and, if required by the FCC rules, whether their RF emissions were considered
in determining compliance at the transmitting site.
2.3.7 Federal Environmental Filing Requirements
a. The applicant shall present a copy of any Environmental Assessment (EA) that may be
required by the FCC through its administration of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
via procedures adopted as Subpart 1, Section 1.1301 et seq. (47 CFR Ch. I).
b. If no such EA needs to be submitted to the FCC, documentation of that fact must be submitted.
c. The applicant shall list location, type and amount (including trace elements) of any materials
proposed for use within the personal wireless communications facility that are considered
hazardous by the federal, state or local government.
2.3.8 Alternatives Analysis
All applications for new tower locations shall be accompanied by a narrative statement endorsed
by a qualified radiofrequency engineer explaining why the proposed location (or locations) was
(were) selected. Such statement shall include supporting documentation demonstrating that no
feasible alternative location within the Town of Sherborn was available. For locations outside
Overlay District 1, such statement shall include additional supporting documentation
demonstrating that at least three alternative scenarios to provide comparable service utilizing
existing structures, locations within Overlay District 1, and/or camouflaged facilities were
considered and rejected.
2.4 CO-LOCATION
a. Licensed carriers shall share personal wireless communications facilities and sites where
feasible and appropriate, thereby reducing the number of personal wireless communications
facilities that are stand-alone facilities. All applicants for a Special Permit for a personal wireless
communications facility shall demonstrate a good faith effort to co-locate with other carriers.
Such good faith effort includes:
1. A survey of all pre-existing structures that may be feasible sites for co-locating
personal wireless communications facilities;
2. Contact with all other carriers for wireless communications operating or licensed to
operate in Sherborn or abutting Towns, and
3. Sharing information necessary to determine if co-location is feasible under the design
configuration most accommodating to co-location.
b. In the event that co-location is found to be not feasible, a written statement of the reasons for
the unfeasibility shall be submitted to the Town. The Town may retain a technical expert in the
field of RF engineering to verify if co-location at the site is not feasible or is feasible given the
design configuration most accommodating to co-location. The cost for such a technical expert
will be at the expense of the applicant. The Town may deny a Special Permit to an applicant who
has not demonstrated a good faith effort to provide for co-location.
c. If the applicant does intend to co-locate or to permit co-location, the Town shall request
drawings and studies which show the ultimate appearance and operation of the personal wireless
communications facility at full build-out.
11
d. If the Planning Board approves co-location for a personal wireless communications facility
site, the Special Permit shall indicate how many facilities of what type shall be permitted on that
site. Facilities specified in the Special Permit approval shall require no further zoning approval.
However, the addition of any facilities not specified in the approved Special Permit shall require a
new Special Permit.
2.5 MODIFICATIONS
A modification of a personal wireless communications facility may be considered equivalent to
an application for a new personal wireless communications facility. Applicants for such
modifications shall appear before the Planning Board to present its proposed modifications in
order that the Board may determine whether the modifications are substantial and require the
submission of a new Special Permit application
2.6 MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE
a. After the personal wireless communications facility is operational, the applicant shall submit
to the Planning Board copies of any documents required by the FCC to demonstrate compliance
with its RF emission standards.
b. After the personal wireless communications facility is operational, the applicant shall submit,
within 10 days of any request from the Town in response to complaints received, documentation
that noise emissions from the facility, measured at its property plane, do not exceed 50 decibels
from 10:00 PM to 7:00 AM or 55 decibels from 7:00 AM to 10:00 PM. Such measurements shall
be signed by an acoustical engineer, stating that noise measurements are accurate and meet the
foregoing standard. In the event these standards are not met, appropriate noise inhibiting
measures shall be implemented and compliance with the standards demonstrated within 30 days
of the initial request for documentation.
c. The carrier(s) operating the wireless communications facility and/or its owner shall maintain
the personal wireless communications facility. Such maintenance shall include, but shall not be
limited to, painting, structural integrity and landscaping.
2.7 ABANDONMENT OR DISCONTINUATION OF USE
a. At such time that a licensed carrier plans to abandon or discontinue operation of a personal
wireless communications facility, such carrier will notify the Town by certified US mail of the
proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations. Such notice shall be given no
less than 30 days prior to abandonment or discontinuation of operations. In the event that a
licensed carrier fails to give such notice, the personal wireless communications facility shall be
considered abandoned if the annual certification required in Section 2.9 d. is not received within
10 days of its due date. If the Town suspects that a facility is abandoned, it may request a
confirmation of continued operations at any time, and a facility shall be considered abandoned if
no such confirmation is received within 30 days of the request.
b. Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the carrier shall physically remove the personal
wireless communications facility within 12 months from the date of abandonment or
discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Removal of antennas, mount, equipment shelters and security barriers from the subject
property.
2. Proper disposal of the waste materials from the site in accordance with local and state
solid waste disposal regulations.
12
3. Restoring the location of the personal wireless communications facility to its original
condition, except that any landscaping and grading shall remain.
c. If a carrier fails to remove a personal wireless communications facility in accordance with this
section of this Bylaw, the Town shall have the authority to enter the subject property and
physically remove the facility. As provided for in Section 2.9 (c), the Planning Board will
require the applicant to provide security, in an amount set by the Planning Board, prior to
issuance of the Special Permit to cover costs for the removal of the personal wireless
communications facility in the event the Town must remove the facility.
2.8 RECONSTRUCTION OR REPLACEMENT OF PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES
Personal wireless service facilities that were in existence at the time of adoption of this Bylaw
may be reconstructed, altered, extended or replaced by Special Permit, provide that the Planning
Board finds that such reconstruction, alteration, extension or replacement will not be substantially
more detrimental to the neighborhood and/or the Town than the pre-existing non-conforming
structure. In making such a determination, the Planning Board shall consider whether the
proposed reconstruction, alteration, extension or replacement will create public benefits such as
opportunities for co-location, improvements in public safety, and/or reduction in visual and
environmental impacts.
2.9 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
a. Insurance in a reasonable amount determined and approved by the Planning Board after
consultation at the expense of the Applicant with one (1) or more insurance companies shall be in
force to cover damage from the structure, damage from transmissions and other site liabilities.
Annual proof of said insurance shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
b. An initial bond to cover annual maintenance for the access road, site tower(s), antennas, and
related equipment will be posted in an amount approved by the Planning Board.
c. Security shall be established prior to the issuance of a Special Permit to ensure that funds are
available for the removal of the wireless communications facility and restoration of the site to as
close to its original condition as is feasible. Such security shall consist of special cash account,
held by the Town, and dedicated to the specific purpose of removing and disposing of the
wireless communications facility and restoring its site. The account shall be established by the
Town upon receipt of the funds from the applicant in an amount determined by the Planning
Board after consultation with an appropriate consultant (at the expense of the applicant). At the
discretion of the Planning Board, a comparable security such as a letter of credit may be
substituted for the cash account.
d. Annual certification as to continuing operations and compliance with applicable standards of
the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration and the American
National Standards Institute shall be filed with the Planning Board by the Special Permit holder,
no later than January 31 of each year.
2.10 COLOR
a. Personal wireless service facilities which are side-mounted on buildings shall be painted or
constructed of materials to match the color of the building material directly behind them.
13
b. Wireless communications facilities shall be of an appropriate color to minimize visibility. The
colors may vary by site, type of facility and/or location of each portion of the facility in relation
to its immediate environs.
2.11 EQUIPMENT SHELTERS
Equipment shelters for personal wireless communications facilities shall be designed consistent
with one of the following design standards:
a. Equipment shelters must be located in underground vaults; or
b. Equipment shelters must be designed consistent with traditional materials, color and design of
the area.
c. Equipment shelters must be camouflaged behind an effective year-round landscape buffer,
equal to the height of the proposed building, and /or wooden fence acceptable to the Planning
Board.
2.12 LIGHTING AND SIGNAGE
a. Personal wireless service facilities shall be lighted only if required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). Lighting of equipment structures and any other facilities on site shall be
shielded from abutting properties. There shall be total cutoff of all light at the property lines of
the parcel to be developed, and foot-candle measurements at the property line shall be 0.0 initial
foot-candles when measured at grade.
b. Signs shall be limited to those needed to identify the property and the owner and warn of any
danger.
c. All ground mounted personal wireless communications facilities shall be surrounded by a
security barrier.
2.13 HISTORIC BUILDINGS
a. Any personal wireless communications facilities located on or within a historic structure (a
structure listed or eligible for listing on the State or National Register of Historic Places) shall not
alter the character-defining features, distinctive construction methods, or original historic
materials of the building; or
b. Notwithstanding the foregoing, approval, where required, of the Sherborn Historic District
Commission or the Massachusetts Historic Commission shall constitute compliance with this
Subsection 2.13.
2.14 COMMENTS FROM OTHER BOARDS
The Planning Board shall request comments from the Town Forest Committee for any proposed
locations within Town Forest, or from other boards of commissions as may be relevant (e.g.
Cemetery Commission for locations near a cemetery, Open Space Committee for locations near
the Bay Circuit Trail).
2.15 TERM OF SPECIAL PERMIT.
A Special Permit issued for any personal wireless communications facility shall be for a
maximum initial term of 5 years. Such permits shall be renewable for additional maximum terms
of five years upon application by the Special Permit holder at least 90 days prior to the expiration
14
of a current term. Renewal applications shall contain documentation that the conditions of the
original Special Permit (or any previous renewals) were met and maintained during the previous
term.
15
SECTION 3 SITE PLAN REVIEW
3.1. AUTHORITY
The administrative requirements herein are authorized by the Town of Sherborn Zoning
Bylaws, Section 5.3.1 (b) Special Permits for Site Changes in the Business District, and
Section 6, Special Permit Granting Authority
3.2. PRECEDENCE
In case of conflict among the zoning bylaw, and/or these regulations, and/or an approved
site plan, the order of precedence shall be:
1. Zoning Bylaw; then 2. these regulations; then 3. the approved site plan.
3.3. APPLICABILITY
These regulations shall apply to projects subject to a Site Plan Special Permit under Section
5.3.1 of the Zoning Bylaw.
3.4. REQUIREMENTS
In order to facilitate the review process, the applicants may schedule a meeting with the
Town Planner to review the requirements and the process. At the discretion of the Town
Planner, a pre-submission meeting with the Planning Board may also be scheduled prior to
submitting an application for a Site Plan Special Permit. Other resources that are available to
the applicant that will aid the application and review process include the Sherborn
Permitting Procedures Manual (available at http://planning.sherbornma.org and for sale at
Town Hall) as well as copies of the regulations and fee schedules of other Town
Departments/Boards. It is recommended that these resources be consulted before preparing
plans in order to minimize or avoid plan changes after submittal.
3.4.1. The Site Plan shall be drawn at a scale 1” = 20', and on a maximum sheet size of 24" X 36",
all existing (dash line) and proposed (solid line) features and elevation contours in
compliance with the requirements of Site Plan Approval of the Zoning Bylaws. Approved
site plans shall be drawn on a reproducible mylar both for recording and to file with the
Planning Board.
3.4.2. Contents. The Site Plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following information to assist the
Planning Board in evaluating the site plan. Separate sheets shall be used as appropriate to
retain plan legibility:
3.4.2.1. The names and address of the record owner of the land, the name and address of the
developer and/or applicant (if different from the owner, and the name, seal, and address of the
designer, engineer, and surveyor who made the plan, all of which shall appear in the lower
right hand corner.
3.4.2.2. A Signature Block located on the right side of each drawing with suitable space to record the
action of the Planning Board and the signatures of the members of the Board, and indicating
the date of approval and date of endorsement.
3.4.2.3. A locus plan drawn to a scale of 1" = 1000' showing the general location of the site in relation
to all adjacent and nearby roads, railroads, waterways, and utility easements. Name of
16
development, scale and north arrow, date of plan and legend.
3.4.2.4. The lot shall be tied into the nearest town, county, and state bound. Bearings and curve data
distances of all lot lines. Locations of driveways, parking and service areas, names of all
parties of interest including abutters, owners of land directly opposite on any public or private
street or way, and abutters to the abutters within three hundred feet of the property line as
they appear on the most recent applicable tax list including those in other cities or towns.
The plan shall also show the location of easements, rights of way, public or private ways, and
other reservations existing, planned or proposed, on, adjacent to, or intersecting the subject
site.
3.4.2.5. Assessor's Map and Lot numbers of subject property.
3.4.2.6. Zoning district(s) and any boundary of zoning districts within the lot, along any lot line, or
within any adjoining property.
3.4.2.7. Topography for the entire site shall be shown in two-foot intervals except where the Board
requires that a one-foot contour interval be used. Contours and elevations of existing and
proposed features shall be based on the North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88).
Existing contours are to be shown as dashed lines and proposed contours are to be shown as
solid lines.
3.4.2.8. The location and dimensions (including height) of all existing and proposed buildings and
structures, including ground coverage, gross floor area, and breakdown of indoor and outdoor
floor area. Open area uses and other uses and improvements. All doorways and their way of
opening shall be shown for all existing and proposed buildings. Location of buildings
existing on the tract to be developed and on adjacent tracts within a distance of 100 feet from
the property line, indicating whether existing buildings on the tract are to be retained,
modified, or removed. Existing soil conditions and soil suitability test results.
A statement of the amount of area of land involved in the site, the percentage of the site
proposed to be covered by buildings and parking areas, the number of square feet of gross
floor area, the area to be proposed to be devoted to open space, the area proposed to be paved
for parking, driveways, loading space, and sidewalks, the total number of parking spaces
proposed and required by the Zoning Bylaws for the uses proposed, the number of employees
expected per shift, and the total floor area of proposed commercial, industrial, office or other
use.
Where the zoning bylaws set requirements related to the above figures, those requirements
also shall be listed in a manner that permits comparison of the required vs. the proposed
quantities.
3.4.2.9. Existing and proposed front, side, and rear yard dimensions. Proposed dimensions shall be in
accordance with the Town of Sherborn Zoning Bylaws as most recently revised.
3.4.2.10. Parking lots; showing driveway entrances and exits designed for safe ingress and egress, curb
cuts, layout of parking spaces, aisles, pedestrian walks, necessary ramps, and representative
cross sections of all proposed service and parking areas and driveways. All of the above shall
be in accordance with the applicable sections of the Town of Sherborn Zoning Bylaws as
most recently revised. All parking and access shall comply with the Architectural Access
Board and Americans with Disabilities Act regulations. The applicant shall indicate the basis
for determining the number of parking spaces.
The plan for any new building shall include appropriate access for fire equipment, such
17
access to be approved by the Fire Chief on the plans prior to construction of the building.
Access to present buildings shall be kept clear of hazardous substances and obstacles which
may, in the opinion of the fire department, impede the proper placement of fire apparatus and
personnel in case of fire.
Proposed traffic circulation systems, including the volume and proposed direction of
projected traffic flows into, out of, and within the site for both vehicles and pedestrians for an
average day and for peak hours.
Off-street loading facilities, necessary ramps, and representative cross sections of all proposed
parking areas and driveways. Curb stops shall be shown where, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, they are necessary.
3.4.2.11. All existing and proposed landscape features such as fences, walls, planting areas, and walks.
Planting details in buffer zones and green belts shall include species, height of species,
spacing of plantings and shall be shown at sufficient scale to illustrate clearly the landscaping
design. (See those Sections of the Sherborn Zoning Bylaw, as most recently amended,
pertaining to landscaping and buffers, including but not limited to Sections 3.4, 4.5.3, 5.1.5,
and 5.6.5.) Plans for walks, walls, and fences shall include dimensions, materials and
finishes.
3.4.2.12. All plans shall show the edge of wetlands, the edge of the 100 year (FEMA) flood plain, the
edge of isolated areas subject to flooding, the banks of intermittent streams, the banks of
perennial streams, the banks of lakes and ponds, the banks of rivers, the riverfront area
(including the 100 foot and 200 foot riparian zones), and the edge of the 100 foot wetland
buffer zones. The limits of these resource areas shall be determined in accordance with
applicable Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Regulations (310 CMR
10.00-10.60, including appendices) and any Town of Sherborn Zoning Bylaw, General
Bylaw or Town Regulation relative to wetland protection, aquifer protection, and/or water
resource protection. FEMA panel number, zone designation, and base flood elevation shall
be indicated on the plan. Wetland boundaries shall be identified according to the
requirements of the Conservation Commission as to criteria and time of year analyzed. If no
resource areas or buffer zones are located on the subject property, then a statement to that
effect shall be on the plans.
3.4.2.13. All facilities for water supply and distribution, fire protection, lighting, and facilities for the
prevention of air pollution and protection of the groundwater. All utilities are to be installed
underground.
3.4.2.13.1. The following site lighting information shall be provided: type, height, wattage, foot candle
output directly under the light source, and foot candle output at the property line and a
photometric layout/diagram showing direction and intensity of outdoor lighting. Lighting
fixtures shall be of "cut-off" design, and not floodlight design, unless otherwise approved by
the Planning Board. Foot candle output directly under the light source shall not exceed five
(5) and shall not exceed .25 at the property line. Lighting (poles and fixtures combined) shall
not exceed 15' in height.
3.4.2.13.2. A duplicate site plan showing a photometric diagram/layout to establish the boundaries of the
illumination shall be provided. The duplicate site plan need not show the detail of the actual
site plan, but shall show the lot, building(s) on the lot, light standard location, and perimeter
of the illumination of each light.
3.4.2.14. Location and dimensions (including height) of all storage facilities for equipment, material,
and other like items.
18
3.4.2.15. Location and dimensions (including height) of facilities for garbage, rubbish, and other waste
collection and disposal. Description and plan of capacity and location of means of sewage
disposal together with approval of the Board of Health and evidence of soil suitability for
such disposal (test pit locations shall be shown on the plans).
3.4.2.16. All facilities for accommodating storm-water drainage and snow-melt runoff from all
buildings, driveways, parking areas, and service areas on the site. The site plan shall be
accompanied by a storm drainage study based on the design criteria of a 25-year storm,
certified by a professional engineer and a proposed drainage system plan, both surface and
subsurface, showing measures proposed to prevent pollution of surface or ground water, soil
erosion, increased run-off, changes in ground water level and flooding. All storm water
drainage shall be contained on site unless otherwise approved by the Planning Board. Major
structures, culverts, detention basins, and retention basins shall accommodate the 100 year
frequency storm event. Leaching pits, basins, and galleys shall be installed. The drainage
design shall incorporate best management practices and standards in compliance with the
most recent edition of the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Handbook.
Soil percolation and/or permeability tests shall be conducted to document the capacity of the
soil to accommodate the discharge of the proposed drainage system. Runoff from all
structures shall be accommodated into leaching basins unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Board. All runoff from parking areas, driveways and service areas on the site shall
be directed into a dedicated oil-water separator. Roof runoff shall be discharged into
drywells.
3.4.2.17. A plan for the control of erosion, siltation, and dust before and during construction including,
but not limited to, appropriate ground cover, crushed stone construction entrance and street
sweeping of adjacent public ways as required by the Board. The Board may require seeding.
3.4.2.18. Location and dimensions (including height) of existing and/or proposed free standing signs
and the manner of their external illumination.
3.4.2.19. All private wells within 200' of the property.
3.4.2.20. All public or community water supply wells within 1000' of the property.
3.4.2.21. Removal of earth shall be performed in accordance with the requirements in accordance with
the Town of Sherborn Bylaws, including Section 5.4 of the Zoning Bylaw and as specified by
other agencies. The applicant shall also indicate on the plan the volume of fill and/or gravel
borrow that will be trucked onto the site. The Board may require certification of compliance
with G.L. c. 21E, as most recently amended, with respect to the existence of contamination or
threat of contamination on the site.
3.4.2.22. The maximum size vehicle, including trailers, expected to use the site after construction shall
be identified by length, width, height, and AASHTO designation.
3.4.2.23. All existing and proposed structures shall have indicated on the plans their garage and
pedestrian entrances and exits and their openings.
3.4.2.24. All existing and proposed public and private utilities, above and below grade, along with their
type, size, and class, shall be shown on the plan. All proposed and existing public and private
utilities on site shall be located underground.
3.4.2.25. All waivers proposed by the Applicant and approved by the Planning Board or a statement to
the effect that no waivers are being requested shall be indicated on the plan.
19
3.4.2.26. There shall be no impact of drainage on abutting public or private water supply.
3.4.2.23. The construction requirements of parking lots and driveways shall be the same as that for
roadways as specified in Schedule A of the Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
As may be specifically allowed under the Sherborn Zoning Bylaws, parking lots may be other
than bituminous pavement as follows:
3.4.2.23.1. Parking areas serving municipal open spaces shall be classified as being in one of two use
categories: Conservation-Passive Uses for which vehicle use is infrequent (trips/day) and of
low capacity (parking less than 20 cars) and Recreation-Active uses for which vehicle use is
frequent (trips/day) and of high capacity (parking above 20 cars).
3.4.2.23.2. Drainage for both Conservation-Passive and Recreation-Active parking areas shall be
designed such that there is no increased runoff impact from the built condition as compared to
the existing condition. All drainage design shall be under the direction of a licensed
professional as is required for any site plan documents. The site design shall strive to
mitigate existing land deficiencies that create an undesirable impact off-site.
3.4.2.23.3. Parking area design shall establish that there is satisfactory sub-surface soil material to
structurally support the proposed vehicle use. The sub-grade shall meet design standards
required for local roadway design of residential subdivisions. There shall be a minimum of
eight (8) inch thickness of graded, crushed stone base meeting the installation and stone
material standards of a local residential subdivision street. There shall be a 4” thick dense
graded crushed stone layer and 4” thick bituminous concrete pavement corresponding to the
standards for a local residential subdivision roadway.
3.4.2.23.4. Conservation-Passive parking area surfaces may be one of the following surfacing options:
- Pavers and grass at 1-1/2" minimum paver thickness;
- Natural or synthetic honeycomb pavers a minimum of 6" deep and bearing on fully
compacted base material and filled/surrounded with porous granular materials;
- A 2" thickness of graded crushed stone with aggregate at 3/4" plus 1" size.
3.4.2.23.5. Recreation-Active area surfaces may be one of the following minimum surfacing options:
- 2-1/2" thick asphalt binder course
- 2-1/2" thick permeable asphalt
- 2-1/2" of compacted stone dust
3.4.2.23.6. Parking spaces are to be adequately denoted by permanent measures as approved by the
Planning Board.
3.4.2.23.7. Maintenance Covenant: All municipal parking areas built for Conservation or Recreation
uses under a Special Permit shall be subject to a periodic site review permit/use reinstatement.
3.4.2.23.8. Public access and public safety conditions shall be a condition of any such parking lot use.
Such conditions as safe access from a public way, lighting and traffic controls, lane and
parking stall markings, parking area travel way, etc. shall be in conformance with the
regulations for normal Site Plan Approval.
3.4.2.23.9. All other aspects and criteria listed in the Zoning Bylaws for granting of any Special Permit
shall be applicable for these Conservation and Recreation Parking Area standards.
20
3.4.2.24. Parking stalls shall be painted according to MassDOT specifications, as most recently
amended. Lines shall be at the head of and along the sides of parking stalls. Lines shall be a
4" wide and shall be one consistent color, either yellow or white. Stalls are measured from
the center of lines.
3.4.2.25. Any additional details that may be pertinent.
3.4.2.26. The applicant shall provide a written statement describing how the proposed site plan
application meets the general conditions of approval of Sherborn Zoning Bylaw.
3.5. SUBMISSION
3.5.1. General. The following shall be submitted to the Planning Board Office: 8 copies of the Site
Plan, 8 copies of the application form “Petition for Special Permit,” 8 copies of the site plan
approval checklist, Application Fee (See Schedule C for amount of fee.) Review Fee (if
applicable, to be determined on a case-by-case basis), Certified List of Abutters from
Assessors’ Office, Copy of any decisions for subject property from Zoning Board of Appeals,
3 copies of stormwater drainage report, 3 copies of traffic assessment (study), Completed
Bank Tax ID Form for review fee funds, Letter regarding consent for use of Board’s
consultant, Good Standing Approval from Tax Collector’s Office.
Note: Please also contact the Board of Health office for its Site Plan fee.
The Town Planner shall review the application for completeness within 14 days of submittal.
If not substantially complete, the site plan may be returned to the applicant with a list of the
discrepancies noted for correction. If found to be substantially complete, the Town Planner
shall distribute, within five (5) business days, one (1) copy each to the Building
Commissioner, Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and
CMD Director. The agencies receiving these copies shall have up to 21 days to make
recommendations to the Planning Board.
3.5.1.1. The application must be accompanied by a copy of a certified list, from the Board of
Assessors, of the names and addresses of all abutters and abutters to abutters within 300' of
the subject property taken from the most recent tax list.
3.5.1.2. If the property was previously granted a Special Permit or Variance from the Zoning Board of
Appeals, a copy of the decision and the site plan reviewed by the Board of Appeals must also
accompany the application. If the property is before the Board of Appeals for a Special
Permit at the time of application to the Planning Board for Site Plan Approval, a copy of the
application form submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals shall also be submitted to the
Planning Board.
3.5.1.3. The site plan shall be prepared by a Professional Engineer (PE) and a Registered Land
Surveyor licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as appropriate, and
certified by same with their seal, stamp and signature. The proposed use(s) and site
development shall conform to the requirements set forth in the Town of Sherborn Zoning
Bylaws and other regulations as applicable. The plan shall conform to the administrative
requirements set forth herein.
3.5.1.4. Technical data, as deemed by the Planning Board to be necessary, shall be provided to
support the site plan and resulting findings.
3.5.2. Traffic Congestion Control and Analysis. A traffic study shall be required that documents
existing and projected traffic within reasonable proximity of the site, the impacts of the
21
project on level of service of nearby roads and intersections, sight distances at exits/entrances
and proposed mitigation measures.
3.5.3. Waivers. Upon request of the applicant, the Planning Board may waive the requirement to
provide any of the planning information which it deems not relevant to the proposed
development.
3.6. SITE PLAN SUBMITTAL FEE
3.6.1. See Planning Board Fee Schedule C.
3.7. HEARING
3.7.1. Notice
3.7.1.1. Notice of hearings shall be advertised as required by the provisions of General Laws, Chapter
40A, Section 11.
3.7.1.2. The public hearing shall be held within 65 days from the date of the proper filing of the
application.
The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the rules and procedures prescribed
by the Planning Board as required by the Zoning Act of Massachusetts General Laws and
shall be open to the public and in accordance with Mass. G.L. Ch. 39, Sec. 23 a, b, & c, as
amended. ("Open Meeting Law")
3.7.3. Representation and Absence. An applicant may appear in his own behalf, and/or be
represented by an agent or attorney. In the absence of any appearance without due cause on
behalf of an applicant, the board may decide on the matter using the information it has
otherwise received.
3.8. DECISION
3.8.1. Time. Within 90 days from the conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Board shall
vote on Site Plan Approval and file its decision with the Town Clerk.
3.8.2. Modification/Amendment/Endorsement. The Planning Board shall have the power to modify
or amend its approval of a site plan on application of the person owning or leasing the
premises, or upon its own motion in the event of changes in physical conditions sufficient to
justify such action within the intent of the Zoning Bylaws. All of the provisions applicable to
approval shall, where apt, be applicable to such modification or amendment.
3.8.3. Voting Requirement
3.8.3.1. The concurring vote of at least four (4) members of the Board shall be necessary to grant Site
Plan Approval. Any amendments or conditions proposed to an original motion to grant Site
Plan Approval shall be declared passed, based on a simple majority vote.
3.8.3.2. The record shall show the vote of each member upon each question or, if failing to vote,
indicate reasons for its decision.
3.8.4. Written Notification of Decision/Detailed Record
3.8.4.1. The Planning Board shall issue a written decision to the applicant giving the reasons for its
22
decision.
3.8.4.2. A detailed record of proceedings, including the vote on each question shall be filed with the
Town Clerk.
3.8.4.3. If site plan approval is granted by the Board, the applicant shall submit a revised plan
reflecting any and all Conditions of Approval within 60-days of filing of the Board’s decision
with the Town Clerk.
3.9. GENERAL
3.9.1. Application. Prior to acceptance, all applications shall be reviewed by the Planning Board or
its agent. If the Planning Board decides that an application is incomplete, it shall be deemed
invalid and the fee returned. If desired, the applicant may resubmit a completed application,
which shall be treated as a new application.
3.9.2. Withdrawal. An application may be withdrawn, without prejudice, by notice in writing to the
Board at any time prior to the hearing by the Planning Board. After an advertisement,
withdrawal, without prejudice, is only by Planning Board Approval.
3.10. ONE-YEAR LIMITATION OF GRANTS; EXTENSIONS
3.10.1. If an approval is granted by the Planning Board, all permits necessary for the prosecution of
the work shall be obtained and construction shall be commenced within one year from the
date of filing of the Planning Board's decision in the office of the Town Clerk.
3.10.2. It is recommended that requests for extensions be submitted in writing to the Planning Board
at least 60 days prior to the expiration date of Site Plan Approval.
3.10.3. Reasonable extension of said time may be granted by the Board for good cause shown.
3.10.4. The Planning Board is herein authorized to assess observation fees and require applicants to
have site plan improvements observed during the construction phase of the project
3.11. APPEAL OF DECISION
3.11.1. Any appeal of the decision of the Planning Board to any order or decision relative to Site
Plan Approval shall be made in conformance with the conditions set out by the Zoning Act.
All such appeals shall be conducted in accordance with the Zoning Act. (MGL Ch. 40A,
Section 17)
23
SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
SECTION 1 GENERAL
1.1. AUTHORITY
Pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 81Q, the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn
has adopted the following Rules and Regulations governing the subdivision of land in the Town of
Sherborn.
1.2. PURPOSE
These Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Sherborn have been adopted
for the purposes set forth in MGL Chapter 41, Section 81M as amended.
1.3. DEFINITIONS
1.3.1. Subdivision. A division of land into two or more lots in such a manner as to constitute
"subdivision" as defined in MGL Ch. 41, Section 81-L, as amended from time to time.
1.3.2. Applicant. Applicant shall include an owner or his agent or representative, or his assigns.
1.3.3. Owner. Owner shall mean the owner or owners of record of all land included within the
subdivision as shown by the records of the Registry of Deeds for the Southern District of
Middlesex County or the Middlesex South Registry District of the Land Court.
1.3.4. CMD. CMD shall mean the Community Maintenance and Development Department.
1.3.5. Board. Board shall mean the Planning Board.
1.4. SUBDIVISION
1.4.1. No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law, of any
land within the Town, or proceed with the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the
construction of ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a
Definitive Plan of such subdivision has been submitted to and approved by the Planning Board
as hereinafter provided.
1.4.2. No subdivision shall be approved unless it complies with these Regulations and with the
applicable provisions of zoning and other Town bylaws and regulations and of the General
Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or unless, in the opinion of the Board, such
subdivision meets the requirements of public safety, including reasonable precautions against
possible natural disasters, of traffic safety and convenience, of adequate water supply, storm
water drainage and sewage disposal and is designed with due regard to the rights, health and
welfare of Sherborn's inhabitants, including the residents of such subdivision. Proposed
subdivisions shall conform to over-all development plans adopted by the Planning Board and
shall adhere to the principles of correct land use, sound planning and good engineering.
1.4.3. The approval of a subdivision by the Board does not affect any rights others may have in or
over the land to be subdivided, nor does it give the Applicant the right to perform work on land
owned by others. The Board is entitled to rely upon the accuracy of the information submitted
by the Applicant. The acquisition of necessary rights and the presentation of complete and
24
correct information to the Board are responsibilities of the Applicant and the failure to do so,
including the failure or inability to obtain all necessary permits, licenses, releases or rights may
constitute a reason for the disapproval or recision of approval of a subdivision plan.
25
SECTION 2 PROCEDURES FOR THE SUBMISSION OF PLANS NOT REQUIRING APPROVAL
UNDER THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW
2.1. SUBMISSION OF PLAN
Any persons who wish to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or to be filed with the Land Court a
plan of land and who believes that the plan does not require approval under the subdivision control law
because the plan does not constitute a subdivision, shall:
a. Schedule Planning Board review by contacting the Town Planner to be placed on the agenda of an
upcoming meeting.
b. Fill out Form A as indicated on the Form (see Appendix)
c. File, by delivery or registered mail, a notice with the Town Clerk. Such notice shall describe the land
to which the plan relates sufficiently for identification, and shall state the date when such plan was
submitted and the name and address of the owner of such land.
d. Submit to the Town Planner the following:
-- A completed Form A
-- A completed original Mylar plan of land and four (4) copies at a scale of 1"-40', or at an alternate
scale appropriate for the size of the property as may approved by the Planning Board.
-- One 1"-200' scale copy of plan of land, or an electronic copy in a form compatible with the
Town’s GIS system.
-- One (1) copy of a plan of land showing the existing boundaries of the land at the same
scale as the plan indicating the proposed changes.
-- Filing fee as specified in Schedule C (check payable to Town of Sherborn)
2.2. CONTENTS OF PLAN
Each plan shall contain the following information:
a. Existing and proposed boundary lines, dimensions and areas (in square feet or to the nearest 1/100 of
an acre) of all lots, the boundary lines of which are to be changed or shown without change.
b. Title, north point, date of survey, date of plan and date of each revision, if any, Assessor's map
number and lot number, and scale legend.
c. Name of owner of record, and name, address, signature and imprint of the seal of the registered
engineer or registered land surveyor preparing the plan.
d. Names of the owners of all abutting lots from the current Assessors' records.
e. Indication of the Zoning district or districts and district boundary lines, if any, coinciding with or
intersecting any lot line.
f. Existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, and easements with an indication on the plan of their
intent and whether they are public or private.The width and construction materials of the traveled way
from which the property derives its frontage, as well as notice as to whether or not the street is a
Scenic Road, shall be indicated on the plan.
g. Existing and proposed public or common areas, if any.
h. Location of all existing buildings on proposed lots and abutting lots.
i. Indication of the floodplain district, if any, within or in close proximity to the proposed lots.
j. Existing and proposed permanent boundary markers, and existing stone walls.
k. Limits of any wetlands subject to State or local jurisdiction, located on or adjacent to the property.
l. A vicinity map showing all other adjacent land of the Applicant and other adjacent properties as far as
the nearest existing street in every direction. The vicinity map may be a copy of the Assessors' maps.
m. A figure indicating total frontage, and a dimension illustrating width at the front setback line and a
proposed building line shall also be shown on the plan.
n. Frontage and area of any remaining adjoining land owned by the Applicant.
o. Notice of any special permits/variances issued which affect the proposed change in lot lines.
26
p. Deed reference of record owner by Book and Page number and Land court Certificate number if
applicable.
q. Printed legend for Planning Board endorsement in the following form:
Approval under the Subdivision Control Law not required.
SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD
Date 20____
q. The following statement shall appear below the space for the signature for the Planning Board: "The
above endorsement is not a determination by the Planning Board as to conformance with zoning
requirements."
2.3. ENDORSEMENT
If the Board finds that the plan meets the requirements of this section and does not require approval under
the Subdivision control Law, at least a majority of the members of the Board shall endorse the plan without
a public hearing and return the original thereof to the Applicant within the time period required by MGL
Ch. 41, Section 81-P from the date of submission of the plan. If the Board shall determine that in its
opinion the plan requires approval under the Subdivision Control Law, it shall give written notice of its
determination to the Town Clerk and to the Applicant within such statutory period.
27
SECTION 3 PROCEDURES FOR THE SUBMISSION OF PLANS REQUIRING APPROVAL
UNDER THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW
3.1. PRELIMINARY PLAN
3.1.1. Preliminary Conference
In order to insure full compliance with these Rules and Regulations and thereby facilitate the
preparation, submission and processing of preliminary plans and definitive plans requiring approval
under the Subdivision Control Law, the Board invites any owner intending to subdivide his land to
request an informal preliminary conference with the Board prior to his submission of a preliminary or
definitive plan.
3.1.2. Filing Procedures for Preliminary Plan
Any person submitting a preliminary plan shall file five (5) six (6) copies thereof with the Planning
Board together with a fully executed Application Form B, and shall simultaneously file two (2) copies
with the Board of Health. On a related but separate matter of compliance, Applicants should reference
the Board of Health Regulations Section II "Public and Environmental Health Review Regulations for
Other than a Single Family Dwelling on a Single Lot". After delivery of the plan and the above forms
to the Board, the Applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice with the Town Clerk
stating the date of submission of said plans for approval, together with a copy of Form B and a copy
of the plans as submitted. Such notice shall describe the land sufficiently for identification and shall
state the name and address of the owner.
3.1.3. Contents of a Preliminary Plan
A preliminary plan shall contain the following information:
a. Subdivision name and title "Preliminary Plan".
b. Names and addresses of record owner, Applicant, subdivider, and seal and signature of the
engineer, surveyor or landscape architect preparing the plan.
c. Subdivision boundaries, north point, date, Assessor's map number and lot number, and scale
legend.
d. Boundary lines of existing and proposed lots with areas, dimensions, and bearings.
e. Delineation of floodplain districts, riparian areas and wetland areas as determined under Ch.
131, Sect. 40 (Mass Wetland Protection Act) and regulations thereunder, and under the Town
of Sherborn's Wetlands Bylaw and any regulations thereunder, within or adjacent to the
subdivision.
f. Delineation of existing buildings and other site features, including but not limited to, existing
driveways, cart paths, trails, fences, walls, stone walls, wooded areas, large trees over 12" in
diameter, rock ridges and outcroppings.
g. Existing and proposed topography at two (2) feet contour intervals showing the elevation of
the tops of rises, hills or hummocks and of water courses and ponds. Existing and proposed
contours on preliminary plan are to tie in with existing and proposed contours on individual lot
plans.
h. Existing and proposed drainage systems including the approximate location and size of all
proposed inlets, outlets, pipes, drains, detention/retention ponds, and drainage easements
within or appurtenant to the subdivision.
i. Proposed locations of municipal services and utility installations.
j. The lines of all existing and proposed streets and ways, including proposed connections, if
any, with existing or proposed streets or ways on adjoining land.
k. The boundaries of all proposed easements or public or common areas within the subdivision
and notations indicating the purposes thereof.
l. The lines and grades of existing streets for a minimum of 500 feet either side of each proposed
subdivision street intersection with an existing street.
28
m. Proposed street names.
n. The names of all abutters as determined from the most recent Assessors' list.
o. A separate transparent reproducible plan at a scale of 1" = 600' showing the following:
1. Boundaries of existing streets and ways, and easements which bound, approach or
are in reasonable proximity to the subdivision in solid lines.
2. Boundaries of proposed streets, ways, easements and public or common areas in
broken lines.
3. Name of subdivision, north point and scale legend.
3.1.4. Groundwater Impact Assessment
The Board may require that the following be submitted where such information is necessary to
evaluate the plan because of special circumstances of the proposal or its location;
a. Location of aquifers, recharge areas, or watersheds for existing or potential drinking water
supplies.
b. Maximum groundwater table elevation and direction and velocity of groundwater flow.
c. Projection of nutrient loading (nitrate-nitrogen concentrations) in groundwater downgradient
of the subdivision in the water resources protection district.
d. Analysis of open and closed drainage system alternatives, examining effects upon the recharge
of aquifers and the quality of groundwater and surface water.
3.1.5. Approval or Disapproval of Preliminary Plan
After submission of a preliminary plan and within the period set forth in Section 81-S of the Mass.
General Laws, both the Planning Board and the Board of Health shall notify by certified mail the
Applicant and Town Clerk that the plan has been approved, or that the plan has been approved with
modifications suggested by either the Board or agreed to by the Applicant, or that the plan has been
disapproved. In the case of disapproval, each board so disapproving shall state in detail its reasons
therefor. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute approval of the proposed subdivision by
either Board.
3.2. DEFINITIVE PLAN
3.2.1. General
The term "Definitive Plan" as used in these Rules and Regulations shall mean a plan of a subdivision
within the meaning of the Subdivision Control Law prepared by a professional engineer, land
surveyor or landscape architect registered in Massachusetts.
The objectives of a Definitive Plan are:
1) presentation of detailed and specific plans, of the construction documents type, for the
development of the subdivision,
2) provision of a specific plan for reference in granting a certificate of action and a special permit
with subdivision plan approval.
The Planning Board encourages thorough analysis and resolution of design issues in the preliminary
plan stage prior to submission of the Definitive Plan. At the time of the filing of the Definitive Plan, it
should be accurate, correct and complete on the day of submission and based on a clear direction as to
a design acceptable to the Board. Any deficiencies and inaccuracies shall be grounds for denial of the
Definitive Plan.
It is recommended that a licensed design professional be responsible for the coordination of the
elements of the Definitive Plan, prepared by other professionals.
29
3.2.2. Filing Procedure for Definitive Plan
Any Applicant submitting a Definitive Plan for approval shall comply with the following filing
requirements:
a. File with the Planning Board the following:
1. An original drawing of the Definitive Plan, and eight (8) contact prints thereof in dark lines
on white background (Section 3.2.3.).
2. The original and eight (8) contact prints of the locus plan (Section 3.2.3.u).
3. The original and eight (8) contact prints of the profile plan (Section 3.2.4.).
4. Two (2) paper copies and an electronic copy of the drainage calculations and drainage
run-off plan (Sections 3.2.5.).
5. Three (3) signed copies of the report of subsurface conditions and soil percolation tests
(Sections 3.2.6.(a)).
6. Three (3) signed copies of the statement concerning filling or earth removal (Section
3.2.6.(b)).
7. Three (3) certified copies of certain recorded instruments and plans affecting the
subdivision (Section 3.2.6.(c)).
8. Three (3) conformed copies of instruments establishing easements in contiguous land
(3.2.6.(d)).
9. Three (3) properly executed copies of each of the following forms:
(i) Application Form C
(ii) Designer's Certificate (Form D)
(iii) List of Abutters (Form E)
(iv) Covenant (Form F) (1)
10. One (1) 1" = 200' scale copy of the Definitive Plan.
11. A filing fee payable to the Town of Sherborn in an amount indicated in the attached fee
schedule. A statement signed by the engineer or surveyor preparing the Definitive
Plan setting forth the computation of the filing fee shall accompany such payment.
b. Give written notice to the Town Clerk, by delivery or by registered mail, postage prepaid, that
the Applicant has submitted such Definitive Plan to the Planning Board, together with a copy of
Form C and a copy of the Definitive Plan as submitted. Such notice shall describe the land to
which the plan relates sufficiently for identification, and shall state the date when such plan was
submitted and the name and address of the owner of such land.
A Definitive Plan shall not be considered to have been submitted until the Applicant has filed
with the Town Clerk a notice stating the date of submittal. If the notice is given by delivery, the
Town Clerk shall give a written receipt or a dated stamp of receipt on a copy of Application
Form C.
c. Such plan shall be considered submitted, unless within 21 days of such delivery the Board
determines that the application is incomplete because it does not contain the information required
in Sections 3.2.3, 3.2.4, 3.2.5, 3.2.6 (if applicable) and 3.2.7 of these Regulations or the proper
procedure was not followed. If the application is considered incomplete, the Planning Board
shall notify the Applicant and the Town Clerk in writing.
d. File with the Board of Health, at the time of filing the Definitive Plan with the Planning Board,
three (3) copies of each plan and document as submitted to the Planning Board along with the
Board of Health filing fee.
e. At the same time as the submission of the Definitive Plan to the Planning Board, the Applicant
shall have made application for all other local, state, and federal permits or approvals required
for the construction of streets, easements, utilities, and other improvements in the subdivision as
provided in these Regulations. Evidence of such filing, or inquiry, in the form of a copy of such
30
application, and of any action by other agencies, shall be submitted to the Planning Board with
the application for the Definitive Plan.
f. An Applicant may withdraw a Definitive Plan upon written request which is approved by vote of
the Board.
g. Subsequent submission of a revised Definitive Plan may be handled in the same manner as an
original submittal, including the payment of an additional fee for review of the alternate or
revised plan. Submission of a plan, which in the opinion of the Board, is so substantially revised
as to constitute a new application shall be treated as a new application and will be accepted for
processing only upon a written request from the Applicant for the withdrawal of an earlier
application.
3.2.3. Contents of the Definitive Plan
The Definitive Plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn in india ink or laser plotted on 4 mil double
sided mylar or 3 mil single sided mylar to a scale of 1" = 40' on sheets measuring 24" X 36" and shall
comply with the recording requirements of the Register of Deeds or of the filing requirements of the
Land Court, in the case of registered land. If multiple sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by
an index sheet of the same dimensions drawn to an appropriately reduced scale. The Definitive Plan
shall be prepared in accordance with the 2006 Land Court Manual of Instructions as amended and
shall contain the following:
a. Subdivision name, perimeter boundaries, north point, Assessor's map number and lot number,
names and addresses of the record owner and the subdivider and name, address, signature and
imprint of the seal of the registered civil engineer and registered land surveyor preparing the
plan;
b. Proposed boundaries, north point, date of survey, date of plan and date of each revision thereto,
scale legend and land area table showing the total acreage of the subdivision and the total
acreage included in each of the following categories:
(i) building lots,
(ii) streets and ways
(iii) utility, drainage and other easements,
(iv) recreation and conservation sites,
(v) all wetland areas including brooks, ponds and other water bodies,
(vi) other categories, if any;
c. Names of all abutters as they appear on the most recent Assessors' list;
d. Side and center lines of all proposed streets, ways, and passageway easements, and sidelines of
proposed driveways, including connections with existing or proposed ways on adjoining land.
Numbered station locations shall be marked along the center lines of all streets at fifty (50) foot
intervals and at all changes in direction. If the plan contains dead-end streets, provision for
future access to existing or previously approved streets or to adjoining land which is not yet
subdivided shall be shown. Lines shall be indicated by bearings referred to the north point.
Relative error of closure shall conform to the requirements of the 2006 Land Court Manual of
Instructions as amended;
e. Accurate dimensions, bearings, length and radius of arc, tangent (or chord) distances, central
angles of curves and such other data as may be required to determine readily the precise location
of every street and way line and width, lot boundary, easement line, common or public area
boundary, and to establish these lines on the ground;
f. Permanent boundary markers properly identified as to whether existing or proposed, the number
and locations of which shall comply with Section 5.11;
g. Location, names and present widths of both the rights-of-way and the paved or traveled way for
streets bounding, approaching or within reasonable proximity to the subdivision;
31
h. Location, purpose, dimensions, and center line courses of all drainage and utility easements,
existing or proposed, and location, purpose and dimensions of all passageways, bridlepaths, trails
and other easements, existing or proposed;
i. Proposed street names on the original Definitive Plan and profiles;
j. A closed traverse of the whole subdivision and of every street and lot within the subdivision;
k. Proposed public ways shall be shown as separate parcels, labeled as such, and title to the parcel
shall be retained by the applicant or his successor until such time as the public way is accepted
by the Town at Town Meeting;
l. Location and outline of all existing buildings and site features including, but not limited to, large
trees (diameter 12 inches, three feet above ground level) within the proposed right of way and
within 10 feet of either side of the proposed right-of-way and/or building envelope, existing
walls, fences, wooded areas, rock ridges, and outcroppings; all wetland resource areas subject to
local jurisdiction (bogs, swamps, marshes, water courses, ponds and floodplain areas) within or
adjacent to the subdivision;
m. Indication of the zoning districts within which the subdivision is located;
n. Zoning district boundary lines and floodplain district lines, if any, located within or in close
proximity to the subdivision;
o. Minimum building setback lines on all lots as determined by Section 4.2 of the Sherborn Zoning
By-Laws;
p. Location and description of all proposed and existing drainage facilities, including the size, type
and location of storm sewers, manholes, catch basins, infiltration galleys, pipes, culverts,
headwalls and drainage ditches, swales, detention/retention ponds and other incidental and
special facilities;
q. Existing and proposed topography at two (2) foot contour intervals prepared from a
topographical field survey, showing the elevation of the tops of rises, hills, hummocks, and ledge
outcroppings, the bottoms of all low points , bowls and swales, and boundaries of wetlands and
riverfront area as determined under Ch. 131, Sect. 40 (Mass Wetland Protection Act) and
regulations thereunder, and under the Town of Sherborn's Wetlands Bylaw. Elevations and two
(2) permanent bench marks shall be based on, in the same datum as, and referenced to U.S. Coast
and Geodetic Survey Monuments. Existing and proposed contours on the Definitive Plan are to
tie in with existing and proposed contours on individual lot plans;
r. Location of sidewalks and delineation of natural terrain features, including trees six (6) inches or
more in diameter, to be preserved in areas between the proposed roadway and the right of way
lines; and within 10 feet of the right of way lines;
s. Typical cross sections of each street;
t. An erosion and sedimentation control plan including, but not limited to:
(i) a temporary drainage plan capable of handling a ten-year storm event to be used during
construction,
(ii) a crushed stone construction entrance to minimize off site tracking of materials,
(iii) barriers to prevent off site washing of soil, and measures to protect components of the
permanent drainage system from sedimentation,
(iv) a dust control plan,
(v) a soil stabilization plan that ensures that disturbed areas where no work is being performed
are not left unstabilized for more than 30 days,
(vi) identification of areas to be used for stockpiling materials during construction, and (vii) any
other measures that may be necessary based on specific site conditions,
(vii) a copy of an National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit application
has been filed with DEP or documentation that no NPDES permit is necessary.
u. A construction sequencing plan;
v. Printed legend for endorsement of the Board's approval in the following form:
32
"This plan is approved on condition that no lot in the subdivision shown hereon shall be sold
until the streets, ways, municipal services and utilities are constructed in accordance with the
terms and conditions of an agreement dated ____________ , 20__, between the Town of
Sherborn acting through its Planning Board and _______________(1) _____________ a copy of
which agreement is recorded herewith and subject to conditions imposed by the Board of Health
and to the recording of this plan and said agreement with the Middlesex South District Registry
of Deeds (or Land court) on or before __________________, 20__.
_____________________________
_____________________________
_____________________________
_____________________________
_____________________________
Being a majority of the Sherborn Planning Board
Date _____________, 20__"
(1) Insert name of each owner of land within the subdivision.
w. Printed legend for the Town Clerk's endorsement in the following form:
"I, Town Clerk of the Town of Sherborn, hereby certify that notice of approval of this plan has
been received and recorded at this office and no notice of appeal was received during the twenty
(20) days next after the receipt and recording of such notice.
_______________________ ____________________________
Date Town Clerk"
x. A separate transparent reproducible locus plan at a scale of 1" = 600" showing the following:
1. Boundaries of existing lots, streets, ways, easements and public or common areas which
bound, approach or are in reasonable proximity to the subdivision in solid black lines;
2. Boundaries of the subdivision and of all proposed lots, streets, ways, easements and public
or common areas in broken lines;
3. North point and scale legend;
4. Name of subdivision, name of each owner and subdivider, date of plan and name, signature
and imprint of seal of the engineer or surveyor preparing the plan.
3.2.4. Contents of Plans and Profiles
Profiles shall be drawn in ink or laser printer on 4 mil double sided mylar or 3 mil single sided mylar
at a vertical scale of 1" = 4' and a horizontal scale of 1" = 40' and corresponding sections of the street
survey plan shall also be shown at the same horizontal scale on each profile sheet. Profiles shall show
the following:
a. The centerline of all proposed streets, ways, drains, sewers, headwalls, and waterways, together
with cross sections of all headwalls, under drains, drainage ditches, open channel brooks and
other water courses. See Appendix, Schedule B, Typical Sections.
b. The existing ground surface profiles along the centerline and each sideline of proposed streets.
c. Elevations and two permanent bench marks based on, in the same datum, and referenced to U.S.
Coast and Geodetic Survey monuments;
d. Proposed drainage system showing the types and sizes of all pipes, catch basins, manholes,
culverts and headwalls, the invert and rim elevations of all catch basins and manholes, the
approximate surface elevation at 100-foot intervals, of all waterways within the subdivision and
at each point where a drainage pipe ends and the approximate depth of water at these points;
33
e. Rates of gradient of all streets, ways, drainage pipes, culverts and waterways shown in
percentage figures at each change in grade;
f. Calculations of volumes of cuts and fills necessary to construct road, including drainage system;
g. Legend:
1. Existing surface at center line in fine black solid line;
2. Existing surface at right side line in fine black long dash line;
3. Existing surface at left side line in fine black short dash line;
4. Proposed surface at centerline in heavy line with grade elevations shown at every 50-foot
station along vertical tangents and at every 25 foot station along vertical curves.
5. Proposed grades in percent along vertical tangents and vertical curve data.
3.2.5. Drainage Calculations and Run-off Plan
Drainage calculations and run-off plan shall be certified by a registered professional engineer to
substantiate the proposed pipe sizes and adequacy of design of the subdivision drainage system
prepared in compliance with Section 4.4.
3.2.6. Groundwater Impact Assessment
The Board may require that the following be submitted where such information is necessary to
evaluate the plan because of special circumstances of the proposal or its location;
a. Location of aquifers, recharge areas, or watersheds for existing or potential drinking water
supplies.
b. Maximum groundwater table elevation and direction and velocity of groundwater flow.
c. Projection of nutrient loading (nitrate-nitrogen concentrations) in groundwater downgradient of
the subdivision in the water resources protection district.
d. Analysis of open and closed drainage system alternatives, examining effects upon the recharge of
aquifers and the quality of groundwater and surface water.
3.2.7. Accompanying Documents
a. A report in writing certified by a registered professional engineer describing the subsurface
conditions within the subdivision, including locations and results of all tests made to ascertain
subsurface conditions within the subdivision, and on each proposed lot in the subdivision,
provide locations and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and ground water
conditions, depth to ground water and locations and results of all soil percolation tests conducted
in accordance with the requirements of the Board of Health;
b. A statement in writing, signed by the Applicant and by the engineer and surveyor preparing the
Definitive Plan, describing in detail any recent or contemplated filling, excavation, relocation or
removal of earth, (including, but not limited to soil, loam, sand, clay or gravel) within the
subdivision. With respect to each such filling or removal operation within the subdivision,
including all filling, cutting and grading required in the construction of the subdivision streets
and ways, the statement shall indicate, by reference to the definitive survey and profile plans, the
approximate perimeter of the area affected thereby, the approximate amount of earth to be
placed, relocated or removed and the changes in elevation resulting therefrom. Specific
explanation is required on any fill to be added, if removal is also proposed, and such fill shall be
"clean fill" and subject to review by the Planning Board or its agent.
c. Three (3) certified copies of all instruments and plans of record, if any, describing or delineating
existing easements, covenants, agreements, and restrictions affecting any land within the
subdivision;
d. Three (3) copies of agreement, if any, providing for the acquisition by the record owner of the
subdivision of such rights and easements in land contiguous to the subdivision as may be
necessary for the lawful discharge of water from the subdivision drainage system onto such
contiguous land or for the extension to the subdivision of utilities or municipal services over,
across or under such land;
34
e. Engineer's and surveyor's field notebooks, if requested by the Board.
f. A statement signed by the Applicant and by the engineer and surveyor preparing the Definitive
Plan that either the proposed work is outside any Estimated Habitat or Priority Habitat area as
defined by the most recent version of a map of such areas prepared by the Natural Heritage and
Endangered Species Program (NHESP) of the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife
or any successor organization, or that permission for such work has been applied for or granted
by NHESP.
3.2.8. Review by Other Boards and Commissions
a. The Planning Board shall promptly after the date a submission of a Definitive Plan is considered
to be complete notify the following department and boards of such submission and request their
review and recommendations.
Conservation Commission
Board of Health
Fire Department
Police Department
Building Inspector
Community Maintenance and Development Department
And such other department, boards, committees or commissions as it may consider
appropriate, given the substance of the application.
b. Except for the Board of Health who shall report to the Planning Board within forty-five (45)
days after receipt of the plan, all other departments and boards who are notified shall be given
thirty-five (35) days after receipt of such notice to make a report to the Planning Board, in
writing, of their recommendations.
The Planning Board shall not render a decision on the plan until forty-five (45) days from the
date of such notice has expired or earlier if all reports are received.
c. Any report submitted to the Planning Board by a reviewing department or board shall be
considered by the Planning Board in making its decision on a Definitive Plan. The Board may
also request any department or board to review the plan with the Planning Board and/or to
provide information regarding the Definitive Plan at the public hearing.
d. A copy of any report submitted to the Planning Board, by another department, or board as part of
the review of a Definitive Plan will be furnished to the Applicant upon request.
3.2.9. On-Site Inspection
a. After the application is considered complete, the Planning Board may request an on-site
inspection.
b. Within 14 days of a request to do so by the Planning Board, the Applicant shall proceed to
staking and preparation for the on-site inspection by the Board. Staking shall consist of placing
stakes in the ground delineating the location of proposed ways, driveway centerlines and such
other features as the Board may request.
The centerline of the proposed streets shall be marked with stakes at no more than 100 foot
intervals with sufficient markings on said stakes to relate to the station locations as shown on the
plan. After the staking, the Board will conduct a site inspection at a time to be arranged with the
Board.
3.2.10. Public Hearing
a. Before approval, modification and approval, or disapproval, of a Definitive Plan is given, a
public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board, notice of the time and place and of the
subject matter, sufficient for identification and including the location of the proposed subdivision
and the name of the Applicant, shall be given by the Planning Board at the expense of the
Applicant by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of Sherborn, once
35
in each of two successive weeks, the first publication being not less than fourteen (14) days
before the day of such hearing, and by mailing a copy of such advertisement to the Applicant and
to all owners of land abutting upon the land included in such plan as appearing on the most
recent assessors list. (M.G.L. Chapter 41, Section 81T)
b. Prior to the endorsement of the Definitive Plan, the Applicant shall file evidence that he has paid
the cost of providing required notice, and of conducting the hearing, if any. No plan shall be
endorsed until such expenses have been paid.
c. The Applicant shall be given the opportunity to present his proposal at the public hearing.
d. The public shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard with respect to the proposed
development, and any comments or documents submitted by the Applicant, Town Boards,
Commissions or Departments, members of the public, or other relevant information shall be
made a part of the public record.
3.2.11. Action
a. The Board will either approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the Definitive Plan within
the time set for Board action by M.G.L. Ch. 41, Section 81U.
b. The action of the Board, including any conditions of approval or specific reasons for disapproval,
shall be stated in a Certificate of Action and filed with the Town Clerk and a copies sent by the
Board to the Applicant by certified or registered mail.
Unless an appeal is taken to the Superior or Land Court from the action of the Board and a
written notice of such appeal is received by the Town Clerk within 20 days of the receipt by the
Town Clerk of the certificate of action, the Planning Board shall endorse the approved Definitive
Plan and refer thereon to any conditions of approval or to any instrument describing such
conditions.
c. The approval by the Board of a Definitive Plan does not constitute a laying out or acceptance by
the Town of the streets within the subdivision as public ways.
d. The Applicant shall be responsible for the expense of furnishing the Board, prior to
recording, three sets of full size black or blue line prints and one set of 3 mil diazo mylars
of all drawings comprising the Definitive Plan. Prior to the start of construction of a
subdivision, the Planning Board shall cause to be recorded at the Applicant's expense, the
Definitive Plan and all legal documents which relate thereto.
e. Unless otherwise waived, any such certificate shall be deemed to include without limitation
the following:
1. The construction of all streets and ways and the installation of all municipal services shall
be completed in accordance with these Rules and Regulations, within a period of two years
from the date that the approved plan and this Subdivision Covenant are recorded/filed at the
appropriate registry. During street construction, the Applicant shall conduct compaction
testing as requested by the agent appointed by the Planning Board to oversee the
subdivision or, if no agent, CMD.
2. Any sale, transfer or other transfer of ownership of rights or interests in all, or any part of,
the subdivision property described in the approved Subdivision Plan shall include a
condition that successors are bound to these General Conditions. In the event of the sale of
the entire subdivision: 1) the Planning Board shall be provided with the name, the address
and telephone number of the new owner and of the representative, if other than the owner,
responsible for the project and 2) for projects in which construction is secured by covenant,
a new covenant shall be executed by the new owner and recorded/filed at the applicable
registry.
36
3. No construction work may be started until the Definitive Plan, the Certificate of Action, the
Covenant (if applicable), and any required easements have been recorded/filed at the
applicable registry.
4. After recording the documents listed above and before construction may begin, the
following shall be completed:
a. Mark the proposed "limit of work" in the field, stake the location of the street, mark
the trees to be preserved in the street rights-of-way, and schedule an appointment with
the agent appointed by the Planning Board to oversee the subdivision or, if no agent,
CMD for inspection by an authorized representative. The "limit of work" is defined as
a point 5 feet beyond the extent of the cut slope, fill slope or other areas of grading
necessary to construct the proposed subdivision street.
b. Make arrangements with the agent appointed by the Planning Board to oversee the
subdivision or, if no agent, CMD for periodic inspections of work during the
construction period.
5. The "limit of work" line shall remain marked until all construction is completed. The area
outside the "limit of work line" shall be protected from damage or loss caused by
construction activities by erecting barriers and avoiding stockpiles of earth materials on the
root systems of trees during construction. The following is also required in relation to the
limit of work line:
a. All workers shall be informed that no construction activity is to occur beyond this
line.
b. The relocation of the line is not permitted without the prior written approval of the
Planning Board or its representative.
c. The area outside the limit of work line shall be protected from damage during
construction. The area outside the limit of work line shall not be used for the storage
of building or earth materials, equipment, vehicles or construction debris or as a
construction staging area.
6. The developer shall maintain a copy of the approved Definitive Plan and of any approved
change orders and a copy of the Certificate of Action (and the Covenant, if applicable) at
his/her normal place of business and on the site during construction. The developer shall
provide a copy of the approved plans and the Certificate to any broker, agent, development
entity, builder or attorney authorized to act in the subdivision, sale or rental of property
within the subdivision and they shall maintain a copy of the plans and this Certificate and
the Covenant at their normal place of business and furnish them to any person interested in
purchasing a lot.
7. No construction activity in the subdivision shall take place (i) prior to 7:00 a.m., (ii) after
5:00 p.m. (or sunset, whichever is later), or (iii) at any time on Sunday or on any legal
holiday.
8. As soon as possible during construction, all disturbed upland areas shall be brought to final
finished grade and all slopes created as a result of cut or fill shall be stabilized to prevent
erosion by either: (a) loaming and seeding in accordance with USDA Soil Conservation
37
Service Guidelines for permanent stabilization, or (b) another way approved by the
Conservation Commission and/or the Planning Board.
9. All debris, including stumps, and construction refuse shall be disposed of offsite, promptly
and properly, and the construction site shall be maintained in clean condition.
10. Final contours, for the construction of the street, are to remain as shown on the Definitive
Plan. Any desired change must be requested in writing and can be made only with the prior
approval of the Board or, where authorized by the Board, the CMD. Such approvals shall
not require a public hearing nor an amendment to the approved Definitive Plan.
11. Permanent bounds, as specified by the Town's standard details, shall be set at all angle
points and at the beginning and end of each curve on the sidelines of the right-of-way.
Permanent bounds shall be installed to delineate any easements offered to the Town in the
same manner.
Iron pins or equivalent permanent markers or monuments shall be set at each corner of each
lot and at each change of bearing on any lot line.
Temporary markers at the location of all permanent bounds, markers or, monuments, as
noted on the approved Definitive Plan, shall be set prior to the construction of the street and
the issuance of any building permit, including a foundation permit; but permanent bounds
or monuments, shall not be installed, within the limit of work line, until all construction
which might damage or destroy them is completed. The markers for each Lot must be
permanently installed before a "Certificate of Occupancy" for any dwelling unit thereon
will be issued.
12. Electric, telephone, and other types of transmission wires, such as cable television, and the
provision for foundations for street lights with wiring in place, shall be installed
underground to one side of the pavement, as shown in the typical section but not under the
pavement. Utility crossings of subdivision streets required for utility system continuity
shall be laid out in a manner that minimizes the crossings.
13. Prior to the installation of the binder course for the street, all underground connections that
will be placed in the right-of-way, shall be made to the limits of the right-of-way. No
trenching will be allowed within the right-of-way subsequent to the installation of the
binder course. No building permit, except for a foundation permit, may be issued until this
work is complete.
14. No building permit, including a foundation permit, shall be issued until lots are released
from the subdivision covenant as specified in Section 3.2.14 or a performance bond is in
place as described in Section 3.2.13.a.
a. The location of the bounds on the subdivision street and on any easements are
temporarily marked if the construction is not at the point where the permanent bounds
may be installed.
b. A performance guarantee in compliance with Section 3.2.13.a has been executed.
15. After the installation of the binder course, no utility structure shall be left protruding in the
right-of-way if the finish course cannot be placed before winter. If utility structures are up
38
above the binder course as winter approaches, the utility structures shall be lowered to the
binder course level without the use of temporary asphalt pavement.
16. The Applicant shall prepare and update an accurate and complete set of the construction
plans showing each element "as built," and a signed set of the as built plans shall be
delivered to the Board prior to release of final security. At the request of the Board, such as
builts shall be confirmed for accuracy by an outside engineer at the Applicant's expense.
Minor changes from the approved plan may be made in the field provided there is a written
change order which must have the prior written approval of the appropriate Town
supervising entities, as designated by the Planning Board for such purpose. A copy of all
such change orders shall be furnished to the Planning Board and shall be maintained by the
Applicant. These approved changes shall be included in the "as-built" plans.
17. The Applicant shall be responsible for maintaining, in a healthy condition, all new trees and
shrubs planted within the right-of-way of the subdivision streets for a minimum period of
one year after planting, and until the street is accepted at Town Meeting. If the location
and/or species of the plants is changed from the approved landscape plan, by direction of
the Tree Warden, the Planning Board or their representative, the new information shall be
submitted in the form of a plan to the Planning Board upon completion of the planting.
After one season, trees that are dead, damaged or not likely to survive in a healthy state,
shall be replaced in kind and maintained for at least one additional year.
18. If, at any time, the construction of the subdivision is not in compliance with the approved
plans, or any approved change order, the Certificate, and/or the Covenant, the Board may
order that work on the construction of the subdivision be stopped, and request that the
Building Inspector defer the issuance of any additional building permits or certificates of
occupancy until the non-complying construction is corrected and brought into compliance.
If the Board issues a stop work order, the Board, or its designees, may also: 1) require that
additional surety be provided to allow for the correction of the noncomplying construction.
2) suspend or rescind the release of any, or all, lots which have not already been conveyed
to a homeowner by filing a notice of such suspension or rescission in the Registry of Deeds.
19. The Board reserves the right to release the lots on an individual basis in relation to the
amount of work that has been completed, and provided further that, if required by the
Planning Board, adequate alternative surety has been made available.
3.2.12. Street Names
Street names shall be submitted to the Historical Commission for comment and be approved by the
Planning Board to prevent duplication or close similarity to names of existing streets and to provide
names in keeping with the character of the Town. Names reflecting geographic, natural or historical
features are preferred to names of persons.
3.2.13. Performance Guarantee
No Definitive Plan will be endorsed until the Applicant has furnished surety as, required by law, to
insure that all required improvements within or appurtenant to the subdivision will be made in
compliance with these Rules and Regulations and in conformity to the approved Definitive Plan, as
modified or amended by the Planning Board and/or the Board of Health. All such required
improvements shall be secured by one, or in part by one and part by the other, of the two methods
described in Sections 3.2.13 (a) and 3.2.13 (b), respectively, which the Applicant may vary from time
to time at his election. (M.G.L., Chapter 41, Section 81U)
39
a. Method One - Performance Bond
A performance bond of the Applicant running to the Town of Sherborn secured by surety (Form
H) or by money or negotiable securities deposited with the Town Treasurer (Form I or Form J) in
such amount as the Board shall determine to be sufficient to cover the cost of completing the
required improvements, or such portion thereof not secured by covenant under Section 3.2.13.b.
Such Bond shall be conditioned upon full and satisfactory completion of all such improvements
within such time as the Board shall determine, but in no event more than two years from the date
of the Board's endorsement of its approval of the Definitive Plan.
b. Method Two - Covenant
A covenant running with the land duly executed by each record owner of the land within the
subdivision. Such covenant shall be either inscribed on the Definitive Plan or be contained in a
separate recordable document (Form F) referred to on the plan and shall provide in part that no
lot shall be built upon or sold until all improvements required under these Rules and Regulations
shall have been completed and approved by the Board as provided herein.
If the Applicant elects to secure performance by covenant, either in whole or in part, approval of
the Definitive Plan by the Board will be made conditional upon (i) the recording of the
Definitive Plan with the covenant (either endorsed on the plan or contained in the separate
document) not later than 60 days after the Board's endorsement of its approval of the plan and
(ii) completion of all required improvements within such time as the Board shall determine but in
no event more than 24 months from the date of such endorsement.
The covenant, whether inscribed on the plan or contained in a separate document, shall contain a
proviso that the construction of all streets and ways and the installation of all municipal services
shall be completed in accordance with the applicable Rules and Regulations of the Board within
___?____ months1 from the date of the Board's endorsement of its approval of the Definitive
Plan, and that failure to so complete shall automatically rescind approval of the plan.
1The number of months as determined by the Board at the time of approval (not exceeding 24 months)
shall be inserted in the covenant proviso.
3.2.14 Normally, a covenant will be recorded with the definitive plan. Lots will be released from the covenant
following execution of a preformance guarantee. This will take place following installation of the
underground utilities, drainage system and binder course of the roadway.
3.3 UTILITY PLANS
Plans prepared by a Registered Engineer in compliance with Section 4.9. showing the proposed location
and placement of each underground utility system, including pipes, conduits, cables, transformers,
substations and other facilities appurtenant thereto shall be filed with and approved by the Board prior to
the installation of such utility.
40
SECTION 4 DESIGN STANDARDS
4.1. GENERAL
4.1.1. Basic Requirements
The Applicant shall observe all design standards for land subdivision as hereinafter provided. These
standards shall be considered minimum standards and shall not be varied from except as allowed by a
waiver in accordance with Section 6.2.
4.1.2. Conformance to General Plan
Any proposed subdivision shall conform, insofar as practicable, to the proposals and intentions of the
Sherborn General Plan, as amended and as in effect, and the Conservation Plan of the Conservation
Commission and the Open Space and Recreation Plan as adopted in whole or in part by the Open
Space Committee, unless substitute proposals are shown to the satisfaction of the Board to be better
for the general area of the subdivision in the Town.
4.1.3. Lot Size and Frontage
All lots shall be of such size and dimensions to meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the
Zoning By-Laws.
4.1.4. One Dwelling per Lot
Except as otherwise allowed under the Zoning Bylaws, only one single family residential dwelling
may occupy each lot.
4.1.5. Protection of Natural Features
All natural features, such as large trees, wooded areas, water courses, wetlands, rock outcroppings,
scenic points, historic spots, and similar community assets, which will add attractiveness and value to
the subdivision, shall be preserved or enhanced.
4.1.6. Groundwater Protection
a. Design and construction shall reduce, to the extent possible, the following:
- dimensions of paved areas
- encroachment within any wetland or floodplain
- volume of cut and fill
- area over which vegetation will be disturbed
- extent of waterways altered or relocated
b. Pollution control devices, including provisions for contaminant removal employing detention
basins, subsurface drains or perforated risers, oil and grit separator catch basins, and other
appropriate devices.
c. Measures to restrict nutrient loading in downgradient groundwater to a maximum of five
milligrams per liter (mgl) nitrate-nitrogen.
d. Measures to control erosion and sedimentation, as specified in an erosion and sedimentation
control plan to be submitted with the Definitive Plan, and the use of construction site best
management practices (BMPs). The erosion and sedimentation control plan should emphasize
phased construction, temporary and permanent ground cover, and sedimentation control devices.
e. The retention of a vegetative buffer around open streams or surface water.
41
4.2 GRADING
4.2.1. Minimum Disturbance
All excavation, filling, sloping and grading outside the right-of-way of each subdivision street shall be
designed and completed to minimize disturbance to the existing natural conditions encountered.
4.2.2. Stabilization
All new slopes and areas disturbed by grading operations shall be topsoiled, seeded or sodded and
planted to stabilize the finished ground forms and surfaces. Seeding and planting shall take place as
soon as possible following the completion of grading. A temporary cover crop of winter rye shall be
planted within 30 days on all soils disturbed during months not suitable for seeding, sodding or
planting or surfaces shall be stabilized by mulch or an erosion control fabric.
4.2.3. Landscape Plan
A Landscape Plan, prepared by a Registered Landscape Architect, shall be required where site
clearing for a street may affect watersheds, affects more than one-half acre, is visible from an existing
public way, or where significant changes in grades or topography are involved.
4.2.4. Slope Easements
The Board may require that defined slope easements be shown on the Definitive Plan and that such
easements be reserved by the Applicant for future conveyance to the Town for maintenance purposes.
4.3 STREETS & DRIVEWAYS
4.3.1. Location
a. All streets and driveways in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, they will provide safe vehicular and pedestrian travel and an attractive street
layout to obtain the maximum safety and amenity for future residents of the subdivision and the
Town. Ways should run along rather than across a slope to the extent possible.
b. The proposed streets shall conform in location, so far as practicable, to any existing plans of the
Planning Board and where required by the Planning Board, to the existing street system and
include only a minimum number of intersections with streets classified as major arterials.
c. Provision shall be made for the proper future projection of streets to, or for access to, adjoining
property, whether or not subdivided.
d. No subdivision shall be approved unless the streets therein connect to, and are accessible from, a
public way in which the Applicant has the necessary access rights.
e. Reserve strips, prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property, shall not be permitted, except
where the Board finds them to be in the public interest.
f. Driveway cuts into streets shall be prohibited until the Planning Board finds that the location,
width, length, line of sight, proximity to other driveways and streets, grade and elevation will
provide adequate provisions for the public safety.
g. Existing streets that will be used to access the proposed subdivision shall be of a pavement width
and condition adequate for the projected traffic. The Board may require the Applicant to fund or
conduct off-site improvements if the existing streets are not adequate.
4.3.2. Alignment
a. Subdivision streets shall be continuous and of uniform width.
b. Subdivision streets intersecting existing streets or other existing or proposed subdivision streets
shall do so:
i) as nearly as possible at right angles, and no less than 60 degrees or more than 120 degrees;
42
ii) either directly opposite or with at least 150 feet centerline offset from existing or proposed
street intersections.
c. The minimum centerline radii of curved streets shall be one hundred fifty (150) feet with greater
radii on arterial streets.
d. A tangent at least on hundred fifty (150) feet in length shall separate all reverse curves except
where the centerline radius of one curve is five hundred (500) feet or more.
e. Street lines at intersections shall be rounded or cut back to provide for a curb radius of not less
than thirty (30) feet.
4.3.3. Width (See Appendix, Schedule A, Typical Street Cross-Sections for each of the above categories.)
a. The minimum width of street rights of way shall be sixty feet.
4.3.4. Grade
a. The minimum centerline grade for any street shall not be less than one-half percent (.5%).
b. The maximum centerline grade for streets shall not be more than eight percent (8%).
c. Where changes in grade exceed one percent (1%), vertical curves, as required by the Board shall
be provided. The length of vertical curve shall be designed to provide a minimum sight distance
of two hundred (200) feet to an object 4.5 feet above the roadway surface from an eye height of
three feet, six inches (3.5 feet). The sight distance shall be shown on the proposed street profiles.
d. Where a grade is five percent (5%) or greater within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the
intersection of street right-of-way lines, a relatively level area at least seventy-five (75) feet long,
with a maximum grade of three percent (3%) shall be provided.
4.3.5. Street Trees and Planted Shrubs
a. Wherever feasible, shade trees twelve (12) inches in diameter or larger shall not be removed
from within street rights-of-way.
b. The Planning Board may require that street trees not less than six (6) feet in height and with
caliper of at least two and one half (2-1/2) inches, shall be planted at varying distances along
both sides of every street and spaced on average not more than forty (40) feet on center.
c. Street trees, shrubs and plant materials shall be selected from an approved list supplied by the
Tree Warden.
d. A design prepared by a registered landscape architect with intent to maintain rural character of
Town may be required if not included in the Plan prepared under Section 4.2.3.
e. A continuous healthy growth for all planted trees, shrubs, plants and seeded areas shall be
maintained for one (1) year from the date of completion of all work on the street or until the
street is accepted by the Town of Sherborn, whichever is later.
4.3.6. Curb Cuts
a. Driveways shall be at least ten (10) feet wide, but no more than twenty (20) feet wide, and have a
curb return at the street of three (3) feet in radius.
b. Where no curbs exist, the driveway flare should have a three (3) foot radius.
c. Unless otherwise allowed by the Planning Board, driveway cuts shall be permitted only at the
street where the frontage requirement has been met.
d. Shared, or common, driveways serving two dwellings shall be allowed by right. Common
driveways serving three or more dwelling units are permitted with a special permit from the
Planning Board.
e. Driveway cuts shall not be permitted within one hundred (100) feet of the sideline of intersecting
streets or railroad crossings.
f. No more than one driveway cut shall be permitted per lot.
4.3.7. Dead-end Streets
43
a. Any proposed street which connects only with a dead-end street shall be deemed to be an
extension of the dead-end street.
b. Dead-end streets and their extensions, if allowed, shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in
length, measured from the centerline of the nearest through street with which it intersects, to the
centerline of the circle or ellipse.
c. Dead-end streets shall be provided with a turn-around (see section 4.3.7.f below) at the closed
end.
d. The Definitive Plan shall show the right-of-way lines of each dead-end street projected through
the turn-around to the subdivision property line. Street easements in the segments of a
turnaround lying outside of such projected lines (including sufficient land beyond the pavement
for snow storage or other street maintenance needs) shall be temporary and shall terminate
pursuant to MGL Ch. 41, Sec. 81M, when the street is extended beyond the turnaround. The land
between such right-of-way lines between the edge of the paved turn-around and the subdivision
property line shall be designated as a separate parcel and shall be conveyed to the Town of
Sherborn along with the constructed portion of the street right-of-way at the time of street
acceptance. The purpose of the parcel shall be designated on the plan as future street right-ofway.
e. An Applicant who extends a dead-end street at a later date shall remove the pavement, relocate
any sidewalks, extend any driveway entrance and properly grade, loam and seed the areas
included within the temporary easements. All such work shall be deemed to be a part of the
required improvements of the connecting subdivision.
f. If, by reason of topography or other physical characteristics of land within or adjoining the
subdivision, or by reason of the present use or development of the adjoining land, the Board is of
the opinion that a particular dead-end street will not be extended beyond the turn-around, the
Board may require that the outside right-of-way line of the turn-around be laid out with a radius
of sixty (60) feet. A paved circle with a radius of forty-five (45) feet and a circular landscaped
island having a radius of twenty two (22) feet less than the designed radius of the
turn-around[specify 23 feet or maybe a smaller radius of perhaps 15 feet with input from Fire
Dept.] shall be provided at the center of the turn-around. The circumference of such island shall
coincide with the inside edge of the circular paved street.
g. The centerline profile grade of a turnaround from its beginning to its terminus shall not exceed
3% unless otherwise approved by the Board.
4.4. DRAINAGE DESIGN
4.4.1. General
The Definitive Plan shall provide adequate drainage facilities within the subdivision for collecting,
conveying and disposing of storm water in a manner which will insure proper protection of the streets
and the areas adjacent thereto. Drainage design shall provide for groundwater recharge to the
maximum extent practicable. All drainage facilities shall be designed in compliance with these Rules
and Regulations. Low impact development, including best management practices, and other more
natural drainage design techniques are encouraged, and waivers from these regulations will be
strongly considered if needed to accommadate such techniques when, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, they provide environmental benefits while adequately managing storm water and preventing
negative impacts on surrounding properties.
4.4.2. Lot drainage
Lots shall be laid out and graded in a manner that ensures development of one shall not cause
detrimental drainage onto another and with the intent that such drainage shall maximize loc-al
groundwater recharge. If it is necessary to carry drainage from one lot to or across another lot, the
44
Definitive Plan shall show a drainage easement of adequate width. A copy of the instrument creating
such easement shall be made a part of the Definitive Plan submission as provided in Section 3.2.2.a.8.
To the extent possible, the Subdivision Plan shall retain natural patterns of drainage and storm water
recharge.
4.4.3. Drainage Calculations
To substantiate the proposed subdivision drainage mitigation system, drainage calculations prepared
and certified by a Registered Professional Engineer shall be filed as a part of the Definitive Plan
(Section 3.2.5) and shall include the following:
a. Drainage run-off plans, prepared at an adequate scale to show the full extent of both existing and
proposed contributing watershed areas, including existing and proposed contours at two (2) foot
intervals, and existing and proposed drainage systems (shown schematically) with tributary areas
to each inlet.
b. Back-up calculations for the approved methodology as stated in section 4.4.4.a, which include a
narrative and over-all drainage design philosophy with data supporting the following:
1. Existing site conditions and drainage computations,
2. Proposed site conditions and drainage computations,
3. Impacts to adjacent properties. If surface water drains onto adjacent existing street right-ofway
or onto adjacent properties not owned by the Applicant, the Applicant shall clearly
indicate what course the discharge will take, and shall present to the Board and to the owner
of adjacent property, evidence that such discharge is satisfactory and permitted by public or
private ownership of adjacent street or property.
Back-up calculations shall reference all sources of information, supporting data and assumptions
used.
4.4.4. Drainage Criteria
a. Drainage design computations shall be based on currently accepted methods (including but not
necessarily limited to the Rational, SCS TR-55, SCS TR-20 methods), as appropriate for the size,
characteristics, and complexity of the existing/proposed drainage system.
b. A twenty-five (25) year storm frequency shall be used for street drainage components and crossculverts.
c. To insure that no properties shall be at risk in the event of a 100 year storm condition, the impact
of a greater than 100 year storm shall be assessed at the Applicant's expense including:
1. Potential for damage to property inside and outside of the subdivision;
2. Potential for reduction in safety inside and outside of the subdivision;
3. Impact downstream; and
4. Changes to offsite runoff.
d. The proposed drainage system shall be shown to allow sufficient recharge within the subdivision
to maintain existing water levels in the area of private wells, within, abutting and downstream of
the subdivision.
e. In no case shall a drainage line of less than 12" in diameter be used.
f. All drains shall be sloped to provide for a minimum velocity of 2-1/2 feet per second at design
flow for self-cleaning purposes. The maximum culvert design velocity shall be 10 feet per
second (flowing full).
g. Where it appears that any street may be extended to connect with an existing or proposed street
on land adjoining the subdivision, the Board may require that provision be made for extension of
the drainage system to a point at or near the subdivision property line.
4.4.5. Retention/Detention Basins
a. Waiver Required
45
The incorporation of retention/detention systems into the proposed drainage improvement
program of the Definitive Plan shall require a waiver by the Board, which may be granted only
after the Applicant has exhausted all other studies of means of accommodating stormwater runoff
by natural drainage strategies. The Board may require that an outside consultant be hired to
confirm these studies at the Applicant's expense (see Administration Section of these Rules).
b. Design Criteria
Design calculations and criteria shall meet the applicable requirements of sections 4.4.3 and 4.4.4
of these Regulations and the following:
1. Where retention/detention facilities are deemed necessary by the Board, they shall be
designed to contain the diverted site run-off generated from 2 year, 10 year, and 100 year
design storms. Run-off greater than that occurring from the 100 year, 24-hour storm shall be
passed over an emergency spillway.
` 2. Detention shall be provided such that after development, the peak rate of flow from the site
shall not exceed that by similar storms prior to development.
3. Retention/detention basins shall maintain existing drainage patterns and flows and shall be
located and discharged within the natural drainage area that they serve to control.
4. The design storage volume depth of basins shall not exceed four (4) feet.
5. A crushed stone berm at least twelve (12) inches in height shall be placed across the basin
perpendicular to the direction of flow. The berm shall be situated no more than 1/3 of the
basin length from the inlet. The purpose of the berm is to promote sediment retention and
prevent the discharge of sediments from the outlet.
6. The outlet shall be a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the bottom of the detention basin
and shall be located at an extreme distance from the basin inlet. Outlets shall be designed to
minimize the potential for clogging by leaves or debris.
c. Basin Landscaping
1. Basins shall be provided generally within the landform and contours of undisturbed,
naturally occurring topography and terrain. Basins shall not be regular geometric shapes but
shall use an irregular or undulating shoreline.
2. Basin side slopes shall be as flat as possible and shall not exceed four (4) foot horizontal to
one (1) foot vertical.
3. Sideslopes shall be landscaped to provide a natural appearance, using native trees and
shrubs. A twelve-foot wide path shall be maintained to provide access to basins inlets and
outlets.
4. Sides and bottoms of basins shall be stabilized with a perennial grass cover. One hundred
percent cover by grasses shall be required within two years after planting. One hundred
percent survival of trees and shrubs shall be demonstrated two years after planting.
4.4.6. Protection
a. All drains and related systems shall be protected from erosion and siltation at all times. Prior to
construction, all disturbed soils shall be temporarily stabilized and after construction all
disturbed soils shall be immediately and permanently stabilized.
b. Any damage to these drainage systems, prior to acceptance by the Town, shall be repaired in a
manner satisfactory to the Planning Board and the Superintendent of Highways, the full cost of
which shall be borne by the Applicant.
4.5 EASEMENTS
4.5.1. Layout of utility and drainage easements
a. Easements shall be continuous from lot to lot and street to street and their layout shall create as
few irregularities as possible.
46
b. Center lines of easements shall follow lot lines so far as practicable and shall not be less than
twenty (20) feet in width.
4.5.2. Water Course Easements
Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, or stream, an emergency maintenance access
easement shall be provided to encompass twenty five (25) feet on either side of the wetland centerline
of the water course or stream or the Mean Annual High Water Line as defined by 310 CMR Chapter
10.00, whichever is greater.
4.5.3. Slope Easements
Slope easements shall be provided where necessary to ensure lateral support and protection of streets
and other construction features.
4.5.4. Pedestrian Ways and Bridle Paths
a. Easements, or fee strips for pedestrian ways or footpaths, at least twenty (20) feet in width will
normally be required to provide convenient circulation and access to parks, schools, playgrounds
and conservation areas.
b. Bridle path easements at least twenty (20) feet in width may be required to connect with
conservation areas, open spaces and existing trails.
c. Existing bridle paths and trails traversing the subdivision shall be preserved with as little
relocation as practicable.
4.5.5. Conservation Restrictions
a. The Applicant is encouraged in appropriate cases to grant to the Town or to any private,
non-profit corporation devoted to conservation purposes, a conservation restriction or wildlife
corridor over any portion of the subdivision in accordance with the procedure prescribed by
General Laws, Ch. 184, Sects. 31 and 32.
b. The Board may require the Applicant to impose uniform restrictions for the benefit of each lot in
the subdivision designed to preserve any wetland areas, brooks, streams, ponds and other bodies
of water located within the subdivision. The boundaries of the areas subject to such restrictions
shall conform substantially with the edge of the wetlands as defined by 310 CMR Chapter 10.00,
the course of the stream or the banks of the body of water as the case may be, and shall include all
land falling within a line at least twenty five (25) feet beyond the normal high water line.
c. Where feasible, the Applicant is encouraged to set aside green belt sections within the subdivision
consisting of wooded or other scenic areas to be preserved by mutual covenants and traversed by
reciprocal trail easements for the benefit of each lot in the subdivision.
4.6 OPEN SPACE
4.6.1. Parks
Before approval of a Definitive Plan the Planning Board may also require the plan to show a park or
parks, suitably located for playground or recreation purposes or for providing light and air for the
residents of the subdivision. The Board may, by appropriate endorsement on the plan, require that no
building be erected upon such park or parks without its approval for a period of three (3) years.
4.6.2. Topsoil and Grading Limitations
No stripping of topsoil shall be permitted in a reserved area. If required by the Board, the land shall
be graded as necessary for surface drainage and left in a suitable condition for the intended use.
4.7 SIDEWALKS AND TRAILS
4.7.1. General
47
a. A sidewalk shall be constructed on one side of all subdivision streets and all frontage. The Board
may require sidewalks on both sides of streets or portions thereof if deemed necessary for the
safety and convenience of pedestrians.
b. Connections between existing trails or bridle paths may be laid out along subdivision streets
within the street right-of-way in addition to the sidewalk.
4.7.2. Design
a. Sidewalks shall be set back not less than six (6) feet from the edge of the paved street, but may be
reduced to as little as three (3) feet if a meandering sidewalk is proposed with a minimum of six
feet in the area of street trees.
b. The grading and construction of sidewalks shall conform to design shown on the Typical Street
Cross-Section (Schedule A). [needs to be updated]
c. Sidewalks need not be parallel to the street and shall be laid out along a curvelinear course within
the right-of-way with a minimum disturbance of the natural terrain. Sidewalks shall be laid out
and constructed so as to preserve trees having a caliper of three (3) inches or more, rock
outcroppings, stone walls and other attractive features of the terrain. Prior to the start of clearing
and grubbing, the Applicant shall walk the proposed street locations with the Planning Board
agent or a member or members of the Board and mark all trees to be preserved within the street
rights-of-way.
d. Open areas between the sidewalk and street shall be landscaped.
e. Sidewalks shall be four (4) feet in width, unless the Board shall specify a greater width.
f. Sidewalks shall be paved with bituminous concrete placed on a compacted foundation of gravel as
detailed in Schedule "A", typical section, subdivision street.
g. Sidewalks shall fully comply with the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board requirements,
including handicapped access ramps at appropriate locations, as stated in 521 CMR 21.00 and
22.00. Also, temporary accessible routes shall be provided as applicable in accordance with 521
CMR 3.10.
4.8 UTILITIES
4.8.1. General
All utilities, including house connections, shall be placed underground at the time of initial
construction. Complete location plans of each utility system shall be filed with and approved by the
Board in compliance with Section 3.3. prior to installation. All utility pipes and conduits and
appurtenant facilities shall be located along the side of the streets preferably between the street and the
sidewalk as described in section 4.8.2. If such facilities must be located under the sidewalk, they shall
be installed before placement of the gravel base of the sidewalk. All manholes shall be placed along
the side of the road outside the pavement area. See Appendix, Schedule B, Typical Sidewalk
Cross-Section.
4.8.2. Installation
a. Electric, Telephone & Other Telecommunication Services
- Exposed, above-grade pull or distribution boxes are prohibited.
- Electric power supply cables and telephone cables shall be placed in a trench centered two (2)
feet from the edge of the street pavement on the side of the street where the sidewalk is to be
placed.
- All electric and telephone service connections to be located underground shall be placed in
conduit extending from the electric service transformers and telephone distribution box to the
right-of-way lines on both sides of the street.
48
- All service transformers shall be located in vaults below the finished grade unless otherwise
specified by the Board and located as far from dwellings as practical given the nature of the
site.
b. Gas Service
- Distribution pipes for gas service, when provided in a subdivision, shall be placed in a trench
centered two (2) feet from the edge of the street pavement on the side of the street opposite
from the sidewalk. Service stubs for all house lots shall be placed at the time of initial
installation.
- All pipes to be located under the street or sidewalk shall be installed prior to the placing of the
gravel base and bituminous concrete pavement.
4.8.3. Protection
a. The subdivider shall protect all utilities and appurtenances installed from any and all damage,
until the entire subdivision is completed and approved as a whole by the Planning Board.
b. Any damage to these utilities and appurtenances, prior to the approval by the Planning Board
shall be repaired in a manner satisfactory to the Planning Board and Superintendent of
Highways, the full cost of which shall be borne by the subdivider.
49
SECTION 5 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
5.1 BASIC REQUIREMENTS
The Applicant shall install all of the improvements required under the Rules and Regulations except those
which may be specifically waived in writing by the Board. No bond or covenant given as surety for such
work under Section 3.2.10. shall be fully released until the Board has received (i) a survey plan of the
improvements as built in compliance with Section 5.2.2.; (ii) a copy of such as-built plan in electronic
format. Such copy shall be capable of conversion to a .DXF file and/or shall be submitted in a format
approved by the Planning Board. The plan shall be referenced to Massachusetts State Plane NAD83
format, at a minimum of two (2) points on the plan, and (iii) a report in writing from its Construction
Inspector giving full approval of the work.
5.2 GENERAL
5.2.1. Standard Specifications
Except as otherwise provided in these Rules and Regulations, all work and materials used in the
installation of the required improvements shall conform to the requirements of the "Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges 1988 Edition", as amended,
hereinafter referred to as the Standard Specifications.
5.2.2. Survey of Improvements as Installed
a. After all street construction is completed and before the release of any bond or covenant, the
developer shall file with the Board one (1) reproduction copy and two (2) contact prints of the
Definitive Plan corrected, including one (1) 1"-200' scale copy of the plan of land, and certified
by a Registered Professional Engineer and Registered Land Surveyor to show the following:
1. Sideline locations of streets and sidewalks as built;
2. Centerline elevations at 50-foot intervals of all streets built;
3. Profiles of the drainage system as installed;
4. Monuments as installed;
5. Utilities as installed; and
6. Easements added.
b. A certificate, signed by the engineer and surveyor preparing such as built plan, shall be endorsed
on the Plan in the following form:
"Date:__________ , 20__
I hereby certify that the within Plan shows the actual as built locations, profiles and elevations
of the streets, drainage facilities and utilities based upon a field survey made during the period
from _________________ to ___________.
______________________ _____________________
Registered Land Surveyor Registered Engineer"
5.2.3. Acceptance of Streets by the Town
a. No street or way through private property shall be accepted unless it has been constructed and
completed in accordance with the Typical Section of a Subdivision Street (Schedule A) and the
specifications set forth or incorporated in these Rules and Regulations. Insert name of street or
way to be accepted by the Town???, or, if only a portion is to be accepted, a description of such
portion.
b. Where a street or way or portion thereof is ready for acceptance by the Town, the Applicant, in
order to facilitate such acceptance, shall cause a Proposed Layout Plan to be prepared by a
Registered Land Surveyor and filed with the Board of Selectmen. Such plan shall be the same as
50
required in Section 3.2.3. (size 18" x 24" or 24" x 36") to an appropriate scale and show the
following:
1. Widths, lengths, bearings of all boundary lines of streets and easements and radii, tangents
and central angles of all curves in street lines.
2. All required monuments with indication that the same have been correctly set.
3. Name and Assessors' list and lot number of each abutting owner appearing on the most recent
Assessors' list.
4. Certificate signed by the Surveyor preparing the plan shall be endorsed on the plan in the
following form:
"Date:_____________, 20___
I hereby certify that_________________________________________has been laid out and
the bounds have been set as shown on the within plan.
________________________
Registered Land Surveyor"
The original of such plan shall be filed with the Board of Selectmen and three (3) copies thereof
filed with the Planning Board.
5.3. STREETS
5.3.1. General
a. Each street or portion thereof necessary to serve each lot in a subdivision shall be constructed and
brought to finish grade as indicated on the approved Definitive Plan and in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
b. The Applicant or his contractor shall furnish and maintain all stakes and such temporary structures
as may be necessary or required by the Planning Board or its Agent for marking and maintaining
points and lines for the installation of the street related utilities throughout the construction of the
subdivision.
c. Streets and ways shall be constructed in accordance with the Typical Section, Subdivision Street
attached to these Rules and Regulations and marked "Schedule A".
5.3.2. Clearing and Grubbing of Streets
Clearing and grubbing of the roadway and sidewalk locations shall be done according to the
requirements of Schedule A and shall include the removal from the Subdivision of all stumps, brush,
roots, boulders and similar materials from the subdivision property as well as all trees which have not
been marked for preservation in compliance with Sections 4.3.5.(a), 6.3.2.a.1 and 6.3.2.a.3.
5.3.3. Excavation and Subgrade Preparation
a. The Street locations shall be excavated to a depth of at least eighteen and one-half (18 & 1/2)
inches below the established finished grade and shall be graded and compacted to conform to
Schedule A, Typical Section.
b. The conditions of the subgrade surface at the bottom of the excavation shall be inspected by the
Planning Board Agent, and, if, in his opinion, such conditions are wet or spongy or otherwise
unsatisfactory due to the presence of clay, sand pockets or organic materials, the bottom shall be
excavated below the subgrade to a depth determined by the agent to be sufficient to insure
removal of all such materials. Suitability of subgrade should also depend upon compacted field
density.
c. If any portion of the street location is required to be excavated below the designed surface of the
subgrade, the space so excavated shall be filled with clean, bank gravel or such other suitable
material containing no stones over six (6) inches in diameter, as approved by the Planning Board
51
Agent. The street location shall then be graded and compacted so as to conform to the Typical
Section.
d. All ledge, boulders and large stones located within the full cross section of the street shall be
cleared to a minimum depth of eighteen and one-half (18.5) inches below the established finish
grade.
e. All drainage pipes, culverts, catch basins and manholes and all utility pipes, conduits and
appurtenances thereto to be placed under the roadway and sidewalk locations shall be installed
and properly back-filled prior to construction of the street and sidewalk gravel base course.
5.3.4. Gravel Base
a. The gravel base of the street shall consist of hard, durable stone and course sand, free from loam
and clay, uniformly graded, containing no stone having a diameter of more than three (3) inches
and conforming to the requirements of the Standard Specifications for processed gravel for
subbase.
b. After the street subgrade has been graded and properly compacted to an elevation of eighteen and
one-half (18.5) inches below the designed finish grade, gravel for the base shall be spread in two
layers of equal thickness, each thoroughly watered and compacted true to lines and grades with a
vibrating roller weighing not less than twelve (12) tons so as to yield a total depth of fourteen (14)
inches after thorough compaction. Each layer shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent of
the maximum dry density of the material as provided in the Standard Specifications. The gravel
base shall be formed as shown on the Typical Section, Subdivision Street. Any depression that
appears during or after rolling shall be filled with gravel and the area rerolled until the surface is
true and even.
c. When required by the Board or by the Board's Agent, samples of the gravel to be used shall be
tested for graduation by sieve analysis and the rolled gravel tested for compaction. Such tests
shall be made at the expense of the Applicant.
5.3.5. Pavement
a. The pavement of the street in a subdivision shall consist of Class 1 Bituminous Concrete Type I-1
constructed in two courses, binder course and the top course. The binder course shall be three (3)
inches thick and the top course shall be one and one-half (1.5) inches thick after rolling so as to
form a compacted final pavement depth of four and one-half (4.5) inches over the gravel base in
conformity with the lines, grades and typical cross section shown on the approved Definitive Plan.
b. Material and construction methods shall conform to the Standard Specifications.
c. No street pavement shall be constructed before March 30th of any year nor after November 1st of
any year without written permission of the Board.
5.3.6. Street Embankments and Retaining Walls
a. Embankments outside of the street right-of-way shall be evenly graded and pitched at a slope of
not greater than 2 horizontal to 1 vertical in fill as shown on Schedule A.
b. Where cuts are made in ledge, other slopes may be permitted upon written approval of the Board.
Where terrain is such that greater slopes are essential, retaining walls made of stone or natural
stone facing or other material as may be approved by the Planning Board. Terracing or rip-rap
may be used either alone or in combination provided that plans of such proposed grading methods
are filed with and approved by the Board prior to the commencement of road construction.
c. The Board may require that defined slope easements be shown on the Definitive Plan and that
such easements be reserved by the Applicant for future conveyance to the Town for maintenance
purposes.
d. All major changes in the gradients of the land and streets as shown on the approved Definitive
Plan shall be completed prior to the installation of the drainage system, utilities and streets.
5.3.7. Curbs and Berms
52
a. Sloped granite edging shall be installed at all street intersections on the curve and extending at
least eight (8) feet beyond the tangent point. The method at installing the edging shall conform to
the Standard Specifications.
b. Sloped granite edging segments at least eight (8) feet in length shall be installed at all catch basins
so as to extend not less than four (4) feet in either direction from the catch basin center line.
c. Unless otherwise specified by the Board, the Cape Cod type berm as shown on the Typical
Section, Subdivision Street (Schedule A) shall be installed along all streets where sloped granite
edging is not required .
5.3.8 Fire Protection
a. No lot within the subdivision shall be further than 1000 feet from an adequate source of water, as
defined below, measured along an existing public way and/or proposed subdivision road shown
on the Definitive Subdivision Plan and the access way to the source of water.
b. A source of water shall be adequate if it is no farther (vertically or horizontally) than 10 feet from
the nearest access point which can be reached by the Fire Department and is (in order of
desirability):
1. A water hole having a minimum recharge rate of 500 gallons per minute, for a minimum
period of two hours, or
2. A water hole containing a minimum of 40,000 gallons throughout the year.
3. Distances to and from a water hole may be measured to and from a dry hydrant connection,
specifications for which shall be approved by the Fire Chief, and connected to a water hole as
described in paragraph b.1. and b.2. above.
(In the event that an adequate source of water cannot be provided by means of a water hole as
specified in subparagraphs b.1. or b.2. above, then the Board may, upon the recommendation of
the Fire Chief and a showing that said water holes are not feasible as a matter of engineering,
approve the installation of a dry hydrant connected to a storage tank with minimum capacity of
40,000 gallons (or such other lesser minimum capacity as may be designated by the Chief of the
Town Fire Department), which tank shall be automatically maintained at full capacity by recharge
from a well and pump system satisfactory, as shown to the Board in writing, to the Chief of the
Town Fire Department.)
c. A five (5) foot high chain link fence with locking gate shall be providedto enclose each water
hole.
d. An easement shall be given to the Town to provide access from the existing public way or
proposed subdivision road to the source of water and for maintenance of the water hole or dry
hydrant system.
e. All equipment associated with a dry hydrant system and fencing surrounding water holes shall be
given to the Town for maintenance as Town property. However, until such time as the Town
accepts such equipment or fencing, it shall be maintained in good repair and working order by the
developer.
5.4. STORM AND SURFACE DRAINAGE
5.4.1. General
A system of storm drains, culverts, ditches, retention/detention basins, and related installations,
including catch basins, gutters and manholes, shall be designed and installed to provide adequate
disposal of surface water, including control of erosion, flooding and standing water from or in the
subdivision and adjacent lands.
5.4.2. Pipes, Culverts and Drains
a. The size of pipe shall be in accordance with the approved Definitive Plan and in any case shall not
be less than twelve (12) inches in diameter.
53
b. Pipe for the construction of all culverts and drains shall be Class III reinforced concrete.
Reinforced concrete pipe of higher class may be required where conditions warrant.
c. All pipes shall be laid out true to line and grade as shown on the approved Definitive Plan. Each
section of pipe shall have a full, firm bearing throughout its length and shall be installed in
compliance with the Standard Specifications. All joints shall be made of Portland Cement Mortar
with jute filler, or rubber type ring gaskets, unless otherwise directed. No backfilling of pipes or
culverts shall be done until the installation has been inspected and approved by the Board or its
agent. All drainage trenches except cross drains shall be filled with clean gravel borrow in
accordance with the Standard Specifications. All cross drains shall be backfilled with selected
bank run gravel approved by the Agent. Minimum covering of all pipe shall be not less than
thirty-six (36) inches.
d. Concrete or masonry head wall or reinforced concrete flared end sections shall be constructed at
the open ends of all drain pipes which serve as outlets to the drainage system. Construction of
head walls and flared end sections shall conform to the Standard Specifications (see Appendix,
Schedule B, Typical Sections).
5.4.3. Catch Basins and Manholes
a. Catch basins shall be located on both sides of the street on continuous grades at intervals of not
more than three hundred (300) feet, and at all low points and at the corners of intersecting streets.
Intervals of less than three hundred (300) feet may be required on steep grades.
b. Catch basins and manholes shall consist of cement brick masonry, concrete block masonry,
precast solid segments or precast concrete structures, all conforming to the Mass. Highway
Department Standard specifications.
c. Catch basins and manholes shall have an inside diameter of not less than four (4) feet at a point
two and one-half (2 1/2) feet below the bottom of the frame.
d. Catch basins shall be at least three (3) feet in depth measured from the invert of the outlet pipe.
e. Walls of catch basins and manholes shall be not less than eight (8) inches in thickness and shall be
laid in mortar composed of one (1) part Portland Cement and two (2) parts sand and sufficient
water to form a workable mixture if made of blocks, or 5” if made of precast concrete.
f. The base of a catch basin or manhole shall consist of one course of brick or precast concrete pies
laid flat with all joints thoroughly flushed full of mortar with a twelve (12) inch weep hole left in
the center.
g. Backfill shall not be applied until after inspection or within five (5) days of setting the mortar.
h. Frame castings for catch basins and manholes shall be set in full mortar beds at the pavement
binder course. Manhole castings shall be set flush with the designed finish grade of the pavement,
except if the finish course cannot be placed before winter, then the castings shall temporarily be
set flush with the pavement binder course. When the finish course is to be placed, the manhole
castings shall be raised to be flush with the finish course. In either case, the catch basin grates
shall be set one (1) inch below gutter grade.
5.4.4. Responsibility for Subdivision Drainage
The responsibility for adequate drainage shall rest with the Applicant. This shall include connection
with existing drainage facilities, if any, provided by the Town. When private drains are connected to
Town drainage, the Town will not be responsible for any damage. If necessary to connect to Town
drainage systems, the Applicant shall be responsible for any necessary upgrades of the Town systems.
5.4.5. Extension of Drains to Adjacent Property
Where property adjacent to the subdivision, but within the same watershed, is not subdivided,
provision shall be made for proper projection of the drainage systems by continuing appropriate drains
and easements to the exterior boundaries of the subdivision at such size and grade as will allow for
such projection.
54
5.5. SIDEWALKS
5.5.1. Location and Width
Sidewalks four (4) feet in width, unless otherwise specified by the Board, shall be constructed along
all streets as per Section 4.7.
5.5.2. Sidewalk Drainage
Areas included between the outside line of the sidewalk and the outside line of the paved street shall
be graded and filled where necessary to insure adequate drainage.
5.5.3. Sidewalk Base
The sidewalk base shall consist of not less than eight (8) inches of clean gravel after thorough
compaction with a five (5) ton roller.
5.5.4. Sidewalk Pavement
The sidewalk pavement shall consist of Bituminous Concrete Type I-1, laid in two courses each one
and one-half (1 & 1/2) inches thick after rolling so as to form a final pavement depth of three (3)
inches over the gravel base as shown on Schedule A.
5.5.5. Loaming and Seeding
All disturbed areas between the sidewalk and the paved roadway shall be loamed and seeded in
accordance with Section 5.8.
5.5.6. Sidewalk Pavement at Street Intersections
At street intersections, the sidewalk pavement shall be constructed flush with the outside edge of the
sloped granite edging at a grade even with the top of the curbing.
5.6. UTILITIES
All utilities shall be installed underground in compliance with Section 4.8.
5.7. GUARD RAILS
Guard rails of an approved design shall be installed as required by the Board.
5.8. GRASS STRIPS
All cleared open areas included within the street right-of-way or within slope or drainage easements shall
be suitably graded and loamed with not less than four (4) six (6) inches of good quality loam after
compaction and rolled and seeded with perennial lawn grass seed. Seeding shall be done at appropriate
times of the year and in a manner to insure the growth of grass.
5.9. TREES
Trees and shrubs shall be planted in accordance with Section 4.3.5.
5.10. STREET SIGNS
Street signs approved by the CMD shall be furnished and installed at all street intersections prior to the
occupancy of any house on the street. Street signs shall be set in concrete and the location and height of
each sign shall be as prescribed by CMD.
5.11. BOUNDARY MARKS AND MONUMENTS
Markers or monuments shall be set on the right-of-way lines of each street at all angle points, at the
beginning and end of all curves, at all intersections with other streets and ways and at subdivision
55
boundary lines. Markers shall also be set along the entire perimeter of the subdivision at intervals of not
more than five hundred (500) feet pursuant to Land Court Instructions. All markers or monuments shall
be of stone or reinforced concrete, shall be not less than four (4) feet in length and not less than six (6)
inches in width and breadth and shall have a drill hole in the center. All bounds shall be set flush with the
surface of the adjoining ground. Wrought iron rods may be used where the points fall on exposed ledge.
The placement and accurate location of these markers shall be certified in writing to the Board by a
Registered Land Surveyor.
5.12. STREET LIGHTING
The Board may require that street lighting with underground wiring be installed in the subdivision
concurrently with the installation of the underground domestic electric service. Plans showing proposed
locations of poles and underground cables, conduits, transformers and related equipment shall be filed
with and approved by the Board before installation is commenced.
5.13. FINAL CLEANING UP
Upon completion of the streets and other required improvements, the Developer shall remove from the
highway and adjoining property all temporary structures, logs, brush, rubbish, loose stumps, loose stones
and boulders, surplus earth, gravel and other materials which may have accumulated or been placed
during construction and shall leave the subdivision in a neat and sightly condition.
56
SECTION 6 ADMINISTRATION
6.1. AUTHORITY
The Planning Board shall be the administrative agency of these regulations and shall have all the powers
conferred upon the Board by the Subdivision Control Law, MGL Ch. 41, Sect. 81A to 81GG, inclusive.
The Planning Board may designate as their agents appropriate town agencies or officials and may from time to
time hire professional assistance to review plans and inspect improvements at the cost of the Applicant.
The Board on its own motion or on the petition of any interested person shall have the power to modify, amend
or rescind its approval of a subdivision plan, or to require a change in a plan as a condition of its retaining the
status of an approved plan (per MGL Ch. 41, Sect. 81W).
6.2. WAIVER OF COMPLIANCE
Strict compliance with the requirements of these Rules and Regulations may be waived only when, in the
judgement of the Board, such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of
the Subdivision Control Law. In waiving strict compliance the Board may impose such alternative conditions as
will serve substantially the same objective as the standards or regulations waived.
Any definitive plan requiring waivers from Section 4 Design Standards and/or Section 5 Required
Improvements must be accompanied by fully engineered plans complying with Section 3.2.3 illustrating that a
subdivision road in compliance with Sections 4 and 5 is feasible. The Planning Board shall submit these plans
to the Conservation Commission, Board of Health, and the Director of Community Maintenance and
Development for review. The Planning Board shall request the advice of such Board, Commission and Director
as to whether the proposed road could be built under applicable regulations and standards. The Planning Board
shall not act to approve such a definitive plan until it has received such advice or at least 45 days has passed
since the date of the requests.
6.3. INSPECTIONS
6.3.1. General
a. Inspection of the required subdivision improvements shall be made by the Planning Board Agent
during the work and arrangements therefore shall be made by the Applicant with the Agent prior
to the starting of street construction.
b. Inspections shall be requested at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance of each inspection by
written notice to the Planning Board Agent, a copy of which notice shall be sent to the Board.
c. All weight slips for bituminous concrete shall be furnished to the Planning Board Agent.
6.3.2. Required Inspections
a. The following scheduled inspections shall be required in all subdivisions during the installation of
the required improvements:
1. Marking of trees to be preserved in the street rights-of-way;
2. Satisfactory clearing and grubbing of the proposed paved areas, embankments and trimmed
slopes of each street;
3. Satisfactory excavation of street and subgrade preparation;
4. Satisfactory installation of all mechanisms to prevent erosion and contain siltation.
5. Satisfactory installation of drainage pipes, conduits, catch basins, manholes and other belowgrade
facilities;
6. Satisfactory installation of utility pipes and conduits located under street and sidewalk
locations;
57
7. Satisfactory filling, grading and compaction of the street and sidewalk subgrades;
8. Satisfactory installation of sloped granite edging at catch basins and at street intersections;
9. Satisfactory placement and compaction of gravel base for streets;
10. Satisfactory installation of underground electric and telephone services;
11. Satisfactory installation of catch basins and manhole frames, headwalls, rip-rapping and
measures to prevent erosion;
12. Satisfactory placement of bituminous binder course on streets;
13. Satisfactory placement of bituminous finish course on streets;
14. Satisfactory construction of sidewalks;
15. Satisfactory installation of street lights, if required;
16. Satisfactory loaming, grading and seeding of grass strips;
17. Satisfactory installation of street signs;
18. Satisfactory installation of street trees where required;
19. Satisfactory installation of monuments;
20. Satisfactory clean-up;
21. Satisfactory maintenance.
b. The Board may authorize its agent to make additional inspections at his discretion during any
stage of the work.
6.4 REVIEW FEES
a. When reviewing an application for, or when conducting inspections in relation to a special permit
or approval of a subdivision or any modification of a special permit or approval of subdivision,
the Board may determine that the assistance of outside consultants is warranted due to the size,
scale or complexity of a proposed project, because of a project's potential impacts, or because the
Town may lack the necessary expertise to perform the work related to the special permit or
approval. The Board may require that Applicants pay a "project review fee' consisting of the
reasonable costs incurred by the Board for the employment of outside consultants engaged by the
Board to assist in the review of a proposed project.
b. In hiring outside consultants, the Board may engage engineers, planners, lawyers, hydrologists,
landscape architects, or other appropriate professionals who can assist the Board in analyzing a
project to ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances/bylaws, and regulations. Such
assistance may include, but not be limited to, analyzing an application, monitoring or inspecting a
project or site for compliance with the Board's decision or regulations, or inspecting a project
during construction or implementation.
c. Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer
who shall establish a special account for this purpose. Expenditures from this special account
may be made at the direction of the Board without further appropriation. Expenditures from this
special account shall be made only for services rendered in connection with a specific project or
projects for which a project review fee has been or will be collected from the Applicant. Accrued
interest may also be spent for this purpose. Failure of an Applicant to pay a review fee shall be
grounds for denial of the special permit or disapproval of the subdivision.
d. At the completion of the Board's review of a project, any excess amount in the account, including
any remaining interest, attributable to a specific project shall be repaid to the Applicant or the
Applicant's successor in interest. A final report of said account shall be made available to the
Applicant or the Applicant's successor in interest. For the purpose of this regulation, any person
or entity claiming to be an Applicant's successor in interest shall provide the Board with
documentation establishing such succession in interest.
58
e. Any Applicant may take an administrative appeal from the selection of the outside consultant to
the Board of Selectmen. Such appeal must be made in writing and may be taken only within 20
days after the Planning Board has mailed or hand-delivered notice to the Applicant of the
selection. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to claims that the consultant selected
has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum, required qualifications. The minimum
qualifications shall consist either of an educational degree in, or related to, the field at issue or
three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. The required time limit for
action upon an application by the Board shall be extended by the duration of the administrative
appeal. In the event that no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen within one month
following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by the Board shall stand.
6.5 BUILDING PERMITS
No building permit shall be issued by the Building Inspector for any lot in a subdivision until the Inspector has
received written confirmation from the Board that such lot has been released from any surety covenant.
6.6 MAINTENANCE
a. If the developer shall obtain the release of any lots from his recorded covenant security agreement
by the filing of a performance bond, he shall thereafter maintain the roads and utilities serving
such lots and the properties adjacent thereto in a safe, satisfactory and sightly condition.
Maintenance shall include:
1. Plowing the streets to full width;
2. Sanding the streets;
3. Keeping drainage structures clear of snow, ice and silt;
4. Prevention of erosion on the street right-of-way, abutting property, lots retained
and lots sold.
b. Upon completion of the required improvements and release of all security, the Applicant shall
properly maintain all roads and other municipal services within the subdivision until acceptance
of the roads by vote of the Town or until the expiration of a one-year period from the date of the
Board's release of security. The costs of such maintenance shall be included in the performance
guarantee as applicable.
6.7 CHANGES IN THE DEFINITIVE PLAN
6.7.1. Modifications
No change shall be made in an approved Definitive Plan nor in the installation of the required
improvements until a revised plan showing such change (prepared from a field survey and signed by a
Registered Engineer and/or Registered Land Surveyor) is filed with the Board for its consideration
and approval. No change in the location of a street right-of-way line shall be permitted or approved
by the Board until a public hearing is held as required by law (MGL Ch. 41, Section 81Q). All
revisions shall be dated, and references to the approved Definitive Plan shall be provided as per
Section 6.7.3. below.
6.7.2. Minor revisions
The Board may permit relocation of lot lines without a public notice or a public hearing and may
permit relocation of utility easements and other minor changes which do not affect names, grades or
exterior lines of streets without a public notice or a public hearing.
59
6.7.3. Reference and Dating Requirements for Revised Plans
Any plan showing a revision to an approved Definitive Plan and submitted prior to the complete
release of all lots or sureties in that portion of the subdivision affected by such revisions, shall bear
notation referring to the original Definitive Plan. The original Definitive Plan shall be re-signed and
dated to correspond to the revision date by the Registered Engineer who originally signed the Plan.
6.8 RESCISSION AFTER TWO YEARS
The failure of the Applicant to begin work in a subdivision or a portion thereof within two (2) years of the
approval of the Definitive Plan shall constitute a reason for the rescission of such approval.
6.9 SEPARABILITY
If any part of these regulations shall be adjudged invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder.
6.10 AMENDMENTS
These regulations or any portion thereof may be amended, supplanted or repealed from time to time by the
Board after a public hearing on its own motion or by petition (MGL Ch. 41, Section 81Q).
60
SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE SCENIC
ROAD ACT
(MGL CH. 40, SEC. 15C)
Adopted April 22, 1991
Revised April 14, 1994
1. STATUTORY PROVISIONS OF THE SCENIC ROAD ACT - M.G.L. CHAPTER 40,
SECTION 15 C
"Upon recommendation or request of the Planning Board, Conservation Commission, or Historical
Commission of any city or town, such city or town may designate any road in said city or town other than
a numbered route or state highway, as a scenic road.
After a road has been designated as a scenic road, any repair, maintenance, reconstruction, or paving work
done with respect thereto shall not involve or include the cutting or removal of trees, or the tearing down
or destruction of stone walls, or portions thereof, except with prior written consent of the Planning Board,
or if there is no planning board, the Selectmen of a town, or the city council of a city, after a public
hearing duly advertised twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area, as to time, date, place and
purpose, the last publication to occur at least seven days prior to such hearing; provided, however, that
when a public hearing must be held under the provisions of this section and under section three of
Chapter eighty-seven prior to the cutting or removal of a tree, such hearings shall be consolidated into a
single public hearing before the Tree Warden and the Planning Board, or if there is no planning board, the
Selectmen of a town, or the city council of a city, and notice of such consolidated public hearing shall be
given by the Tree Warden or his deputy as provided in said section three of Chapter eighty-seven.
Designation of a road as a scenic road shall not affect the eligibility of a city or town to receive
construction or reconstruction aid for such road pursuant to the provisions of Chapter ninety."
2. PURPOSE
The Sherborn Planning Board has adopted these regulations with the following objectives:
a. To maintain the natural beauty that currently exists along scenic roads in Sherborn.
b. To maintain and enhance the rural character of the Town and encourage compatibility with
existing roadside features.
c. To implement more fully the provisions of the Scenic Road Act, with acknowledgement that
the roads serve a transportation function for pedestrians, equestrians and non-motorized as
well as motorized vehicles.
3. SHERBORN STREETS SUBJECT TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE SCENIC ROAD ACT
61
Designated as scenic roads at the Annual Town Meeting held on March 11, 1974, except as noted:
Apple Street Goulding Street East* Maple Street Snow Street
Ash Lane Goulding Street West Mill Street South Street
Brush Hill Road Green Lane Nason Hill Road Western Avenue
Cross Street Greenwood Street Perry Street Whitney Street
Curve Street Hollis Street Pleasant Street Woodland Street
Farm Road Hunting Lane Prospect Street
Forest Street Lake Street Rockwood Street
*Designated at Town Meeting held on April 24, 2001.
4. PROCEDURE TO DESIGNATE ROADS AS A SCENIC ROAD
The Planning Board, the Board of Selectmen, the Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission,
or by petition of citizens of the Town (consistent with petition requirements to place an article on the
warrant) may propose "scenic road" status for any road in Sherborn other than a numbered route or state
highway as a scenic road. The Planning Board shall hold a Public Hearing on the petition, notifying the
Selectmen, the Tree Warden, the Superintendent of Highways, the Conservation Commission, and the
Historical Commission, and advertising twice in a newspaper of general circulation, the first
advertisement at least fourteen days prior to the date of the public hearing.
The Planning Board shall make a recommendation to the Town Meeting on the merits of designation of
the proposed road as a scenic road.
A majority vote of Town Meeting is required for designation. Such designation shall be effective as of
the date of Town Meeting action. Any work on any portion of the right-of-way of a scenic road which
was not physically commenced at the time the road was designated as a scenic road shall conform to these
regulations.
5. DEFINITIONS
In the absence of contrary meaning established through legislation or judicial action pursuant to MGL
Chapter 40, Sec. 15C, these terms contained in that statute shall be construed as follows:
"Road" shall mean a vehicular traveled way plus its necessary appurtenances within the right-of-way
including bridge structures, drainage systems, retaining walls, traffic control devices, pedestrian facilities,
and the air space above them, but not intersecting streets or driveways.
"Cutting or removal of trees" shall not be construed to include clearing of nuisance growth, routine or
emergency tree maintenance which removes only permanently diseased or damaged limbs, trunks or roots
and dead whole trees, or thinning out of overcrowded trees as determined by the Tree Warden, but shall
include such cutting or removal done in contemplation of, or following, repair, maintenance,
reconstruction or paving work for a road.
"Repair, Maintenance, Reconstruction, or Paving-work" shall mean any such work done within the
right-of-way by any person or agency, public or private. Construction of new driveways or alterations of
existing ones is also included to the extent such work takes place within the right-of-way. Except as
62
allowed in the preceding paragraph, roadside cutting for clearance for vehicles or for improvement of
line-of-sight shall also be included within this definition.
"Trees" shall mean any trees (not bushes) having a trunk diameter of one and one half inches or larger at
one foot above the ground. All trees within the right-of-way of a scenic road or on the boundaries thereof
shall be subject to these regulations; if for whatever reason, it is uncertain whether the tree is within the
right-of-way of the scenic road, it shall be taken to be within the coverage of these rules and regulations
until the contrary is shown.
"Stone walls" shall not be construed to include assemblages of stone involving less than one cubic foot of
wall material per linear foot nor totaling less than five feet in length. All stone walls within the entire
right-of-way of a scenic road or on the boundaries thereof shall be subject to these regulations; if for
whatever reason, it is uncertain whether the stone wall is within such right-of-way of the scenic road, it
shall be taken to be within the coverage of these rules and regulations until the contrary is shown.
"Tearing down or destruction of stone walls" shall not be construed to include temporary removal and
replacement within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed six months, at the same location with the
same materials according to the original character.
6. CONSTRUCTION AND APPLICABILITY OF THE RULES AND REGULATIONS
CONTAINED HEREIN
The Planning Board authority and jurisdiction shall be consistent with MGL Ch. 40, Sec. 15C. These
rules and regulations shall be controlling and may be amended from time to time.
7. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR DRIVEWAYS
7.1 Curb Cuts
The driveway standards shall be consistent with the regulation for curb cuts contained in the
Planning Board Subdivision Regulation Section 4.3.6.
7.2 Stone Wall Removal Limitations
Where stone walls exist, the maximum amount of stone wall to be removed shall be the width of
the driveway or new road at the location of the stone wall plus three feet on each side.
a. Unless otherwise waived, removed stone shall be used to repair other sections of the wall
along the road.
b. No wall shall be cut without construction of an appropriate terminus. Appropriate end points
are shown in the Appendix, Figures 1 & 2, and consist of stone piers, granite posts, stone
walls with tapered ends turning back onto the lot along the drive, or wooden posts with or
without a gate.
7.3 Tree Removal Limitations
No tree with a trunk exceeding 8" in diameter four and one half feet above ground level shall be
cut for a driveway or new road unless the curb cut cannot be safely located otherwise. Unless
63
otherwise waived, whenever trees are removed, trees in a species and location suitable to the
Planning Board and the Tree Warden shall be planted.
8. PROCEDURES
8.1 Filing Instructions
Any person or organization seeking consent of the Planning Board under MGL Ch. 40, Sec. 15C
(the Scenic Road Act) regarding the cutting or removal of trees or the tearing down or destruction
of stone walls, or portions thereof, in connection with the Repair, Maintenance, Reconstruction or
Paving-work (as defined in Section 5) on Scenic Roads, shall submit a request to the Planning
Board together with the following:
a. A plan showing the location and the nature of the proposed action and a description of the
proposed changes to trees and stone walls;
b. A statement of the purpose(s) for the change;
c. A list of owners of property located in whole or in part within 500 feet of the proposed
action;
d. Except in the case of town agencies, a filing fee of $25.00 shall be paid; and
e. Any further explanatory material useful to adequately inform the Planning Board prior to the
public hearing.
Notice of submittal shall be filed with the Town Clerk and a copy of the submittal transmitted to
the Tree Warden after it is accepted and signed for by the Planning Board or its staff.
8.2 Tree Warden
Planning Board hearings shall be held in conjunction with those held by the Tree Warden acting
under MGL Ch. 87. Consent to an action by the Planning Board shall not be construed as inferring
consent by the Tree Warden or the reverse, nor shall execution of these rules and regulations in any
way lessen the Tree Warden's duties under MGL Ch. 87.
8.3 Notice
The Planning Board shall, as required by statute, give notice of its public hearing by advertising
twice in a newspaper of general circulation in the area, the last publication at least seven days prior
to the public hearing.
This notice shall contain a statement as to the time, date, place, and purpose of the hearing with a
description of the action proposed by the applicant. Copies of this notice shall be sent to the
applicant, the Selectmen, the Tree Warden, the Superintendent of Highways, the Conservation
Commission, the Historical Commission, and the owners of property located within 500 feet of the
proposed action.
In the event that the Planning Board holds a joint hearing with the Tree Warden acting under MGL
Ch. 87, the advertisement shall be made by the Tree Warden.
64
8.4 Timing
The Planning Board shall hold a Public Hearing as soon as practical but in no event later than forty
five days from the date on which notice of submittal is received by the Town Clerk unless a longer
time is agreed to by the applicant.
8.5 Decision
a. The Planning Board shall make a decision as soon as practical but in no event later than 15
days from the hearing unless a longer time is agreed to by the applicant.
b. In rendering its decision, the Planning Board shall consider the application based on
compliance with the "Scenic Road Act" and the considerations listed in Section 9.
c. The Planning Board may require sufficient bond to be posted to cover the costs of required
work within the road right-of-way and to protect existing vegetation and stone walls. Such
bonding shall be specified in the Board's decision.
d. The decision of the Planning Board shall be filed within fifteen days of the close of the Public
Hearing with the Town Clerk unless a longer time is agreed to by the applicant; copies of
which shall be sent to the applicant, the Selectmen, the Tree Warden, the Superintendent of
Highways, the Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission, and those persons who
have requested a copy of the decision.
e. The approval by the Planning Board under these regulations of a proposed action shall be
valid for two years, after which it shall be void.
9. CONSIDERATIONS
In acting in regard to a Scenic Road request, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
a. Scenic and aesthetic characteristics;
b. Public safety;
c. Accident history within 500 feet of tree(s) and stone walls at issue;
d. Location and setback of telephone poles in relation to the pavement, trees and stone walls (in
no case shall a tree be removed for safety purposes which is as far as or further from the
center of the paved right-of-way than a utility pole within 500 feet thereof);
e. Traffic volume, congestion and posted speed limit;
f. Preservation of natural resources;
g. Environmental and historical values;
h. Recreational uses of road, taking into account the nature and extent;
65
i. Relationship of the road design to the standards of the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules
and Regulations but recognizing that a variance from standard should be allowed when a road
has been designated scenic by the Townspeople;
j. Compensatory actions proposed, such as replacement of trees or walls;
k. Financial and other consequences of design revision to avoid or reduce damage to trees or
stone walls;
l. Evidence contributed by abutters, town agencies, and other interested parties; and
m. Other sound planning principles.
10. ENFORCEMENT
10.1 Remedy for Failure to File
Failure to file with the Planning Board for permission to cut or remove trees or for destruction of
any portion of a stone wall within the layout of the scenic road will require an immediate filing as
detailed above and shall be subject to restoration of the features. Unless waived, this restoration
shall consist of replacing the stone wall on a square-foot per square-foot basis as necessary and
replacing the trees cut on a diameter-inch per diameter-inch basis at locations specified by the
Planning Board and the Tree Warden. A diameter-inch per diameter-inch replacement means that
the combined diameter of the replacement trees measured one foot above ground level for trees up
to 8" in diameter and four and one half feet above ground level for trees in excess of 8" diameter
must equal the total diameter of the original tree trunks.
10.2 Compliance
Failure to comply with the duly issued decision of the Planning Board shall be subject to
restoration as detailed above and other remedial measures the Planning Board deems necessary,
including, but not limited to the enforcement of the bonding and restoration as detailed above.
10.3 Authority
The Planning Board and the Tree Warden shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
these Regulations.
66
APPENDICES AND FORMS
67
APPENDIX
I. PLANNING BOARD FORMS
Petition for Special Permit . . . . . . I-1
FORM A Application for Endorsement of Plan Believed not to Require
Approval under the Subdivision Control Law . . I-2
FORM B Application for Approval of a Preliminary Plan . . I-3
FORM C Application for Approval of a Definitive Plan . . . I-4
FORM D Designer's Certificate . . . . . . . I-6
FORM E Certified List of Abutters . . . . . . I-7
FORM F Covenant . . . . . . . . I-8
FORM G Certificate of Action . . . . . . . I-10
FORM H Performance Bond - Surety Company . . . . I-11
FORM I Performance Bond - Secured by Deposit . . . . I-12
FORM J Performance Bond - Secured by Bank Passbook . . . I-13
FORM K Release of Lots (Provision of Surety) . . . . I-15
FORM L Release of Lots (Completion of Work) . . . . I-16
II. TYPICAL SECTIONS
SCHEDULE A Typical Roadway Cross-Section . . . . II-1
SCHEDULE B-1 Sloped Granite Edging . . . . . II-2
B-2 Bituminous Concrete Berm . . . . . II-3
B-3 Municipal Standard Catch Basin Frame & Grate . . II-4
B-4 Concrete Block Manholes (less than 9 feet) . . . II-5
B-5 Concrete Block Manholes (over 9 feet) . . . II-6
B-6 Special Manholes for 36" to 84" Dia. R.C. Pipe . . II-7
B-7 Concrete Block Catch Basin . . . . . II-8
B-8 Precast Concrete Catch Basin . . . . . II-9
B-9 Concrete and Field Stone Masonry Ends for 30" to 84" Pipe . II-10
B-10 Reinforced Concrete Pipe Flared Ends . . . II-11
B-11 Concrete & Fieldstone Masonry Combination Ends up to 30" Dia. II-12
B-12 Subdrain . . . . . . II-13
B-13 Cemented Stone Masonry Wall . . . . II-14
FIGURE 1 Scenic Road Driveway Layout . . . II-15
2 Scenic Road Driveway Layout . . . II-16
III. FEES
SCHEDULE C Fees . . . . . . .. III-1
I-1
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
PETITION FOR SPECIAL PERMIT
Date Submitted ________________, 20______
INSTRUCTIONS
Submit the number of copies indicated below of this form and plans and a check, payable to the Town of
Sherborn, for the filing fee in the amount of $950 ($750 for a Site Plan, $475 for special permit renewal)
plus Applicant should be prepared to reimburse Town for associated and related costs such as advertising
and engineering review.
TO THE SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD:
The undersigned hereby petitions for the following special permit under the Sherborn Zoning By-Laws.
_____ 3.2.29 Accessory storage/parking cars (5 copies) _____ 4.4 Street Frontage (3 copies)
_____ 4.5 Open Space Subdivision (7 copies) _____ 4.6 Planned Unit Development (7 Copies)
_____ 5.3.1 Site Plan (7copies) _____ 5.6 Residence M Multidwelling (7 copies)
_____ 5.7 Residence EA Multidwelling (7 Copies) _____ 5.8 Wireless Communications
Facility (5 Copies)
DESCRIPTION OF PREMISES:
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
REASONS WHY PERMIT SHOULD BE GRANTED: _____________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
Has there been a previous application for a special permit on these premises? _______
If so, what was the date of the previous application? ___________________________
State your interest in the premises. (Owner, lessee, etc.) ________________________
Does anyone else have an interest in the premises? (Owner, lessee, mortgagees, etc.) ________________
If so, state names and respective interests.
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
LOCATION OF PROPERTY: Assessors' Plans, Map No.________, Lot No.(s)______________
NAME AND ADDRESS OF SURVEYOR/ENGINEER:
____________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
SOURCE OF OWNER'S TITLE:
(a) Deed from ________________________________________________dated___________recorded
in Middlesex S. District Registry of Deeds Book________________, Page_____________,
OR
(b) Land Court Certificate of Title No.__________ registered with Middlesex S. District Registry,
Book_____, Page_____
Applicant's: Signature: ___________________________________________________Date:__________
Name(printed):____________________________________________________ Tel.: _______________
Address:_____________________________________________________________________________
I-2
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM A
APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT OF PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL UNDER
THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW
Date submitted: ______________________
INSTRUCTIONS:
For all applications believed not to require approval under the subdivision control law, and in accordance with
Massachusetts General Law Ch. 41, Sec. 81P, please do the following:
1. Schedule a review by the Planning Board. (See or call the Town Planner, 508.651.7855.)
2. Fill out this FORM A as specified below.
3. Submit to the Town Planner (to bring to the Planning Board review meeting):
a. Completed original of this FORM A and one (1) additional copy of this completed form.
b. A completed original Mylar plan of the land and four (4) copies of the plan at a scale appropriate
for the size of the property as may be approved by the Planning Board.
c. One (1) 1” = 200’ scale copy of the plan of the land or an electronic copy in a form compatible
with the Town’s GIS system.
d. One (1) copy of a plan showing the existing boundaries of the land at the same scale as the plan
indicating the proposed changes.
e. Filing fee as specified in Schedule C (check payable to: Town of Sherborn).
Note that the time period of MGL Ch. 41, Sec. 81P does not commence until the applicant files with the Town Clerk.
TO THE SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD:
The undersigned wishes to record the accompanying plan and requests a determination by your Board that approval
under the Subdivision Control Law is not required. The undersigned believes that such approval is not required because
the plan does not constitute a subdivision (fill in Section 1 or Section 2 below, but not both):
1. Either because:
a. Either lot shown thereon has the minimum frontage, area and width required by the Sherborn
Zoning By-Laws; and
b. Each lot show thereon has frontage on _________________________________________, a
public way ___ or a private way ___ (check one).
2. Or because: ___________________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________
LOCATION OF PROPERTY: Assessors’ Plans, Map No._______, Lot No(s).__________
NAME OF SURVEYOR: ______________________________________________________________________
SOURCE OF OWNER’S TITLE:
(a) Deed from________________________________________dated__________________recorded in
Middlesex S. District registry of Deeds Book ___________________, Page _________________; or
(b) Land Court Certificate of Title No. ___________ registered with Middlesex S. District Registry,
Book________, Page _________
APPLICANT’S SIGNATURE: ____________________________ Address: _____________________________
_____________________________
PLANNING BOARD ACTION:
Date of decision: __________________________
Approval not required: _____________________
Approval required: ________________________
Authorized Signature: ______________________
I/we certify that I am/we are the owner(s) of record of the
ovabove- described property:
naSignature(s)____________________________________
____________________________________
Name(s)________________________________________
________________________________________
Address________________________________________
________________________________________
I-3
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM B
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY PLAN
Sherborn, MA
Date submitted: ______________________
INSTRUCTIONS:
File two (2) completed forms with the Planning Board and one (1) completed form with the Town Clerk and in accordance
with Massachusetts General Law Ch. 41, Sec. 81S. Two (2) copies of the Preliminary Plan shall also be filed with the
Board of Health.
TO THE SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD:
The undersigned submits herewith five (5) copies of a Preliminary Plan of a subdivision of land in the Town of Sherborn
for approval under the Subdivision Control Law and the current Rules and Regulations of your Board.
1. NAME OF SUBDIVISION
__________________________________________________________________________________
2. NAME OF REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR AND ENGINEER
__________________________________________________________________________________
3. LOCATION OF PROPERTY: Assessors’ Plans, Map No._______, Lot No(s).__________
4. NAME OF SURVEYOR: ________________________________________________
5. SOURCE OF OWNER’S TITLE:
(c) Deed from________________________________________dated__________________recorded in
Middlesex S. District registry of Deeds Book ___________________, Page _________________; or
(d) Land Court Certificate of Title No. ___________ registered with Middlesex S. District Registry,
Book________, Page _________
Applicant’s signature: _______________________________________
Applicant’s address: _________________________________________
_________________________________________
PLANNING BOARD ACTION: I/we certify that I am/we are the owner(s) of record of the above
described property:
Date filed: __________________________
Approved: _____________________
Disapproved: ________________________
Signature(s)_____________________________________
_____________________________________
Name(s)________________________________________
________________________________________
Address________________________________________
________________________________________
I-4
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM C
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF DEFINITIVE PLAN
Date: ______________________
To the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn:
The undersigned, being the owner of certain land shown on proposed subdivision plan entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
By
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Dated _______________________________________, hereby submits said plan as a definitive plan in accordance with
the Rules and Regulations of the Town and makes application to the Board for approval of said plan.
The applicant’s title to said land is derived from
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
by deed dated ______________________ and recorded in Middlesex County Registry of Deeds, Book _____________,
Page _________, and/or registered in the Middlesex S. Registry District of the Land Court, as Document No.________ and
noted on Certificate of Title No. ___________, Registration Book _________________, Page ________________, and
said land is free of encumbrances except for the following:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Said plan has ( )/has not ( ) evolved from a preliminary plan submitted to the Planning Board on
_____________________, and approved ( )/approved with modifications ( )/disapproved ( ) on
___________________________________________.
The applicant hereby applies for the approval of said definitive plan by the Planning Board, and in furtherance thereof
hereby agrees to abide by the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board of the Town. The applicant hereby further
covenants and agrees with the Town, upon the approval of said definitive plan by the Planning Board:
1. To construct ways and install municipal services as shown on the approved definitive plan in accordance with the
Rules and regulations of the Planning Board of the Town, with such modifications or conditions, if any as may be
imposed by the Planning Board or Board of Health of the Town, such modifications or conditions to be set forth
in a Certificate of Action to be filed by the Planning Board with the Town Clerk. Such construction of ways and
installation of municipal services shall, if begun, be completed within two years from the date of endorsement by
the Planning Board of its approval of the plan unless the Planning Board shall specify a different period of time
for the completion of such work. If the construction of ways and installation of municipal services is not begun
within two years from the date of endorsement by the Planning Board of its approval of the plan, or within such
shorter or longer period of time as the Planning Board may specify, such approval shall terminate and the
applicant shall be required to resubmit the plan to the Planning Board for re-approval with such modifications or
conditions as the Planning Board may then deem appropriate.
I-5
2. To give security for the construction of ways and installation of municipal services required under Paragraph 1
above in accordance with G.L.C. 41, S. 81U. The giving of such security shall not operate so as to relieve the
applicant of his or its obligations under Paragraph 1 above, and if the applicant fails to construct ways and install
municipal services as therein required and the security given under this paragraph proves insufficient to pay for
the completion of such work, then the applicant shall be liable to the Town for the additional cost of completing
such construction of ways and installation of municipal services.
3. To permit the Planning Board, its duly authorized agents and employees, and any agent or employee of the Town
or any person authorized by the Town, to enter upon the land included in the subdivision for the purpose of
determining whether the work required under Paragraph 1 has been begun or completed, and for the purpose of
completing such work, if begun, in the event the applicant fails to do so within the required time. The applicant
shall grant to the Town an easement, which shall be referred to on the plan and recorded with the plan, to enter
upon the land for the purposes set forth in the preceding sentence.
4. To record the definitive plan and any covenant given under G.L.C. 41, S. 81U in the appropriate district Registry
of Deeds or Registry District of the Land Court within sixty (60) days of the date of the Planning Board’s
endorsement of its approval of the plan. Any covenant given under G.L.C. 41, S. 81U shall be referred to on the
recorded definitive plan. If the Planning Board shall impose modification or conditions on its approval of the
definitive plan, its Certificate of Action setting forth such modifications or conditions shall be referred to on the
plan and shall be attached to ad recorded with the plan. Any condition required by the Board of Health or Health
Officer of the Town not incorporated in the Planning Board’s Certificate of Action shall also be inscribed on the
plan or contained in a separate document referred to on the plan recorded with the plan.
The applicant hereby requests that the time within which the Planning Board must action the subdivision plan submitted
herewith be extended to a period of 135 days from the date of submission.
Received by Town Clerk: Applicant’s:
Date: __________________________
Time: _____________________
Signature: ________________________
*Signature:_____________________________________
Address:________________________________________
________________________________________
________________________________________
________________________________________
___________________________
* All owners of the land must sign the application. If the land is owned by a corporation or trust, a copy of the instrument
authorizing the person who signs the application to act for the owner must be attached to the application. If the applicant is
not the owner of the land, a separate sheet listing the names addresses of the owners and the interest of the applicant in the
land should be attached to the application.
I-6
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM D
DESIGNER’S CERTIFICATE
Sherborn, MA
Date: ______________________
TO THE SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD:
I/We hereby certify that the accompany plan, being a Definitive Plan of a subdivision located in the Town of Sherborn
entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
and dated ______________________________, is true and correct and complies in all respects with the current Rules and
Regulations of your Board, except as follows:1
_________________________________________
Registered Land Surveyor
_________________________________________
Address
_________________________________________
Registered Professional Engineer
_________________________________________
Address
1 List all exceptions. If no exceptions, so state.
I-7
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM E
CERTIFIED LIST OF ABUTTERS
Sherborn, MA
Date: ______________________
TO THE SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD:
The undersigned, being an applicant for approval of a Definitive Plan of a proposed subdivision entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________,
submits herewith the following sketch showing the land included within the subdivision and the names and relative
locations of all land owners who properties abut the subdivision or are located on a street or way on the side opposite
therefrom. The mailing addresses of all such owners are listed on a separate sheet attached hereto.
Applicant’s signature: _________________________________________
Address: _________________________________________
Sherborn, MA
Date: ______________________
TO THE SHERBORN PLANNING BOARD:
This is to certify that according to the most recent real estate tax list for the Town of Sherborn, the names and addresses of
the assessed owners of properties abutting (or opposite) the parcel(s) shown on the above sketch are the same as those
markd on such sketch and listed on the attached sheet, except as follows:
_________________________________________
Assessor of the Town of Sherborn
I-9
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM F
COVENANT
Date: ______________________
Whereas
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________[Name of Owner(s)] _____________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________________(the Developer)
has submitted an application dated _____________________________, to the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn
(the Town), a municipal corporation situated in Middlesex County, Massachusetts, for approval of a definitive plan of a
certain subdivision entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
By________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
dated _______________________________________, and has requested the Planning Board to approve such plan without
requiring a performance bond or other surety;
Now therefore, in consideration of the Planning Board approving said plan without requiring a performance bond or other
surety, and in consideration of one dollar in hand paid, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledge, the Developer represents,
covenants and agrees with the Town pursuant to G.L.C. 41, S. 81U, as amended as follows:
1. The Developer is the owner in fee simple of all the land included in the aforesaid subdivision and there are no
mortgages of record or otherwise on any of said land, except those described below and subordinated to the
Covenant, and the present holders of said mortgages have assented to this Covenant prior to its execution by the
Developer.
Description of Mortgages (Give complete names of mortgagees and Registry of Deeds reference to mortgage.):
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________________________________________________
2. This Covenant shall run with the land included in the aforesaid subdivision and shall operate as a restriction upon
said land.
3. The ways and municipal services required to serve the lots in said subdivision shall be installed and constructed as
shown on the definitive plan and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board of the
Town, with such modifications or conditions, if any, as have been imposed by the Planning Board or Board of
Health of the Town, such modifications or conditions being set forth in a Certificate of Action dated
________________________ to be recorded herewith, before such lot may be built upon or conveyed other than
I-8
I-9
by a mortgage deed; provided that a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by foreclosure or
otherwise and any succeeding owner of such premises or part thereof may sell any such lot subject to the
limitation
that no lot shall be built upon until such was and services have been provided to serve such lot; and provided
further that nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to this Covenant, of
either the entire parcel of land shown on said subdivision plan or of all lots shown on such plan not previously
released by the Planning Board.
4. Reference to the Covenant shall be entered upon said plan and this Covenant shall be recorded when said plan is
recorded.
5. Lots within the subdivision may be released from the foregoing conditions only upon the recording of a written
release executed by a majority of the Planning Board and specifically enumerating the lots to be released there
under.
6. This Covenant shall be binding upon the executors, administrators, devisees, heirs, successors and assigns of the
Developer.
7. The construction of ways and installation of municipal services shall, if begun, be completed within two years
from the date of endorsement by the Planning Board of its approval of the plan. If the construction of ways and
installation of municipal services is not begun within two years from the date of endorsement by the Planning
Board of its approval of the plan, such approval shall terminate and the applicant shall be required to resubmit the
plan to the Planning Board for re-approval with such modifications or conditions as the Planning Board may then
deem appropriate.
Executed as a sealed instrument this _________day of _____________, 20___.
(Signatures of individuals, trustees under a declaration of trust or corporate officers, thereunto duly authorized, as owner(s)
or mortgagee(s), as applicable.)
Owner(s)*
_________________________________________
_________________________________________
_________________________________________
*If there is more than one owner, all must sign.
Assents of Mortgagee(s):
________________________________________
________________________________________
________________________________________
I-10
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM G
CERTIFICATE OF ACTION
Date: ______________________
This is to certify that the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn has this day approved a definitive subdivision plan
entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
by
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
dated _______________________________________. This approval is subject to receipt of a covenant or other proper
security under G.L.C. 41, S. 81U to secure the construction of ways and installation of municipal services in accordance
with the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board of the Town and the terms and conditions of this approval. The
giving of such security shall not, however, relieve the owner of the subdivision of his or its obligation to construct ways
and install municipal services in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board of the Town and the
terms and conditions of this approval. If the owner fails to construct ways and install municipal services as required and the
security given proves insufficient to pay for the completion of such work, then the owner shall be liable to the Town for the
additional cost of completing such construction of ways and installation of municipal services.
This approval is subject to the following terms and conditions:
1. The construction of ways and installation of municipal services shall, if begun, be completed within two years
from the date of endorsement by the Planning Board of its approval of the plan. If the construction of ways and
installation of municipal services is not begun within two years from the date of endorsement by the Planning
Board of its approval of the plan, such approval shall terminate and the applicant shall be required to resubmit the
plan to the Planning Board for re-approval with such modifications or conditions as the Planning Board may then
deem appropriate.
2. [etc.]
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
Majority of the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn
I-12
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM H
PERFORMANCE BOND
SURETY COMPANY
Know all men by these presents that
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________ _______,
as Principal, and ____________________________________________________________________________________
a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of ____________________________________ and
having a usual place of business in______________________________________________, as surety, herby bind and
obligate themselves and their respective executors, administrators, devisees, heirs, successors and assigns, jointly and
severally, to the Town of Sherborn, a Massachusetts municipal corporation, in the sum of
_____________________dollars.
The condition of this obligation is that if the Principal shall fully and satisfactorily observe and perform in the manner and
in
the time therein specified, all of the covenants, conditions, agreements, terms and provisions contained in the application
signed by the Principal and dated _____________________________________, under which approval of a definitive plan
of a
certain subdivision entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
by
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
dated ________________________________, has been granted by the Planning Board of the Town, with such
modifications or conditions, if any, as have been imposed by the Town acting through its Planning Board or Board of
Health, then this obligation shall be void; otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect and the aforesaid sum shall be
paid to the Town to satisfy and complete the Principal’s obligation.
The Surety hereby assents to any and all changes and modifications that may be made of the aforesaid covenants,
conditions, agreements, terms and provisions to be observed and performed by the Principal, and waives notice thereof.
In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands and seals this _________________ day of ________________,
20____.
Principal
_____________________________________
By: _____________________________________
(Title)
Surety
_____________________________________
I-12
By: _____________________________________
(Title)
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM I
PERFORMANCE BOND
SECURED BY DEPOSIT
Know all men by these presents that _____________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________ ,
as Principal, hereby binds and obligates himself/itself and his or its executors, administrators, devisees, heirs, successors
and
assigns, jointly and severally, to the Town of Sherborn, a Massachusetts municipal corporation, in the sum of
_______________________________dollars, and has secured this obligation by depositing said sum in money or
negotiable securities with the Treasurer of the Town.
The condition of this obligation is that if the Principal shall fully and satisfactorily observe and perform in the manner and
in
the time therein specified, all of the covenants, conditions, agreements, terms and provisions contained in the application
signed by the Principal and dated _____________________________________, under which approval of a definitive plan
of a
certain subdivision entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
by ________________________________________________________________________________________________
dated ________________________________, has been granted by the Planning Board of the Town, with such
modifications or conditions, if any, as have been imposed by the Town acting through its Planning Board or Board of
Health, then this obligation shall be void; otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect and the aforesaid sum shall be
paid to the Town to satisfy and complete the Principal’s obligation.
In witness whereof the Principal has hereunto set his hand and seal this ____________ day of ________________,
20____.
Principal
_____________________________________
By: _____________________________________
(Title)
I-11
I-12
I-13
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM J
PERFORMANCE BOND
SECURED BY BANK PASSBOOK
Know all men by these presents that _____________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________________________________________ ,
as Principal, hereby binds and obligates himself/itself and his or its executors, administrators, devisees, heirs, successors
and
assigns, jointly and severally, to the Town of Sherborn, a Massachusetts municipal corporation, in the sum of
__________________________dollars, and has secured this obligation by depositing in the name of the Town of Sherborn
the sum of ________________ in ________________________[Name of Bank], evidenced by Bank Book No. ________,
and by depositing said bank book with the Treasurer of the Town.
The condition of this obligation is that if the Principal shall fully and satisfactorily observe and perform in the manner and
in
the time therein specified, all of the covenants, conditions, agreements, terms and provisions contained in the application
signed by the Principal and dated _____________________________________, under which approval of a definitive plan
of a certain subdivision entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
by ________________________________________________________________________________________________
dated ________________________________, has been granted by the Planning Board of the Town, with such
modifications or conditions, if any, as have been imposed by the Town acting through its Planning Board or Board of
Health, then this obligation shall be void; otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect and the aforesaid sum shall be
paid to the Town to satisfy and complete the Principal’s obligation.
In the event the Principal shall fail to perform its obligation as above set forth, the Town may use the funds in said account,
or any part thereof, to satisfy and complete the Principal’s obligation on said project, without further notice to or consent
by the Principal.
Upon completion of all the work required to be completed by the Principal as above set forth, the aforesaid bank book shall
be returned to the Principal.
In witness whereof the Principal has hereunto set his hand and seal this ____________ day of ________________,
20____.
Principal
_____________________________________
I-13
By: _____________________________________
(Title)
The ____________________________________________ Bank hereby acknowledges that it has received notice of the
Principal’s obligation under this bond, and, in the event the Principal fails to perform said obligation, agrees to pay the
Town in accordance with the provision of this bond.
_________________________________________
Authorized Signature
To be executed in four (4) copies, all of which are to be considered originals. Two (2) copies are to be forwarded to the
above Bank and one (1) signed copy returned to the Planning Board. In addition to the bank book, the Town should also
receive a written assignment of the account and a withdrawal slip signed in blank.
I-15
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM K
RELEASE OF LOTS
(Provision of Surety)
The undersigned, being a majority of the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn, Massachusetts, hereby certify that in
the opinion of the Planning Board sufficient surety has been provided to secure performance of the construction of ways
and the installation of municipal services required to serve certain lots, hereinafter designated, in accordance with the
provisions of the Covenant dated ______________________ and recorded in Middlesex County Registry of Deeds, Book
___________,
Page _________, and/or registered in the Middlesex S. Registry District of the Land Court, as Document No.________ and
noted on Certificate of Title No. ___________, Registration Book _________________, Page ________________, said
lots being shown on a plan entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
recorded with said Registry of Deeds in Plan Book ___________, Page _______, Plan No. ____________, and/or
registered in said Registry District of the Land Court in Plan Book ___________, Plan ____________, and said lots are
hereby released from the restrictions as to building and sale specified in paragraph 3 of said Covenant.
Lots designated on said plan and released hereunder:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Executed as a sealed instrument this _____________________ day of ________________________, 20______.
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
Majority of the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
_____________________________________, ss. Date: ____________________
Then personally appeared one of the above-named members of the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn,
Massachusetts and acknowledged foregoing instrument to be the free act and deed of said Planning Board, before me.
_________________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires: _________________________________________
I-16
PLANNING BOARD, SHERBORN, MA
FORM L
RELEASE OF LOTS
(Completion of Work)
The undersigned, being a majority of the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn, Massachusetts, hereby certify that in
the opinion of the Planning Board the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services required to serve
certain lots, hereinafter designated, has been completed in accordance with the provisions of the Covenant dated
______________________ and recorded in Middlesex County Registry of Deeds, Book ___________, Page _________,
and/or registered in the Middlesex S. Registry District of the Land Court, as Document No.________ and noted on
Certificate of Title No. ___________, Registration Book _________________, Page ________________, said lots being
shown on a plan entitled
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
recorded with said Registry of Deeds in Plan Book ___________, Page _______, Plan No. ____________, and/or
registered in said Registry District of the Land Court in Plan Book ___________, Plan ____________, and said lots are
hereby released from the restrictions as to building and sale specified in paragraph 3 of said Covenant.
Lots designated on said plan and released hereunder:
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________________________________
Executed as a sealed instrument this _____________________ day of ________________________, 20______.
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
___________________________________________
Majority of the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
_____________________________________, ss. Date: ____________________
Then personally appeared one of the above-named members of the Planning Board of the Town of Sherborn,
Massachusetts and acknowledged foregoing instrument to be the free act and deed of said Planning Board, before me.
_________________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires: _________________________________________
















SCHEDULE C
FEES
Approval Not Required $250 for zero or one additional lot plus $50 per lot for each
additional lot.
Subdivision Plans
Preliminary Plan $750 plus $125 per lot
Definitive Plan $1500 plus $250 per lot after a preliminary plan approval, or
$2500 plus $750 per lot if there was no preliminary plan
Applicant pays out of pocket costs, including engineering review.
Modification $500, plus out of pocket costs, including engineering review
Site Plan $750 plus out of pocket costs, including engineering review
No fee for preliminary site plan review or minor modification
$250 for major modification plus out of pocket costs, including
engineering review
Special Permit $950 plus associated and related costs, including engineering
review.
Renewal fee is $475
Scenic Road Permit $25 plus associated out of pocket costs including advertising
costs
This fee schedule was adopted by the Planning Board at a hearing held on February 9, 2011
III-1
Adopted 1981, Revised 01/17/2019
Regulations for the Use of Sherborn Conservation Land
Property under the control of the Sherborn Conservation Commission is open to the
public for peaceful enjoyment and those uses compatible with the natural environment
and consistent with the conservation purposes for which the land was acquired. While the
Commission encourages visitation, all persons are requested to stay on established trails
as off-trail use may damage the rare or endangered plants that exist on some of these
properties, may impact wildlife habitats, and can compact soils and create erosion.
Likewise, visitors with pets are encouraged to clean up their pets’ waste, as it is
unpleasant for others and contaminates water runoff.
Our neighbors are our friends. Please respect the boundaries of private property, and do
not trespass thereon without the express permission of the landowner.
Use of Sherborn conservation land is subject to the following regulations, which are
unique to land under the control and management of the Sherborn Conservation
Commission. For regulations applicable to Town Forest land, please consult the Sherborn
Town Forest website or inquire at Sherborn Town Hall.
Properties under the control of the Sherborn Conservation Commission which receive the
most use include, but are not limited to, the following: Barber Reservation, Bailey Trail,
Hildreth Schoolhouse Lot, Hopestill Reservation, McGregor Quarry, Bogastow Trail,
Leland Mill Pond Reservation, Peters Hill, Price Woodlands, Ward Parks Pond and
Hidden Meadow Reservation. If in doubt about the applicability of these regulations,
please consult the Sherborn Conservation Agent (as below).
Violation of these regulations may result in a fine not to exceed $200 and in prosecution
to the full extent of the law, as well as civil liability for damage to the property.
1. Occasional access restrictions may be necessary due to changing environmental
concerns. All users of the properties shall comply with any posted regulatory
signs (including, without limitation, signs closing certain areas or trails to all use)
and with the verbal directions of a police officer or other agents of the Town of
Sherborn. Disorderly conduct, disturbing the peace, and any action illegal under
the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or By-Laws of the Town of
Sherborn is forbidden on the properties.
2. Visitors must keep pets under control, as regulated by Sherborn General By-Law
Chapter 5A (Town Meeting 2018).
3. Unauthorized cutting or removing any plant, tree or other natural features;
hunting, killing or trapping any animal or bird; carrying or discharging of
firearms, explosives or other projectiles; defacing or injuring signs, trees, trail
markers, buildings, walls or other property; and littering is prohibited.
4. A written permit for overnight camping must be obtained in advance from the
Conservation Agent.
5. A written permit for open fires must be obtained in advance from the Sherborn
Fire Department.
6. Notification for any group activity involving twelve (12) or more persons is
requested to be given to the Sherborn Police Department in advance of the
intended use of the property.
7. In those areas in which agricultural crops, including trees and fields of hay, are
being cultivated, any act resulting in damage to such crops is prohibited.
8. Except as permitted in this regulation, no motor vehicle is allowed on
Conservation Commission property. Motor vehicle, as used herein, includes,
without limitation, a car, truck, jeep, tractor, motorcycle, motorbike, trailbike, and
snowmobile. Only the following motor vehicles may be operated on said
property:
a. Motor vehicles of the Fire Department, the Police Department, the
Department of Community Maintenance and Development of the Town of
Sherborn (or of others officially requested to assist any of these Departments),
but only in connection with the performance of official duties.
b. Motor vehicles of regional public utilities, their agents or contractors, but only
to the extent reasonably necessary to inspect, maintain, repair or replace the
pipeline or utility lines or to prevent injury to property adjacent to the pipeline
or utility lines.
c. Motor vehicles the use of which has been approved, or which are used in
connection with a project which has been approved, by the Conservation
Commission or their respective authorized designees, but only to the extent
reasonably necessary to undertake and complete such project.
Please report any problems you observe to the Sherborn Conservation Commission by
calling 508 651-2594 or emailing conservation@sherbornma.org .
SHERBORN WETLANDS REGULATIONS
TOWN OF SHERBORN CONSERVATION COMMISSION
Adopted
December 1994
Revised
2001, 2003, 2005,
1/2006, 10/2006,
9/2007, 2/2009,
6/2009, 3/20/2014,
12/4/2014, 2/16/2017
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 2
Table of Contents
Section 1 Introduction and Purpose........................................................................................... 5
1.1 Incorporation................................................................................................................... 5
1.2 Purpose and Protected Interests..................................................................................... 5
Section 2 Definitions .................................................................................................................. 6
Section 3 Burden of Proof......................................................................................................... 10
Section 4 Jurisdictional Areas .................................................................................................. 11
4.1 Resource Areas .............................................................................................................. 11
4.2 Buffer Zones .................................................................................................................. 11
4.3 Activities within Resource Areas and Buffer Zones....................................................... 11
Section 5 Performance Standards ........................................................................................... 12
5.1 General .......................................................................................................................... 12
5.2 No Alteration Zone (Inner Buffer Zone) ........................................................................ 12
5.3 Fill .................................................................................................................................. 13
5.4 Stumps........................................................................................................................... 13
5.5 Discharge from Water Filtration and Softening Systems .............................................. 13
Section 6 General Provisions .................................................................................................... 14
6.1 Expert Consultant Fees.................................................................................................. 14
6.2 Reservation.................................................................................................................... 15
6.3 Amendments ................................................................................................................. 15
Section 7 Procedures ............................................................................................................... 16
7.1 Exempt Activities ........................................................................................................... 16
7.2 Administrative Approval................................................................................................ 16
7.3 Request for Determination of Applicability................................................................... 17
7.3.1 Review Period.........................................................................................................17
7.3.2 Submission Requirements ......................................................................................17
7.3.3 Determination by Commission...............................................................................18
7.4 Notice of Intent ............................................................................................................. 19
7.4.1 Notice of Intent Form .............................................................................................19
7.4.2 Abbreviated Notice of Intent..................................................................................19
7.4.3 Procedure for Notice of Intent ...............................................................................20
7.4.4 Information to Be Shown on Site Plans..................................................................20
7.4.5 Information to Be Provided in Notice of Intent Text..............................................21
7.4.6 Information that May Be Requested During a Notice of Intent Hearing for Activity
Proposed in the No Alteration Zone (see Section 5.2) ..........................................22
7.4.7 Natural Heritage Filing............................................................................................22
7.4.8 Watercourse Alteration Notification......................................................................23
7.4.9 Notice of Intent Submission Requirements............................................................23
7.5 Site Visits ....................................................................................................................... 24
7.5.1 Site Visits Generally ................................................................................................24
7.5.2 Site Visits for Review of Notice of Intent................................................................24
7.6 Fee Schedule.................................................................................................................. 24
7.6.1 Notice of Intent (NOI) Fees.....................................................................................24
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 3
7.7 Total Fees ...................................................................................................................... 25
7.7.1 Other Fees ..............................................................................................................25
7.7.2 Filing Fee Policies....................................................................................................26
7.8 Hearings......................................................................................................................... 26
7.8.1 Public Notice...........................................................................................................26
7.8.2 Conduct of Hearing.................................................................................................27
7.8.3 Continuances ..........................................................................................................27
7.8.4 Issuance of Order ...................................................................................................27
7.9 Recording in Registry of Deeds or Land Court............................................................... 27
7.10 Orders of Conditions ..................................................................................................... 27
7.10.1 Decisions.................................................................................................................27
7.10.2 Compliance with an Order of Conditions ...............................................................28
7.10.3 General Requirements............................................................................................28
7.11 Amended Orders of Conditions..................................................................................... 28
7.11.1 Minor Changes........................................................................................................29
7.11.2 Moderate Changes .................................................................................................29
7.11.3 Significant Changes.................................................................................................29
7.12 Denials ........................................................................................................................... 29
7.12.1 Procedural Denials..................................................................................................29
7.12.2 Substantive Denials ................................................................................................30
7.13 Appeal Procedure .......................................................................................................... 30
7.14 Certificate of Compliance .............................................................................................. 31
7.14.1 Criteria ....................................................................................................................31
7.14.2 Procedures..............................................................................................................31
7.15 Performance Guarantee................................................................................................ 32
7.15.1 Procedures..............................................................................................................32
Section 8 Emergencies ............................................................................................................. 33
8.1 Definition....................................................................................................................... 33
8.2 Procedures..................................................................................................................... 33
Section 9 Enforcement.............................................................................................................. 33
9.1 Definition....................................................................................................................... 33
Section 10 Severability and Invalidity ....................................................................................... 33
Section 11 Effective Date ........................................................................................................... 34
APPENDIXES
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 4
Preface
Sherborn's General Wetlands By-Law (Chapter 17 of the General By-Laws; hereinafter referred to
as the Sherborn By-Law or By-Law) was enacted in 1979 and subsequently amended as local
legislation independent from the Commonwealth's Wetlands Protection Act, General Laws
chapter 131, §40 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). The Sherborn By-Law provides the Sherborn
Conservation Commission with the authority to regulate projects in and adjacent to wetlands. The
Sherborn By-Law does not provide specifics as to how such regulation is to be accomplished.
Specifics, including definitions, performance standards, and areas of interest, are needed to
define the bounds of the authority to regulate, as well as to protect the public interest in wetland
resources.
As the state Act gave the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection the authority to
make regulations, our local Sherborn By-Law gives the Conservation Commission the power to do
the same. The state regulations, contained in the Code of Massachusetts Regulations at 310 CMR
10.00, declare that "nothing contained (in the state regulations) should be construed as
preempting or precluding more stringent protection of wetlands or other natural resource areas
by local by-law, ordinance or regulation" (310 CMR 10.01(2)).
These regulations will be known as the Sherborn Wetlands Regulations. The fee schedule reflects
the direct costs to the Town of processing applications under the Sherborn By-Law. Detailed
requirements for submittals are set forth in Section 7 "Procedures". Forms for submittals, which
satisfy both the state and local requirements, are available at the office of the Conservation
Commission in Sherborn Town Hall. State forms are also available at the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection web site:
http://www.mass.gov/eea/agencies/massdep/water/approvals/wetlands-and-waterwaysforms.
html#4
The Sherborn Wetlands Regulations also provide details on the performance standards for
activities proposed to take place in the Buffer Zone (100 feet horizontally outward from the
upland edge of most wetland resource areas, the first 50 feet of which are a no-alteration zone).
Most of the Conservation Commission's review typically concerns proposed activities in the buffer
zone. The State wetlands regulations can be found the Massachusetts Office of Energy and
Environmental Affairs website (at http://www.mass.gov/dep/water/laws/regulati.htm as of
February 2014).
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 5
Section 1 Introduction and Purpose
1.1 Incorporation
These regulations are promulgated by the Town of Sherborn Conservation Commission
(hereinafter referred to as the Commission) pursuant to the authority granted to it under Section
5 of the Sherborn By-Law. These regulations are intended to be read together with the Sherborn
By-Law, which has many provisions that are not repeated in these regulations. These regulations
will be used to implement and enforce the Sherborn By-Law. These regulations supersede all
existing rules and practices previously applicable to procedures and proceedings before the
Commission.
All of the procedures and requirements set forth in the Act and the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Regulations at 310 CMR 10.00 et seq. are hereby incorporated and made a part of
these regulations, except where they differ from or depart from the Sherborn By-Law or these
regulations. Where the Sherborn By-Law or these regulations differ from the state regulations,
the Sherborn By-Law and these regulations will be applied in addition to the Act and state
regulations. The applicant should first address the Act and state regulations at 310 CMR 10.00 et
seq. and then supplement the application to comply with the Sherborn By-Law and the Sherborn
Wetlands Regulations.
1.2 Purpose and Protected Interests
The purpose of these Regulations is to establish definitions, presumptions, performance
standards and uniform procedures by which the Commission carries out its responsibilities under
the Sherborn By-Law. These regulations intend to utilize the Home Rule authority of the Town to
protect Resource Areas defined in the Sherborn by-law for additional wetland interests, standards
for burdens of proof, presumptions, performance standards, and procedures stricter than those
of the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (G.L. Ch. 131, §40) and Regulations thereunder
(310 CMR 10.00).
The Sherborn By-Law establishes a public review and decision-making process by which activities
affecting protected resource areas are to be regulated, in order to contribute to the protection of
the following interests:
1. quality and quantity of public and private water supplies
2. quality and quantity of ground water supplies as well as recharge and storage areas
3. prevention of pollution
4. wildlife habitat and wildlife
5. wetland ecosystem health, including protecting wetland plant habitat
6. flood control
7. storm damage prevention
8. prevention of erosion and sedimentation.
Groundwater is the predominant source of drinking water in the Town of Sherborn; therefore,
protection of Interests related to water quality and quantity including, but without limitation,
Interests 1, 2 and 3, and the ability of jurisdictional areas defined in section 4 of these
Regulations to function to protect and contribute to those Interests, is essential.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 6
Section 2 Definitions
The definitions applicable to the Sherborn Wetlands Regulations are the same as set forth in the
Act and the State regulations at 310 CMR 10.00 et seq., except for the following modifications to
those definitions and additional definitions. Some of the State definitions are repeated in this
section for ease when reading town regulations. People should consult both the State and Town
definitions. Where the Sherborn Wetlands Regulations expand on the State definition, the
Sherborn Wetlands Regulations control.
Adverse effects. A greater than negligible change to an area subject to protection of the Sherborn
By-law and its Regulations, or to one of its characteristics or factors, that diminishes the value
of that area to one or more of the specific interests protected by the By-law and its
Regulations, as determined by the Commission. “Negligible” means small enough to be
disregarded.
Agent or Administrator. Anyone appointed or assigned by the Commission to serve as its
representative.
Alter. Alter means to change the conditions of any Area Subject to protection and review under
the By-Law. The term “alter” shall include, without limitation, the following activities when
undertaken to, upon, within, or affecting the resource areas protected by this By-Law:
a. Removal, excavation, or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregate materials of any kind
b. Changing of pre-existing drainage characteristics, salinity distribution, flushing
characteristics, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns, or flood retention characteristics
c. Drainage or other disturbance of surface water level or groundwater table
d. Dumping, discharging, or filling with any material that may degrade water quality,
vegetation, or habitat in a wetland resource area
e. Placing of fill, or removal of material, which would alter elevation.
f. Driving of piles, erection or repair of buildings or structures of any kind, except work
wholly inside a building and exterior repair of existing buildings or structures which
presents no risk of alteration of land, waters, or vegetation
g. Placing of obstructions or objects in water
h. Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees, within a Resource Area or within a
Buffer Zone
i. Changing water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, or other physical or chemical
characteristics of water
j. Any activities, changes, or work that may cause or tend to contribute to pollution of any
body of water or groundwater, including without limitation, any activity that may cause
surface water runoff contaminated with sediments, chemicals, or animal wastes
k. Changes to storage of flood waters and storm water runoff waters in wetlands
l. Incremental activities that have or may have a cumulative adverse effect on the Interests
protected by the By-Law and its regulations
m. Application of pesticides (which includes herbicides and insecticides).
An acre or more of disturbance. The removal or relocation of soil or vegetation, either temporary
or permanent, of at least an acre of land (43,560 square feet). Removal or relocation of soil
or vegetation from less than an acre which is part of a plan for a larger land disturbance,
ultimately adding up to an acre or more also qualifies as an acre of disturbance.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 7
Applicant. The individual or entity filing (or on whose behalf is filed) the Sherborn Notice of
Intent or Sherborn Request for Determination of Applicability.
Bank. The land area which normally abuts and confines a water body; the lower boundary being
the mean annual low flow level, and the upper boundary being the first observable break in
the slope or the mean annual flood level, whichever is higher.
Bordering Land Subject to Flooding. The area inundated when a statistical 100-year frequency
storm causes lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams to rise from their normal courses. The
“bordering land” boundary is defined in one of three ways:
1. The boundary or high water mark of the 100-year floodplain as shown on the Sherborn
FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) flood study map where that boundary is
based on flood profile data.
2. For areas bordering other resource areas, where the boundaries of the 100-year flood
plain are not based on FEMA flood profile data, historic observations of high water flood
levels shall be used. Evidence includes high water marks, flood damage to structures or
trees, flood debris deposition elevations, written depth measurements, photos, and other
flood documentation.
3. For areas bordering other resource areas where the boundaries of the 100-year flood
plain are not based on FEMA flood profile data, and where documented historic
observations are not available, the floodplain boundaries may be based on hydrologic
calculations.
Bordering Vegetated Wetlands. Bogs, swamps, marshes and wet meadows that border on water
bodies are Bordering Vegetated Wetlands (BVWs). BVWs are areas where the soils are saturated
or inundated such that they support plants that are adapted to periodically wet conditions.
Buffer Zone. Any land within 100 feet horizontally outward from the upland edge of any resource
area other than the Riverfront Area resource.
Commission or Conservation Commission. The Conservation Commission of the Town of
Sherborn.
Commissioner. An appointed member of the Sherborn Conservation Commission.
Edge Effect. Edge effect can occur whenever two contrasting habitat types meet. The edge effect
establishes a gradient in ecological functions and values as you transition from one habitat
type to the adjacent one. Transitions can be sharp or gradual. Some examples of variations in
habitat characteristics that may be in evidence at an edge are fluctuations in soil moisture,
humidity, seed dispersal, and exposure to sunlight.
Freshwater wetlands. Wet meadows, marshes, swamps, bogs, and areas where groundwater,
flowing or standing surface water or ice provide a significant part of the supporting substrate
for a plant community for at least five months of the year; emergent and sumbergent plant
communities in inland waters; that portion of any bank which touches any inland waters.
Inner Buffer Zone. (Also referred to as the No Alteration Zone) The portion of the Buffer Zone
within 50 feet horizontally outward from the upland edge of a Resource Area.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 8
Isolated Land Subject to Flooding. An isolated depression or closed basin without an inlet or an
outlet. It is an area which at least once a year confines standing water to a volume of at least
1/4 acre-feet and to an average depth of at least 4 inches.
Limit of Work. The outer edge of the area where workers and their equipment may move about
while working on a project. The limit of work must be shown on project plans and noted on
the site by a siltation barrier or flagging.
National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES). A program administered by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency intended to minimize the impacts to water quality
and wetlands from municipally owned stormwater discharge systems.
No Alteration Zone. Presumptively the Inner Buffer Zone
Outer Buffer Zone. The portion of the Buffer Zone extending from the outer edge of the Inner
Buffer Zone to 100 feet horizontally from the upland edge of a Resource Area.
Passive Recreation. This term connotes recreational activities that do not conflict with or diminish
the interests protected by the Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law and these Regulations.
These are non-altering use of the waters and banks of resource areas and buffer zones for the
purpose of personal enjoyment, such as swimming, canoeing, sailing, scuba diving, bird
watching and, as appropriate, fishing and hunting. Recreational use of resource areas includes
observation of its plants and wildlife.
Perennial Stream. A “perennial stream” or “perennial river” is defined in 310 CMR
10.58(2)(a)(1)(c) of the Act as one that flows throughout the year, except in periods of
extended drought. It has a watershed of one-half (0.5) square mile or greater and has a
predicted low rate greater than or equal to 0.01 cubic feet per second at the 99% flow rate
duration using USGS stream Stats method or the stream has a watershed of one-half square
mile and the surficial geology of the contributing drainage to the stream at project site
contains 75% or more stratified drift.
Phase II Program. An extension of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permitting program to include, within urbanized areas, discharges from municipal separate
storm sewer systems (MS4’s), and to construction activities that disturb an area equal to or
greater than one acre and less than five acres of land (established in 2003; applicable to
municipalities with populations of 10,000 or fewer).
Prevention of Pollution. The prevention or reduction of contamination of surface water,
groundwater, resource areas or buffer zones.
Private Water Supply. Any source or volume of surface or ground water demonstrated to be in
any private use or shown to have potential for private use.
Protection of wildlife habitat means protection of the ability of any resource area (or buffer zone)
to provide important food, shelter, migratory or overwintering areas, or breeding areas for
wildlife.
Public Water Supply. Any source or volume of surface or groundwater demonstrated to be in
public use or approved for water supply pursuant to M.G.L. Ch. 111, § 160 by the Division of
Water Supply of the DEP or shown to have a potential for public use.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 9
Quorum. A majority of the members then in office.
River. Any natural flowing body of water that empties into any ocean, lake or pond or other river,
which flows throughout the year. See the state regulations 310 CMR 10.58(2) for further
definition details.
Resource Area. Any area identified as a resource area in 4.1 “Resource Areas’ of these regulations
based on the Sherborn By-Law. This term is used synonymously with areas subject to review
under the Sherborn By-Law and these regulations.
Significant. Significant means plays a role. “Significant” in the positive sense means plays a role in
the provision or protection of Interests defined as relevant by the Commission. In a negative
sense, a “significant” adverse effect means plays a role in adversely affecting the jurisdictional
area’s ability to contribute to the provision or protection of Interests defined as relevant by
the Commission.
Structures. Any thing built in a fixed location, including but not limited to houses, tool sheds,
bridges, culverts, driveways, stone walls, wooden fences, and tennis courts.
Urbanized Area. Designated by the US EPA and based on statistics from the U.S. Bureau of Census,
an urbanized area has a population density of at least 1,000 people per square mile.
Sherborn’s Urbanized Area is approximately four square miles and is located in the center of
town (see attached map in Appendix E.)
Vernal pool. A confined basin or depression which, at least in most years, holds water for a
minimum of two continuous months during the spring or summer or both, and which is free
of adult fish populations. A confined basin or depression occurring in an existing lawn,
garden, landscaped area, driveway, cultivated field, or open grazed meadow is not considered
a vernal pool.
Vernal pool habitat. A vernal pool and the area within 100 feet of the mean annual boundaries of
such pool. Such an area is an essential breeding habitat for amphibian, reptile, or other
vernal pool community species and provides other extremely important functions during the
non-breeding season for a variety of these species as well as other wildlife.
Wetland Ecosystem Health. The state within which communities of distinct character types (ex.
forested wetland, wet meadow) support a diverse inter-dependent number of organisms,
where those organisms can sustain community balance and resilience, where natural
processes of succession and senescence can continue unimpeded, and where the functions
and values of wetland resource areas are intact.
Wetlands Protection Act (WPA). Section 40 of Chapter 131 of the Massachusetts General Laws,
and as amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder at 310 CMR 10.00, et seq.
Wildlife. Any birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, fish, insects or invertebrates that are
dependent upon wetlands for a portion of their life cycles.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 10
Section 3 Burden of Proof
It is the applicant's responsibility to note those requirements and presumptions contained in
these Regulations that are, per Home Rule authority of the Town, articulated in addition to those
set forth in 310 CMR 10.03(1) and 310 CMR 10.03(2).
The applicant has the burden of proving by a preponderance of credible evidence that the work
proposed in the application will not have significant adverse effects upon the interests protected
by the Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law and these Regulations, and the Commission accepts
and approves such evidence, including but not limited to overcoming the presumptions set forth
in Section 5.
Failure to provide this evidence to the Commission is sufficient cause for the Commission to deny
the proposed project, or, at the Commission's discretion, to continue the hearing to another date
to enable the applicant or others to present additional evidence.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 11
Section 4 Jurisdictional Areas
(Areas Subject to Protection and Review)
4.1 Resource Areas
The following resource areas are subject to protection under Chapter 17, Sherborn General
Wetlands By-Laws:
1. Banks
2. Wet meadows
3. Marshes
4. Swamps
5. Bogs
6. Fresh water wetland, beach, estuary, creek, river, stream, pond or lake
7. Land subject to flooding, both bordering and isolated
8. Land under water bodies and waterways
9. Riverfront Area
In order to protect these resource areas, any altering activity within 100 feet horizontally outward
from the upland edge of a resource area (with the exception of Riverfront Area) shall be reviewed
by the Commission.
Riverfront Area is a protected resource area (which does not have a buffer zone) that is the area
of land between a river’s mean annual high-water line measured horizontally outward from the
river and a parallel line located 200 feet away in most cases. All work in the Riverfront Area is
subject to an “alternatives analysis” and must meet various performance standards. See 310 CMR
10.58 Riverfront Area for details.
4.2 Buffer Zones
Buffer zones are any land within 100 feet horizontally outward from the upland edge of any
resource area with the exception of Riverfront Area.
4.3 Activities within Resource Areas and Buffer Zones
Any alteration proposed or undertaken in a Resource Area or in a Buffer Zone is subject to
regulation under the Sherborn By-Law and requires the filing of a Request for Determination of
Applicability or a Notice of Intent.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 12
Section 5 Performance Standards
When the Commission allows work to be performed in any area subject to its review, it shall
require the work to meet certain performance standards. Performance standards are intended to
identify the standard of care to which the applicant must adhere in order to reduce the risk of
harm to the interests protected under the Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law and these
Regulations.
The Commission, at its discretion, may conclude based on specifics of the proposed alteration, the
existing site conditions, etc. that the project will not result in significant adverse effects to the
interests protected under the Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law and these Regulations, and that
the thresholds for the performance standards set out below have been met.
Performance standards vary according to the resource area affected. The Commission may
employ the performance standards contained in 310 CMR 10.00, with the following amplifications
5.1 General
Any proposed work subject to these Regulations must have no significant adverse effect,
immediate or cumulative, on the Interests defined in these Regulations or on the ability of
Resource Areas and Buffer Zones to function to protect those Interests.
5.2 No Alteration Zone (Inner Buffer Zone)
Because of its proximity to a Resource Area, any activity within 50 feet horizontally outward from
the upland edge of a Resource Area (“Inner Buffer Zone”), has a higher potential to cause adverse
effects on the Interests identified in Section 1.2, particularly protection of water quality and
quantity. Therefore, it is presumed that any alteration in the No Alteration Zone will result in
adverse effects to the interests protected by the Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law and these
Regulations. To overcome this presumption, the applicant must specifically demonstrate by a
preponderance of credible evidence that the project activities will not significantly:
1. Result in erosion and sedimentation into adjacent wetlands and water bodies;
2. Alter shading to adjacent wetlands and water bodies and water temperature regimes;
3. Reduce input of leaf litter and woody debris to adjacent wetlands and water bodies;
4. Reduce the capacity of the Buffer Zone to detain, filter and infiltrate runoff;
5. Reduce the capacity of adjacent wetlands and water bodies to support wildlife (through
the provision of essential upland habitat characteristics required by wildlife utilizing the
adjacent wetlands or water bodies); or
6. Create barriers to movement of wildlife through the Buffer Zone or from one wetland to
another;
7. Alter vegetation, plant community structure, and/or plant species composition unless as
part of a permitted mitigation effort;
8. Alter surface and subsurface hydrology as measured by alterations to:
a. peak discharge
b. runoff volume
c. infiltration capacity
d. base flow levels
e. groundwater recharge
f. direction of groundwater flow
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 13
g. pattern of groundwater flow
h. groundwater gradient
i. water temperature
j. surface water levels in ponds or confined basins;
9. Alter physical and/or chemical soil properties;
10. Alter edge effects;
11. Result in increased loading or runoff of contaminants (e.g. pesticides and road run-off) or
nutrients.
5.3 Fill
All fill used in connection with any project under the jurisdiction of the Commission will be clean
fill, containing no garbage, refuse, rubbish, industrial or commercial or municipal fill or waste,
demolition debris, or septic sludge, including, but not limited to lumber, wood, stumps, plaster,
wire, rubbish, pipes, lathe, paper, cardboard, glass, metal, tires, ashes, appliances, motor vehicles
or parts of any of the foregoing. No fill containing levels of oil or hazardous materials above GW-
1/S-1 Method 1 Standards, as described in the Massachusetts Contingency Plan (MCP)
environmental regulations as revised, will be used in connection with any project under the
jurisdiction of the Commission.
The source of any fill will be made known in writing to a member of the Commission at least one
week prior to placement at the site. All environmental reports and results of chemical testing of
such fill will be filed with the Commission at this time. The Commission reserves the right to
require specific additional chemical testing of fill by a third party, at the applicant's expense, prior
to placement at the site.
Every eighteen inches of vertical fill thickness used on site will be compacted by at least five
passes of a bulldozer or equivalently weighted machine.
5.4 Stumps
No stumps, trees, or branches generated during land clearing are to be buried on the site. The
Commission may require that applicants submit original transport bills of lading indicating offsite
transport of stumps, signed by the hauler and receiver of the material.
5.5 Discharge from Water Filtration and Softening Systems
No discharge from swimming pools, water filtration systems, water softening systems, or the
pumping out of basements is permitted into abandoned wells or cisterns, or any areas protected
by these regulations without a Negative Determination or an Order of Conditions specifically
allowing such activity.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 14
Section 6 General Provisions
6.1 Expert Consultant Fees
As provided by GL Ch. 44 § 53G, the Commission may impose reasonable fees for the employment
of outside engineers and/or other consultants, engaged by the Conservation Commission, for
specific expert services deemed necessary by the Commission to come to a final decision on an
application submitted to the Conservation Commission pursuant to the requirements of the Act
or the Sherborn By-Law.
Funds received by the Commission pursuant to these rules shall be deposited with the Town of
Sherborn treasurer who shall establish a special account for this purpose. Expenditures from this
special account may be made at the direction of the Commission without further appropriation as
provided in GL Ch. 44 § 53G. Expenditures from this account shall be made only in connection
with the review of a specific project or projects for which a consultant fee has been collected from
the applicant.
Specific consultant services may include but are not limited to resource area survey and
delineation, analysis of resource area values, hydrogeologic and drainage analysis, impacts on
municipal conservation lands, and environmental or land use law. The consultant shall be chosen
by, and report only to, the Commission and/or its Administrator or Agent.
The Commission shall give written notice to the applicant of the selection of an outside
consultant, which notice shall state the identity of the consultant, the amount of the fee to be
charged to the applicant, and a request a request for payment of said fee in its entirety. Such
notice shall be deemed to have been given on the date it is mailed or delivered. No such costs or
expenses shall be incurred by the applicant if the application or request is withdrawn within five
days of the date notice is given.
The fee must be received in its entirety prior to the initiation of consulting services. The
Commission may request additional consultant fees if necessary review requires a larger
expenditure than originally anticipated or new information requires additional consultant
services. Failure by the applicant to pay the consultant fee specified by the Commission within ten
business days of the request for payment shall be cause for the Commission to determine that the
application is administratively incomplete (except in the case of an appeal). The Commission shall
state such in a letter to the applicant, copied to the DEP. No additional review or action shall be
taken on the permit request until the applicant has paid the requested fee. The applicant may
appeal the selection of the outside consultant to the Sherborn Board of Selectmen, who may
disqualify the outside consultant selected only on the grounds that the consultant has a conflict of
interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualification
shall consist of either an educational degree or three or more years of practice in the field at issue
or a related field. Such an appeal must be in writing and received by the Sherborn Board of
Selectmen and a copy received by the Commission. The required time limits for action upon the
application shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 15
6.2 Reservation
These regulations will not be construed to limit the authority of the Commission under the
Sherborn By-Law. The Commission reserves the right to act in a manner consistent with the
Sherborn By-Law upon any matter within its jurisdiction.
6.3 Amendments
These regulations may be revised from time to time by a majority of a quorum of the Commission,
provided that one advertised public hearing has been held (previous to the vote) for discussion of
the proposed revisions, said hearing having been advertised at least 48 hours before.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 16
Section 7 Procedures
The procedures described below are designed to help the applicant and the Commission through
the review process as quickly and efficiently as possible. Close adherence to the procedures is
advised. The following procedures apply to all filings under the Sherborn By-Law (unless
otherwise specifically stated).
7.1 Exempt Activities
The following minor activities within the buffer zone and outside Resource Areas specified in the
Sherborn Wetlands Regulations Section 4.1 are not subject to regulation under the Sherborn
General Bylaw, Chapter 17 because they are initially presumed to not alter an area subject to
protection if the proposed work meets the following criteria: (a) the existing lot where the work
is proposed is for an existing single family home/residence and (b) the work is performed in a
manner that has no adverse effects to resource areas and the resulting project does not create
erosion and sediment run-off into wetland resource areas and any land disturbed by the project is
restored to previous or improved conditions for protecting wetlands and erosion and
sedimentation controls are established when needed to prevent such alterations.
1. construction of an unpaved walkway less than 30-inches wide for private pedestrian use;
2. installation and maintenance of fencing provided it will not constitute a barrier to wildlife
movement and is in existing lawn and/or landscaped areas;
3. maintenance of existing stone walls;
4. stacking of cordwood;
5. vista pruning that is conducted at least 50 feet from any Resource Area, where vista
pruning means the selective thinning of tree branches or understory shrubs to establish a
specific “window” to improve visibility and does not include cutting of trees that would
reduce the leaf canopy to less than 90% of existing crown cover and does not include the
mowing or removal of understory brush;
6. pruning and normal maintenance of existing landscaped areas;
7. mowing of existing lawns;
8. planting of native species of trees, shrubs or groundcover (but excluding lawn
turf/grasses);
9. installation and maintenance of patios and decks totaling less than 150 square-feet in
existing lawn in outer 50-100-foot buffer zone that allow water infiltration;
10. replacement of footings or sonotubes for an existing deck provided it does not take place
in unaltered buffer zone area;
11. conversion of impervious to vegetated surfaces.
7.2 Administrative Approval
For purposes of determining that a proposed project is not subject to review by the Commission
either because:
1. it will take place more than 100 feet from a wetland resource, or 200 feet from a
perennial stream or river or
2. it meets the criteria of section 7.1,
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 17
an applicant may request administrative approval. Such request shall be made in writing to the
Commission using the form specified by the Commission. A site visit to the property by the Agent
(or Administrator/Agent) may be required. The Agent shall determine whether to issue an
Administrative Approval within 21 days of the request or of the date when sufficient information
is provided. If an Administrative Approval is issued, it will be effective immediately. If issued, an
Administrative Approval will serve as a Negative Determination of Applicability for purposes of
issuing building permits or as Commission approval pursuant to Board of Health regulations. All
Administrative Approval applications shall be reported to the Commission at the next scheduled
meeting.
7.3 Request for Determination of Applicability
The purpose of the Request for Determination of Applicability (RDA) is to allow the Commission to
determine whether the proposed project will alter an area subject to protection under the
Sherborn By-Law such that the filing of a Notice of Intent will be required. After the filing of the
Request for Determination in accordance with state regulations, a Commissioner(s) or Agent will
visit the site and make a presentation to the Commission. The Commission will then vote to
determine if a Notice of Intent is required.
7.3.1 Review Period
- Resource Area Boundary Determination
Resource area boundary delineation determination shall be reviewed at the sole discretion
of the Commission or its Agent during winter conditions (snow fall and frozen ground), and
shall be reviewed only when site conditions are such that the Commission or its Agent
believes they can adequately review the relevant resource area indicators (e.g. soil,
vegetation, topography, and hydrology).
7.3.2 Submission Requirements
It is the applicant's responsibility to provide all of the information required for this review. This
information is to be included on the Request for Determination form. WPA Form 1 is available at
the Sherborn Selectmen's Office at the Town Offices or from the MA Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) web site at:
http://www.mass.gov/eea/agencies/massdep/water/approvals/wetlands-andwaterways-
forms.html#4.
Any outstanding violations, enforcement orders, remediation activities or unpaid fines applied to
a property under the Act and its regulations or the Sherborn By-law and its regulations must be
resolved to the satisfaction of the Commission prior to the submission of a Request for
Determination of Applicability for work on that same property.
The applicant must provide all information requested on the Request for Determination and:
1. Pay the required fee (see Section 7.6 Fee Schedule) and return the original to:
Sherborn Conservation Commission
19 Washington St.
Sherborn, MA 01770
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 18
2. Send a copy and the plans to:
MA DEP Northeast Region
205B Lowell St.
Wilmington, MA 01887
3. Send a copy to the property owner if the applicant is not the property owner.
4. Include a plan for the Commission that shows (at a minimum):
a. Structures on the lot
b. North arrow on lot plan, with locus map and street name
c. Location of proposed work, and distance to wetlands or other resource to be
protected
d. General vegetation types
e. Drainage directions
f. Spot elevations or contours (if available)
7.3.3 Determination by Commission
After the filing of a complete Request for Determination, the Commission shall issue a
Determination of Applicability Form 2 within 21 days. During this time, a Commissioner(s) or
Agent will visit the site. At a public meeting of the Commission, the Commissioner or Agent who
reviewed the Request for Determination and visited the site shall present his/her findings. . The
Commission will then vote, and a majority vote is required for action on the Determination. The
property owner will receive the signed Determination by mail.
If a Positive Determination is issued, meaning that the project will impact an area subject to
protection, the applicant must file a Notice of Intent in order to possibly obtain a permit for the
project. A Negative Determination means the proposed project will have a minimal impact on an
area subject to protection, and the project is approved as presented or approved with written
conditions. A Negative Determination is valid for three (3) years.
If the Request for Determination and/or the related information is incomplete or an accurate site
assessment cannot be undertaken, a Positive Determination will be issued due to a lack of
sufficient information. An applicant can waive the 21-day determination period, and a
determination will be delayed until the application is complete or an accurate site visit is possible.
7.3.3.1 Replacement Septic Systems outside the No Alteration Zone
Subject to Section 7.3.2, a replacement septic system may be permitted under a Determination of
Applicability if the proposed project meets the following conditions:
1. the wetland resource areas have been delineated and are shown on a plan
2. the proposed work is located outside the No Alteration Zone
3. the proposed septic system upgrade is not an expansion of the existing system
4. any area of disturbance during construction of the proposed system is not of a slope
greater than 25%
5. the portion of the buffer zone affected by the proposed system has been previously
altered
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 19
6. a signed, stamped engineered plan must accompany the application and must show the
proposed septic system and all components associated with the system. In addition the
plan must include the following information:
a. the wetland flags and associated buffer zones
b. contour lines at 2-foot intervals
c. the location of the erosion control barrier
d. the location of the access route to the project site
e. the location of potential stockpiles
7.4 Notice of Intent
The role of the Commission is that of a reviewing agency. It is the applicant's responsibility to
provide all of the information required for review in the Notice of Intent (NOI). It is in the
applicant's interest to submit as complete and accurate description of the project as possible to
ensure that requests for additional information do not result in unnecessary delays. In instances
where the applicant is not the owner, the Commission shall require written proof of the owner's
assent to the filing.
7.4.1 Notice of Intent Form
Filing a Notice of Intent under the Sherborn By-Law and the Act is done on WPA Form 3 Notice of
Intent, Appendices A, B, C, D, and the Sherborn Supplemental Notice of Intent Form 3/4A.
Appendices A, B, C, D and the Sherborn Supplemental Notice of Intent Form 3/4A may be
obtained from the office of the Conservation Commission at Sherborn Town Hall and can also be
found on the Commission’s website at:
http://www.sherbornma.org/Pages/SherbornMA_Conservation/index
and in the Sherborn Wetlands Regulations. WPA Form 3 may be obtained from the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection web site:
http://www.mass.gov/eea/agencies/massdep/water/approvals/wetlands-andwaterways-
forms.html#4.
7.4.2 Abbreviated Notice of Intent
An Abbreviated Notice of Intent is provided to simplify the review of projects which are likely to
result in limited impact on a resource area. This form (WPA Form 4) may be used when all of the
following apply:
1. The proposed work is within the buffer zone (only) or is within Land Subject to Flooding
(only), and will alter less than 1,000 square feet of surface area.
2. The proposed work will not result in any alteration to a wetland resource area other than
those noted in a. above.
3. A Department of the Army permit (Corps of Engineers Section 10 or Section 404) or
Division of Waterways license (M.G.L. Ch. 91) is not required.
Abbreviated Notice of Intent forms may be obtained from the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection website:
http://www.mass.gov/eea/agencies/massdep/water/approvals/wetlands-andwaterways-
forms.html#4.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 20
The Commission or their Agent may, at their discretion, require the filing of Appendix D and the
Sherborn Supplemental Notice of Intent Form 3/4A. These additional forms may be obtained at
the office of the Conservation Commission in Sherborn Town Hall, or on the Commission’s
website at:
http://www.sherbornma.org/Pages/SherbornMA_Conservation/index
and in the Sherborn Wetlands Regulations.
The filing fee for an Abbreviated Notice of Intent will follow the fee schedule for full Notices of
Intent. (See Section 7.6 of these regulations.)
7.4.3 Procedure for Notice of Intent
In addition to information already required by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the
following information is required with each Notice of Intent filed with the Commission. Omission
of information deemed pertinent by the Commission will be grounds for not opening an
advertised public hearing, or continuing a public hearing, or denying the order of conditions. For
convenience, Appendix D contains this information in worksheet form.
7.4.4 Information to Be Shown on Site Plans
All of the following will be required unless exempted in writing by the Commission.
7.4.4.1 Existing Conditions
1. Title Box to include: The date, name and address, if available, of project; the name of the
owner/applicant, the name of the preparer, a scale (at least 1 inches = 100 feet with
details), a north arrow, a reference to the assessor's map and to the parcel number
2. Appropriate engineer's or land surveyor's stamp and signature (Note: The professional
who stamped the original plans must also sign and date any revisions with the same date
as the revision date.) At least one original signature copy of each plan must be submitted
to the Commission
3. Lot size(s) and property boundaries
4. Names and property lines of abutting property owners
5. Two foot topographic contours (existing and proposed); elevation above mean sea level, if
available, or assumed elevations; location of benchmark of elevations or assumed datum
6. The border of any wetland resource area on or within 100 feet of applicant's property,
with flow directions labeled, if applicable
7. Limits of all wetland resource areas, including survey locations and numbers of
flags/stakes; note date of flagging, and name/firm of botanist
8. Delineation of buffer zone (100-foot horizontal distance from all wetland resources areas)
and of No Alteration Zone.
9. Limits of Bordering and Isolated Lands Subject to Flooding, including 100-year storm
elevation
10. Department of Environmental Management (DEM) and Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) wetlands and floodplain restrictions (FEMA maps are available at the
Conservation Commission Office, the Selectmen's Office, and Sherborn Assessors’ Office)
11. High water mark for all water bodies, from best available data (data source must be cited)
12. Top and toe of any inland bank or beach
13. Total watershed area in which site is located, all sub-watersheds on site, and on- and offsite
discharge points (projects must not alter the water runoff from the site)
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 21
14. Location, date and soil summaries of all soil borings and test pits on site; location, date
and readings of groundwater level measurements on site
15. Stone walls or other barriers located between the area of work and the area subject to
protection under these regulations
16. Locations and types of easements on site and on other properties within 50 feet of
property line
7.4.4.2 Proposed Conditions
1. Work limits and location of temporary erosion controls; delineate areas where vegetation
will be altered
2. Proposed contours and amount of fill required to be added or removed (in cubic yards
and maximum thickness); pre- and post- development grades on all slopes 4 to 1 or
steeper; locations of stockpiles
3. Construction sequence and details, including cross-sections and elevations, of drainage
structures (including but not limited to catch basins, leaching basins, dry wells, swales,
retention areas, ditches, etc.) and road crossings in wetland resource areas
4. Equipment access routes and storage/parking areas during proposed work
5. All above-ground structures, roadways, access ways, stone walls, fences, and other
physical alterations proposed; identify roadway or surface material proposed; location
and elevation of lowest floor of all structures
6. Existing natural drainage patterns and proposed alterations
7. All on-site below-ground alterations and structures, including but not limited to utility
lines, drainage structures, septic systems, cesspools, wells, and storage tanks in the buffer
zone
8. Location, capacity, and design details of on-site septic system
9. Distance of proposed on-site leaching facility to wetlands, watercourses, or other
resource areas
10. Calculated square footage of temporary and permanent alteration of wetland resource, if
applicable
11. Calculated square footage of temporary and permanent alteration of inner and outer
buffer zone
12. For new construction, location of leaching facilities on other properties within 50 feet of
the lot line, or 300 feet of the proposed project
13. For new construction, location of all existing and proposed wells on property and within
200 feet of project on abutting properties, and minimum distance to all septic systems
7.4.5 Information to Be Provided in Notice of Intent Text
All of the following will be required unless exempted in writing by the Commission.
7.4.5.1 Existing Conditions
1. Topography, soils, and geology description
2. Description of vegetation types, such as upland or wetlands community types and plant
species list
3. Section of a U.S.G.S. quadrangle map, with site location circled (i.e. a locus map)
4. Completed State delineation form known as “DEP Bordering Vegetated Wetland (310
CMR 10.55) Delineation Field Data Form” for wetland resource
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 22
7.4.5.2 Proposed Conditions
1. Description of activities, construction sequencing and estimated timetable. Include
description of future phases
2. Description of indirect and direct impacts, both temporary and permanent, on wetland
resource areas
3. Description of soil erosion, sediment control plan, and mitigation plans for impacts to
resource areas
4. Details of mitigation plans for activities in the buffer zone to limit long term indirect
impacts to adjacent resource areas
5. Description of storm water management plan, including existing and proposed drainage
areas
6. Description of wastewater management plan
7. Hydrologic calculations shall conform to Soil Conservation Service procedures
8. Wetlands creation/restoration plan, including area, with existing and proposed
topography at contours at 1-foot intervals, and plans showing proposed grading,
stockpiling, planting (indicate source of plants), and timetable
9. Volume of fill required and source of fill
7.4.6 Information that May Be Requested During a Notice of Intent Hearing for Activity
Proposed in the No Alteration Zone (see Section 5.2)
For a project that proposes to alter greater than or equal to 5,000 square feet of No Alteration
Zone, the Commission may require the applicant to provide adequate information regarding the
following so as to enable the Commission to evaluate whether the proposed activity is to be
permitted:
1. Values and functions of the Resource Area and/or Buffer Zone to protect Interests.
2. Wildlife habitat and rare species present on the site. This information may include
assessment of food, water, breeding space, shelter, security, movement and migration
space, and connections to other habitat areas.
3. A Summary or Detailed Wildlife Habitat Evaluation as defined in Appendices A and B of
the MassDEP Massachusetts Wildlife Habitat Protection Guidance for Inland Wetlands
(March 2006) conducted by a qualified wildlife biologist.
4. Reasonably practicable alternatives to the proposed activities, including reducing the
scale and scope of the project. Options that appear to be precluded only by self-imposed
constraints shall be considered as reasonably practicable alternatives.
The Conservation Commission may deny a permit if the applicant fails to provide the information
requested.
7.4.7 Natural Heritage Filing
The latest computer map showing Estimated Habitat of Rare and Endangered Species must be
included with the Notice of Intent. A filing to the Natural Heritage Office is needed if the
Estimated Habitat of Rare and Endangered Species map indicates that a proposed project lies
within the boundary of the Estimated Habitat of Rare and Endangered Species. This map can be
found online or requested from the Natural Heritage Office. If your property is located within a
polygon on the map indicating an estimated habitat, a filing to that office will be required by the
Commission.
This filing, made by the applicant, is to be made before the Notice of Intent is scheduled for a
public hearing. Closing a hearing is contingent upon written response from the Natural Heritage
Office.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 23
7.4.8 Watercourse Alteration Notification
To the extent required by FEMA, if applicant is planning to alter or relocate a river system in any
manner, it shall require a number of notification letters, which will be included in the Notice of
Intent. Letters of notification should be submitted to the following:
1. Conservation Commissions in the adjacent communities of Dover, Natick, Ashland,
Framingham, Medfield, Millis, Holliston);
2. NFIP State Coordinator
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
3. NFIP Program Specialist
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
7.4.9 Notice of Intent Submission Requirements
The applicant will submit nine complete paper copies and a complete electronic copy of the
Notice of Intent with Site Plans, supporting documentation, and a check payable to the Town of
Sherborn, in the amount set forth in the fee schedule (see Section 7.6 "Fee Schedule" and
Appendix A "Wetlands Filing Fee Calculation Worksheets) to the Conservation Commission Office
or the Selectmen's Office at the Town Offices. The applicant must also send a separate check to
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) Boston. One copy of the Notice of
Intent with Site Plans and supporting documentation must be sent to the DEP Regional Office.
The Commission must receive the completed Notice of Intent Site Plans and supporting
documents at least 14 day before the next regularly scheduled public meeting.
In keeping with the requirements of Sherborn’s General Permit under the Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES), any applicant
for a project proposed through a Notice of Intent for a property within Sherborn’s Urbanized Area
(see Appendix E), which will disturb or alter an acre or more of land, temporarily or permanently,
must show proof of submitting an EPA Notice of Intent application form to the EPA by presenting,
at the opening of the hearing before the Commission, a copy of the application, and either proof
of mailing the application to EPA by certified mail, return receipt requested, or a copy of the email
receipt from EPA for an online filing of the application. Opening the hearing is contingent upon
this proof of submittal.
Any outstanding violations, enforcement orders, remediation activities or unpaid fines applied to
a property under the Act and its regulations or the Sherborn By-Law and its regulations must be
resolved to the satisfaction of the Commission prior to the submission of a Notice of Intent for
work on that same property.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 24
7.5 Site Visits
7.5.1 Site Visits Generally
The Commission, any Commissioner, the Conservation Agent, or any person designated by the
Commission, shall have the right to enter and inspect any place, property, or area for purposes of
evaluating any request or application to the Commission, or enforcing the requirements of any
order or certificate issued under the Act, the Sherborn By-Law, or these regulations. In addition,
the Commission, any Commissioner, the Conservation Agent, or any person designated by the
Commission, may require the submittal of any pertinent data or documents deemed necessary by
the Conservation Commission. Without limiting the foregoing, the submission of any Request for
Determination or Notice of Intent to the Commission constitutes a grant by the Applicant of
his/her/its consent to entry and inspection and provision of data and documents as set forth in
this paragraph.
7.5.2 Site Visits for Review of Notice of Intent
The following markings and flagging must be in place before the field inspection, where
applicable. Failure to properly stake and mark the site may result in non-review and thus a delay
or denial of the project.
1. Edges of wetlands must be flagged with numbered flags, as reflected on submitted maps
2. House number must be visible if it is an existing house; if no house is on property, the lot
number must be posted and visible from the street
3. Property boundaries must be staked with numbered stakes at all corners
4. All proposed structures or additions, including decks, must be staked for identification
purposes at all corners; stakes must be numbered and labeled
5. Septic tank, leaching field, and well locations must be staked with labeled stakes if within
the buffer zone.
7.6 Fee Schedule
7.6.1 Notice of Intent (NOI) Fees
Refer to the following table and bullets for the complete Sherborn fee schedule; for definitions of
the Notice of Intent categories listed below, refer to Appendix A, Form A-1, “Wetlands Filing Fee
Calculation Worksheet” on page 30 of these regulations.
Overall, NOI fees involve three separate payments covering (i) a MA State-specified fee that is
divided between the State and the Town and (ii) a Sherborn By-Law fee. There are two payments
(currently by check) made out to the Town of Sherborn: one for the town share of the State fee
and one for the Sherborn By-Law fee. There is one payment for the state share of the State fee
that is made directly to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and sent to the MA DEP.
The following table summarizes the fees for the State-specified categories of activities for NOI
filings; see Appendix A for more information. The State fee is as of 1/03/2013 and is subject
change by the MA DEP; it is presented in DEP WPA Form 3 and its instructions.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 25
NOI Category 7.7 Total
Fees
Sherborn By-Law
Fee
MA State Fee
Town Share State Share
Category 1 $792.50 $682.50 $67.50 $ 42.50
Category 2 $2,737.50 $ 2,237.50 $ 262.50 $ 237.50
Category 3 $3,562.50 $ 2,512.50 $ 537.50 $ 512.50
Category 4 $5,162.50 $ 3,712,50 $ 737.50 $ 712.50
Category 5 $3,500.00 See DEP WPA Form 3 instructions
Category 6 See Appendix A See DEP WPA Form 3 instructions
7.7.1 Other Fees
1. An Amended Order of Conditions requires a fee of $500.00 to the Town; no State fee is
required.
2. An Extension of an Order of Conditions requires a fee equal to the original filing fee for
the Notice of Intent for that same project; no State fee is required.
Note: An Extension of an Order of Conditions filed when the work approved by the
original Order of Conditions has not commenced will require a fee of $50. In addition, the
applicant must pay the fees associated with recording the Extension to the Order of
Conditions, if granted.
3. A Request for Determination of Applicability requires a fee dependent on the scope of the
project, please choose from the following tiers and submit accordingly.
Basic Fee: $120.00 - The basic fee is applicable to all additions, renovations and
modifications to an existing residence or an existing single family lot, exclusive to new
subdivisions, lot reconfigurations, or establishments of an easement. Examples include:
Residence additions (such as a patio or family room), septic systems and well related
work, ancillary structures (such as a barn or a shed), and driveway
installation/reconfigurations.
Comprehensive Fee: $200.00 - All projects that do not fit the criteria required to qualify
for the basic fee shall be charged the comprehensive fee amount. Examples include, but
are not limited to, all commercial projects, subdivisions or projects establishing new
property lines or limits, dedication of easement or rights-of-way, and demolition and
removal of existing structures for reconstruction of new structures on an existing lot or
new lot.
No State fee is required.
Additional Inspections/Site Visit Fee: $30.00 - Additional site visits by the Agent, a
Commissioner and/or a Commission designee may be required to fulfill the Commission’s
work. Such visits can arise due to plan modification or other filing changes. The Basic fee
includes up to one site visit.
The Comprehensive fee includes up to two site visits. Additional site visits shall be
charged in the amount of $30 per visit. The additional site visits are required due to a
comprehensive redesign or resubmission of and application shall be either: (a) charged as
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 26
an additional site visit or (b) at the Agent’s discretion, part of a required re-application
and its corresponding fee.
Distribution Box Review Fee: $50.00 Proposals for projects consisting of only the
replacement of an existing distribution box for a septic system. All other proposed
projects shall follow the fee schedule above.
4. An Administrative Approval requires a fee of $70.00 to the Town; no State fee is required.
If a Request for Determination of Applicability (RDA) for the same activity or project is
subsequently applied for within 60 days, the RDA fee is $50.00 to the Town. If project is
determined to be exempt and no building permit is required, then no fee shall be
assessed.
5. A Request for a Certificate of Compliance requires a fee of $200.00. No State fee is
required.
6. Note: A Request for a Certificate of Compliance for approved alterations which never
commenced will require a fee of $50.
7. A Request for a Certificate of Compliance for an expired Order of Conditions requires a fee
equal to the filing fee for the original Notice of Intent or $200.00, whichever is greater.
No State fee is required.
Certificates of Compliance shall be recorded at the Registry of Deeds by or for the property owner
and the recording costs shall be paid by the property owner or his designee.
7.7.2 Filing Fee Policies
1. Fees are payable at the time of application and are nonrefundable.
2. Fees shall be calculated based on the above fee schedule and confirmed by the
Commission or its Administrator and/or Agent.
7.8 Hearings
7.8.1 Public Notice
A hearing date will be scheduled within twenty-one days of the filing of a complete Notice of
Intent. The applicant shall give written notice of the filing of an application for an order of
conditions, Notice of Intent or Abbreviated Notice of Resource Area Delineation at the time of
such filing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand delivery written acknowledgement
of receipt, to all abutters within one hundred feet of the property line of the land where the
activity is proposed at their mailing addresses shown on the most recent applicable tax list of the
assessors, including owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, and in
another municipality or across body of water and to such other persons as the Commission may,
by regulation, determine. The notice shall state a brief description of the project and the date of
the Commission hearing or meeting date if known.
At the time of the hearing and before the hearing opens, the applicant must present a list of all
abutters within 100 feet of the property line of the land where the activity is proposed, along with
an Affidavit of Service (Appendix C "Affidavit of Service") certifying that all abutters received
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 27
notice of the filing. The applicant should send notices by certified mail, return receipt requested,
and present the return receipts at the hearing meeting. (Applicants other than the property
owner must submit a statement of proof of vested interest in the property, purchase and sale
agreement, and notarized statement from the owner.)
Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given by the Commission at the expense of
the applicant, not less than five days prior to the hearing, by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation in Sherborn. .
7.8.2 Conduct of Hearing
At the time of the hearing, the applicant or his or her representative will appear before the
Commission and make a presentation relative to the Notice of Intent.
7.8.3 Continuances
Hearings may be continued at the request of the applicant or Commission. If a hearing is to be
continued to allow preparation of revised plans, all field flagging and other changes must be made
and all revised plans must be received ten days before the continued hearing.
7.8.4 Issuance of Order
Within twenty-one days of the close of the hearing, the Commission will issue an Order of
Conditions. A majority of the Commission must approve and sign written decisions. Orders of
Conditions written under the Sherborn By-Law and Regulations may be on the same form as
Orders issued under the Act.
7.9 Recording in Registry of Deeds or Land Court
The following forms, issued by the Commission, are required to be recorded in the Middlesex
County Registry of Deeds or the Land Court, whichever is appropriate:
1. Final Order of Conditions (recorded by the Conservation Commission)
2. Amended Order of Conditions (recorded by the Conservation Commission)
3. Extension Permit (recorded by the Conservation Commission)
4. Certificate of Compliance (recorded by the applicant)
Recording is done at the applicant’s expense. The Agent will inform the applicant of the amount
of the recording fee.
If the applicant desires to delay the recording of the Final or Amended Order, he or she must state
in writing to the Commission the reasons for the delay, and the estimated date of recording. The
Commission may, but is not required to, comply with the applicant's request.
7.10 Orders of Conditions
7.10.1 Decisions
Decisions will be made by the Commission simultaneously under the Act and the Sherborn By-
Law. An Order of Conditions is designed to permit the proposed construction activity while, at the
same time, ensuring that valuable wetland resources are protected from either deliberate or
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 28
accidental damage. Wetlands protection is achieved by a combination of design elements within
the approved plan and by additional conditions imposed by the Commission. The applicant must
receive the Order of Conditions, allow the mandated appeal period to elapse, and allow the
Commission’s Agent to record the Order of Conditions with the Registry of Deeds before
proceeding with any work conditioned under the Order. All construction activities must be
completed in compliance with the existing valid Order of Conditions.
7.10.2 Compliance with an Order of Conditions
Compliance with an Order of Conditions may be monitored by periodic visits by members of the
Commission or its Agent. All wetlands flags are to stay in place until the Commission issues a
Certificate of Compliance. In addition, at the time it issues the Order, the Commission may strictly
control construction activities by outlining stages of the work and by requiring periodic
inspections and proof of compliance of each separate stage. A partial Certificate of Compliance
may be required at discrete points of the project. The Commission holds the applicant to strict
accountability for complying with the conditions contained in the Order. Orders of Conditions are
valid for three years from date of issue, unless otherwise extended by the Commission. The
applicant will be charged a fee according to the Fee Schedule in Section 7.6 for an Extension to an
Order of Conditions.
7.10.3 General Requirements
The following apply to all Orders of Conditions:
1. The Order of Conditions reflects decisions made at the hearing and all information
gathered during the hearing, at the on-site inspection, and from relevant laws and
regulations.
2. Orders of Conditions are issued under both the Act and the Sherborn By-Law.
3. The Order of Conditions refers to specific wetlands values being protected.
4. The Order of Conditions will include Findings of Fact made at the hearing.
5. The Order of Conditions may include mitigation conditions.
6. Conditions may be for the construction period (e.g. hay bales for erosion control) or may
be in perpetuity (e.g. no alteration zones for erosion control and wildlife habitat).
Conditions may be structural (e.g. hay bale barrier for erosion control) or may require a
specified standard of performance (e.g. prevention of erosion).
7. Conditions may refer both to the Act and to the Sherborn By-Law or may refer only to the
Sherborn By-Law. These separate conditions shall be explicitly identified in the Order of
Conditions.
7.11 Amended Orders of Conditions
Quite often, modifications must be made to projects during construction. The Commission
recognizes the need for such changes and sets forth the following procedures for assessing them.
Because each modification is unique, it is impossible to determine in advance how any particular
change will be addressed by the Commission. With any proposed modification, the applicant will
first contact the Commission and explain the modification in writing. The Commission has the
authority to determine the appropriate category for the modification. The applicant will be
charged a fee according to the Fee Schedule in Section 7.6 for an Amended Order of Conditions.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 29
7.11.1 Minor Changes
These changes are modifications that the Commission determines have no likelihood of an impact
on any wetland resource and need only the authorization of the Commission. Applicants will
contact the Commission to request a change. If the Commission finds the change requested is a
minor modification it will record that determination in the applicant's file and mail a copy to the
applicant and the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection regional office. The
Commission will consider the following criteria in making this determination:
1. extent of modification
2. proximity to wetland
3. type of equipment required for construction
7.11.2 Moderate Changes
These changes are modifications that the Commission determines have some likelihood of an
impact on a wetland resource. These changes require an Amended Order of Conditions, which
requires a request for a public hearing, payment of a separate filing fee of $500, and abutters’
notices sent by the applicant or their agent. Following receipt of the separate filing fee, the
Commission will schedule a public hearing to be held within 21 days of the receipt of such fee and
will publish a notice thereof in a local publication in the same general manner as for a Notice of
Intent. The Commission will make a decision on the request for an Amended Order of Conditions
following a public hearing. An Amended Order of Conditions must be filed by the Commission at
the Registry of Deeds with a marginal reference to the original Order of Conditions.
The following may require an Amended Order of Conditions:
1. Decrease in the distance from resource area
2. Increase in potential for erosion
3. Decrease in the size of no alteration zone
4. Alteration of land form
5. Change in size and location of structure and appurtenances
6. Increase in amount of vegetation removed
7. Activity beyond the limit of work
7.11.3 Significant Changes
Changes that are not related to the originally permitted activity may require a new Notice of
Intent rather than an Amended Order of Conditions (that is, a deck appurtenant to a permitted
dwelling would require a separate filing). Any modification that will change or increase the
impact of the project on any wetland resource is considered a Significant Change. The applicant
will follow the procedures set forth in Section 5 "Procedures".
7.12 Denials
7.12.1 Procedural Denials
When a Notice of Intent and supporting plans are reviewed and found incomplete, or if the onsite
requirements (Sherborn Wetlands Regulations, Section 7 "Procedures") are not met, the
Commission will contact the applicant and advise him or her to address the inadequacies with an
amended Notice of Intent and/or revised plan or corrected on-site preparation before the
scheduled hearing date. The Commission may follow this recommendation with a letter
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 30
describing the inadequacies of the filing. The hearing may be rescheduled due to lack of
information.
If the applicant at the time of the hearing has not addressed the inadequacies of the Notice of
Intent filing, the Commission may deny the project for lack of information.
If the Commission finds that the information submitted by the applicant is not sufficient to
describe the site, the work, or the effect of the work on the interests identified in the Act and the
Sherborn By-Law, it may issue an Order of Conditions denying the work. The denial will specify the
information that is lacking and why it is necessary.
In writing the procedural denial, the Commission will:
1. State that the denial is specifically based on lack of information describing the site, the
work and/or the effect of the work on the interests of the Sherborn By-Law and the
Wetlands Protection Act Regulations (310 CMR 10.00).
2. List specific information needed citing appropriate sections of the Wetlands Protection
Act Regulations (310 CMR 10.00) and/or Sherborn Wetlands Regulations.
A procedural denial is without prejudice (i.e., a new Notice of Intent can be filed).
7.12.2 Substantive Denials
The Commission may deny permission for any activity within areas under its jurisdiction if, in its
judgment, such denial is necessary to protect resource areas and interests, as cited in Section 1.2
"Purpose and Protected Interests". Due consideration is given to all possible effects of the
proposal on all values protected under the Sherborn By-Law. The applicant is given opportunity
to present competent and relevant oral and written arguments to refute presumptions made in
the Sherborn By-Law and these regulations. Substantive denials are based on a reasoned analysis
of the proposed activity and the possible effects of this activity on the listed area and
environmental interests (see Section 4 "Jurisdictional Areas"). In most cases, neither the
assumption of protection nor the assumption of damage can be proven with certainty. The
Commission bases its judgment on the best scientific information available to it at the time, and in
all cases the Commission acts to protect the public interests, as defined in the Sherborn By-Law.
The Commission will give consideration to demonstrated hardship on the applicant caused by the
denial. A denial will be based upon a decision specifically to do so. A denial will be voted by
majority of those present at the hearing. The written decision will include the reasons for the
denial, citing interests protected, and relevant regulations. The written decision will be signed by
a majority of the Commission.
7.13 Appeal Procedure
An appeal may be taken from a decision under the Sherborn By-Law in accordance with the
provision of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 249.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 31
7.14 Certificate of Compliance
7.14.1 Criteria
Upon completion of the project and after two growing seasons have passed (when applicable) the
applicant shall submit a Request for a Certificate of Compliance (WPA Form 8A). The Commission
will issue the Certificate of Compliance when a project is completed within the constraints of an
Order of Conditions. The Certificate may be used to continue permanently certain conditions from
the original Order that are deemed appropriate by the Commission. The applicant will be charged
a fee according to the Fee Schedule in Section 7.6 for a Certificate of Compliance.
Any outstanding violations, enforcement orders, remediation activities or unpaid fines applied to
a property under the Act and its regulations or the Sherborn By-Law and its regulations must be
resolved to the satisfaction of the Commission prior to the submission of a Request for a
Certificate of Compliance for work on that same property.
If the project is not completed in accordance with Order of Conditions, the Commission has the
authority to withhold the Certificate of Compliance.
7.14.2 Procedures
1. Upon completion of the work permitted, the applicant requests, in writing, that the
Commission issue a Certificate of Compliance stating that the work has been satisfactorily
completed.
2. The Commission may require as-built plans stamped by a registered professional
engineer, architect, landscape architect or land surveyor, including a written statement by
such a professional certifying substantial compliance with the plans, or setting forth what
deviation, if any, exists from the plans approved in the applicable Order of Conditions.
3. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Compliance, an Agent or Commission member will
make a site inspection. All wetlands flags must be in place at the time of the site
inspection.
4. If the Commission determines, after review and inspection, that the work has been done
in compliance with the Order, a Certificate of Compliance will be issued within twentyone
days of receipt of a written request therefore, and will certify on Form 8 that the
activity or portions thereof described in the Notice of Intent and submitted plans have
been completed in compliance with the Order. The Certificate of Compliance must be
signed by a majority of the Commission. A copy of the Certificate of Compliance is sent to
the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection by the Commission.
5. If the Commission determines, after review and inspection, that the work has not been
done in compliance with the Order, it may refuse to issue a Certificate of Compliance.
Such refusal must be issued within twenty-one days of receipt of a request for a
Certificate of Compliance, must be in writing, and must specify the reasons for denial.
6. If the final Order contains conditions that continue past the completion of the work, such
as maintenance or monitoring, the Order will specify which conditions remain. These
conditions will also be specified in the Certificate of Compliance.
7. The Certificate of Compliance (together with any continuing conditions) must be recorded
by the applicant in the Land Court or Registry of Deeds, whichever is appropriate.
Certification of recording will be sent to the Commission on the form at the end of WPA
Form 8B, or its replacement.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 32
8. If the approved project was never undertaken, a Certificate of Compliance may be issued
if the applicant no longer intends to go forward with the project.
7.15 Performance Guarantee
The performance guarantee is a tool available to the Commission to insure that proposed work is
done in compliance with the Order of Conditions. The performance guarantee may be used in
large, complex projects, or where the threat to particular resource areas warrants additional
security.
7.15.1 Procedures
At the discretion of the Commission, the performance guarantee will be either in the form of a
cashier's check or a performance bond. The Commission has the authority to use any such funds
held under this section for the purposes stated by a vote of the Commission. If the performance
guarantee is in the form of a bond, the form and amount must be approved by the Commission
and the original shall be filed with the Town Clerk. If the performance guarantee is a certified
check, the Commission and applicant shall enter into an agreement as to the terms for the
disposition and use of the funds. The check shall be deposited with the Town Treasurer in a
separate account.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 33
Section 8 Emergencies
8.1 Definition
Emergency work is that which is necessary for the protection of public health, or for the safety,
repair, or restoration of property, or for the protection of the environmental interests set forth in
the Sherborn Wetlands Regulations.
8.2 Procedures
a. If immediate action is required, the Agent or a Commission member may arrange for
an immediate site visit.
b. The Agent or a Commission member will determine the nature of the emergency and
the work required to abate the problem.
c. No work beyond that necessary to abate the emergency will be allowed without the
permission of the Commission. Work necessary to carry out subsequent repairs will
be done in accordance with the requirements of the Sherborn By-Law and
Regulations. The Agent or a Commissioner will be informed of the emergency work as
soon as possible.
d. In no case will any removal, filling, dredging, or alteration authorized by such
certification extend beyond the time necessary to abate the emergency.
Section 9 Enforcement
9.1 Definition
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise alter any area subject to
review under the Sherborn By-law without the required authorization, or cause, suffer, or allow
such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise fail to restore illegally altered land to
its original condition, or fail to comply with a permit or an enforcement order (WPA Form 9)
issued pursuant to the Sherborn By-Law.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce the Sherborn By-Law, its regulations, and Orders
of Conditions and determinations issued thereunder by violation notices, enforcement orders,
and civil and criminal court actions.
Section 10 Severability and Invalidity
If any provision or section of these regulations is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid, the invalidity of such provision or section will not affect the validity of any other
section or provision, nor will it invalidate any Order of Conditions or determination which
previously has been issued.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017) 34
Section 11 Effective Date
The effective date of these regulations will be the date on which these regulations are approved
by vote of the Sherborn Conservation Commission. These regulations will apply to all Notices of
Intent, Requests for Determination of Applicability or requests for Certificates of Compliance filed
after that date.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
Appendix A: Wetlands Filing Fee Calculation Worksheets
Form A-1: Project Categories and Fees
for Notice of Intent (NOI) filed under the Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law & Regulations
The By-Law filing fees are in addition to State filing fees outlined by MA DEP in WPA Form 3 -
Notice of Intent and its instructions. Two separate checks must be made payable to the Town of
Sherborn: (1) the town share of the State fee and (2) the By-Law fee charged by the Town. As in
DEP WPA Form 3, a separate check for the state share of the State filing fee is made payable to
the Commonwealth of MA and sent to the MA DEP.
NOTE: At both the State and Town levels, a separate fee is charged for each proposed activity (and such
activities are defined by the State regulations). For example, an NOI seeking an Order of Conditions for an
addition to a single family dwelling and for a swimming pool, both in jurisdictional areas and Category 1
activities would have a By-Law fee to Sherborn of $1,365.00 for two Category 1 activities.
Category 1
For each activity, By-Law fee is $682.50
plus State fee as per WPA Form 3 ($110)
a. Work on single family lot; addition, pool, etc.
b. Site work without a house
c. Control vegetation
d. Resource improvement
e. Work on septic system separate from house
f. Monitoring well activities minus roadway
g. New agricultural or aquaculture projects
Category 2
For each activity, By-Law fee is $2,237.50
plus State fee as per WPA Form 3 ($500)
a. Construction of single family house
b. Parking lot
c. Beach nourishment
d. Electric generating facility activities
e. Inland limited projects minus road crossings
and agriculture
f. Each crossing for driveway to single family
house
g. Each project source (storm drain) discharge
h. Control vegetation in development
i. Water level variations
j. Any other activity not in Category 1, 3, 4, 5 or 6
k. Water supply exploration
Category 3
For each activity, By-Law Fee is $2,512.50
plus State fee as per WPA Form 3 ($1,050)
a Site preparation (for development) beyond
Notice of Intent scope
b. Each building (for development) including site
c. Road construction, not crossing or driveway
d. Hazardous cleanup
e. Water supply development
Category 4
For each activity, By-Law fee is $3,712.50
plus State fee as per WPA Form 3 ($1,450)
a. Each crossing for development or commercial
road
b. Dam, sluiceway, tidegate (safety) work
c. Landfills, operations/closures
d. Sand and gravel operations
e. Railroad line construction
f. Bridge
g. Hazardous waste alterations to resource areas
h. Dredging
i. Package treatment plant and discharge
j. Airport tree clearing
k. Oil and/or hazardous material release response
actions
Category 5
By-Law Fee for each activity is $3,500.00
plus State fee as per WPA Form 3
a. Docks, piers, revetments, dikes, etc. (costal or
inland)
Category 6
By-Law Fee is $3.00 per linear foot for a single
family house project (no maximum) and a
minimum of $2,000.00 for any other activity
plus State fee as per WPA Form 3
a. Boundary delineations for wetlands resources
Complete calculations on next page.
Revised March 20, 2014 for By-Law fees and
1/3/2013 for State fees (check for later State revisions).
NOTE: The Total State Fee is to be divided between the State and the Town based on
MA DEP “WPA Form 3 – Notice of Intent Instructions and Supporting Materials”. Based
on “rev. 1/03/13”, the state share of the Total State Fee is 50% of the State Fee in excess
of $25, and the remaining portion is the town share. Check for later State revisions.
Form A-2
Sherborn Conservation Commission
Wetlands Filing Fee Calculation Worksheet
For Notices of Intent filed under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and
The Sherborn Wetlands Bylaw and Regulations
Abbreviated Notice of Intent (Form 4) or Notice of Intent (Form 3):
The fee should be calculated using the following 5-step process and worksheet below:
Step 1 / Type of Activity: Describe each type of activity (see previous page for list of activities) that
will occur in wetland resource area and buffer zone.
Step 2 / Number of Activites: Enter the number of activities of each type in column labeled Step 2.
Step 3 / Individual Sherborn and State Activity Fees: Using the six project categories on the
previous page, enter the individual Sherborn activity fee in column labeled Step 3a and the individual
State activity fee in column labeled Step 3b.
Step 4 / Subtotal Sherborn and State Activity Fees: Multiply the number of activities (Step 2)
times the individual Sherborn activity fee (Step 3a) and enter the Sherborn fee subtotal in column
labeled Step 4a. Multiply the number of activities (Step 2) times the individual State activity fee
(Step 3b) and enter the State fee subtotal in the column labeled 4b. Note: If any of these activities
are in a Riverfront Area in addition to another Resource Area or the Buffer Zone, the
standard fees per activity must be multiplied by 1.5 to get base Riverfront fee amounts.
Step 5 / Total Sherborn Project Fee: Determine the total project fee payable to the Town of
Sherborn by adding the Sherborn Fee Subtotal column. Enter the total Sherborn fee in box labeled
Step 5a. Determine the total project fee payable to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts by adding
the State Fee Subtotal column. Enter the total State fee in the box labeled Step 5b.
Step 1
Type of Activity
Step 2
No. of
Activities
Step 3a
Individual
Sherborn
Activity Fee
Step 4a
Sherborn
Fee
Subtotal
Step 3b
Individual
State
Activity Fee
Step 4b
State
Fee
Subtotal
Total Filing Fees Step 5a
Total Sherborn
Fee
Step 5b
Total State
Fee
Sherborn Wetland Regulations (2/16/2017)
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
Form A-3
Sherborn Conservation Commission
Wetlands Filing Transmittal Form
(use in place of DEP Appendix B, Wetland Fee Transmittal Form)
For Notices of Intent filed under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and
The Sherborn Wetlands Bylaw and Regulations
Complete pages 1 and 2 of Sherborn Wetlands Filing Fee Calculation Worksheet and send
them along with a check for the state share of the filing fee, payable to the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, to DEP, Box 4062, Boston, MA 02211. Review of the Notice of Intent cannot
begin until the fee is received.
A. Applicant Information
1. Applicant:
____________________________________________
Name
____________________________________________
Mailing Address
____________________________________________
City / Town State Zip Code
____________________________________________
Phone Number
2. Property Owner (if different):
____________________________________________
Name
____________________________________________
Mailing Address
____________________________________________
City / Town State Zip Code
____________________________________________
Phone Number
3. Project Location:
____________________________________________
Street Address City / Town
B. Fees
Use Sherborn Wetland Filing Fee Calculation Worksheet attached.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
Appendix B
Notification to Abutters
Under The Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and
The Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law
In accordance with the second paragraph of the Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 131, Section 40, and the Town of Sherborn General Wetlands Bylaw,
Chapter 17, you are hereby notified of the following:
An abutter to your property has filed a Notice of Intent with the Sherborn
Conservation Commission seeking permission to remove, fill, dredge or alter and
area subject to protection under the Wetlands Protection Act (General Laws
Chapter 131, Section 40) and the Sherborn General Wetlands Bylaw.
Applicant: _________________________________________________
Street address and map and lot numbers where the activity is proposed:
_______________________________________________________________
Notice of the public hearing, including its date, time and place will be published at
least five (5) days in advance in a local newspaper of general circulation. The
hearing will be on:
date: ___________________________________
time: ___________________________________
Notice of the Public Hearing will be posted in the entrance hallway of the
Sherborn Town Office not less than forty-eight (48) hours in advance.
Information about the hearing may also be obtained by calling the Sherborn
Conservation Commission at 651-7863.
A copy of the Notice of Intent may be examined at the Selectmen’s Office or the
Conservation Commission at the Sherborn Town Hall.
Copies of the Notice of Intent may be obtained from (check only one):
____ The Town Office (fee charged for copies)
____ The applicant
____ The applicant’s representative, by calling (____) ____-________
between the hours of ________________ on the following days of
the week _____________________________________________.
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
Appendix C
Affidavit of Service
under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and
the Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law
(to be submitted to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection and
the Conservation Commission when filing a Notice of Intent)
I, ______________________________________________, hereby certify under the
pains and penalties of perjury that on _____________ I gave notification to property
owners within 100 feet of the property line of the lot where the proposed work is to take
place, in compliance with the second paragraph of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
131, Section 40, and the Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law, in connection with the
following matter:
A Notice of Intent filed under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and
the Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law by
_____________________________________
with the Sherborn Conservation Commission on ______________ for property
located at ________________________________________________________.
The form of the notification, and a list of the abutters to whom it was given and their
addresses, are attached to this Affidavit of Service.
_____________________________________________________________________
Name Date
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
Appendix D
Worksheets of Information to Be Shown on Site Plans
and in Notice of Intent Text
Table D-1. Information to Be Shown on Site Plans
P= Provided; N=Not Provided; NA=Not Applicable
P N NA Conditions
Existing Conditions
a. Title Box to include: The date, name and address, if available, of
project: the mane of the owner/applicant, the name of the preparer, a
scale (at least 1 inch = 100 feet with details), a north arrow, a
reference to the assessor’s map, and parcel number
b. Appropriate engineer’s stamp and signature (Note: The professional
who stamped the original plans must also sign and date any revisions
with the same date as the revision date.) At least one original
signature copy of each plan must be submitted to the Commission.
c. Lot size(s) and property boundaries
d. Names of property lines of abutting property owners
e. Two foot topographic contours (existing and proposed); elevation
above mean sea level, if available, or assumed elevations; location of
benchmark of elevations or assumed datum
f. The border of any resource area on or within 100 feet of applicant’s
property, with flow directions labeled, if applicable
g. Limits of all wetland resource areas, including survey locations and
numbers of flags/stakes; note date of flagging, and name/firm of
botanist/soil scientist
h. Delineation of buffer zone (100-foot radius from all wetland
resource areas) and no-alteration zone
i. Limits of Bordering and Isolated Lands Subject to Flooding,
including 100-year storm elevation
j. Department of Environmental Management (DEM) and Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) wetlands and floodplain
restrictions (FEMA maps are available at the Conservation
Commission’s Office, the Selectmen’s Office, and Assessor’s Office)
k. High water mark for all water bodies, from best available data (data
source must be cited)
l. Top and toe of any inland bank or beach
m. Projects must not alter the water runoff from the site: identify total
watershed area in which site is located, all sub-watersheds on site, and
on- and off- site discharge points
n. Location, date and soil summaries of all soil borings and test pots
on site; location, date and readings of groundwater level
measurements on site
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
P= Provided; N=Not Provided; NA=Not Applicable
P N NA Conditions, Continued
o. Stone walls or other barriers located between the area of work and
the area subject to protection under these regulations
p. Locations and types of easements on site and on other properties
within 50 feet of property line
Proposed Conditions
a. Work limits and location of temporary erosion controls; delineate
areas where vegetation will be altered
b. Proposed contours and amount of fill required to be added or
removed (in cubic yards and maximum thickness); pre- and post
development grades on all slopes 4 to 1 or steeper; locations of
stockpiles
c. Construction details, including cross-section and elevations, of
drainage structures (including but not limited to catch basins, leaching
basins, dry wells, swales, retention areas, ditches, etc.) and road
crossings in wetland resource areas
d. Equipment access routes and storage/parking area during proposed
work
e. All above-ground structures, roadways, access ways, stone walls,
fences, and other physical alterations proposed; identify roadway or
surface material proposed; location and elevation of lowest floor of all
structures
f. Existing natural drainage patterns and proposed alterations
g. All below-ground alterations and structures, including but not
limited to utility lines, drainage structures, on-site septic systems,
cesspools, wells and storage tanks
h. Location, capacity, and design details of on-site septic system
i. Distance of proposed on-site leaching facility to wetlands,
watercourses, or other resource areas
j. For new construction, location of leaching facilities on other
properties within 50 feet of the lot line, or 300 feet of the proposed
project
k. For new construction, location of all existing and proposed wells on
property and within 200 feet of project on abutting properties, and
minimum distance to all septic systems
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
Table D-2. Information to Be Shown in Notice of Intent Text
P= Provided; N=Not Provided; NA=Not Applicable
P N NA Conditions
Existing Conditions
Topography, soils, and geology description
Description of vegetation types, such as upland or wetland community
types and plant species list
Other relevant information
Section of a U.S.G.S. quadrangle map, with site location circled (i.e. a
locus map)
Proposed Conditions
Description of activities, construction sequencing and estimated
timetable. Include description of future phases
Description of indirect and direct impacts, both temporary and
permanent, on wetland resource areas
Description of soil erosion, sediment control plan, and mitigation
plans for impacts for resource areas
Details of mitigation plans for activities in the buffer zone to limit
long term indirect impacts for adjacent resource areas
Description of storm water management plan, including existing and
proposed drainage areas
Description of wastewater management plan
Hydrologic calculations will conform to Soil Conservation Services
procedures
Wetlands creation/restoration plan, including area, with existing and
proposed topography at contours at 1-foot intervals, and plans
showing proposed grading, stockpiling, planting (indicate source of
plants), and timetable
Volume of fill required and source of fill
Table D-3. Marking and Flagging Required Before Field Inspection
P= Provided; N=Not Provided; NA=Not Applicable
P N NA Marking and Flagging
Edges of wetlands must be flagged with numbered flags, as reflected
on submitted maps
House number must be visible if it is an existing house; if no house is
on property, the lot number must be posted and visible from the street
Property boundaries must be staked at all corners
All proposed structures or additions, including decks, must be staked
for identification purposes at all corners; stakes must be numbered and
labeled
Septic tank, leaching field, and well locations must be staked with
labeled stakes if within the buffer zone
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
Appendix E – Map of Sherborn’s Urbanized Area (shaded area)
Sherborn’s urbanized area is bordered southerly by Woodland and Snow Streets, westerly
by Greenwood Street and Old Orchard Road, northwesterly by Maple Street, extends east
of South Main Street to Farm Road, Great Rock Road, Peckham Hill Road, and southerly
to the intersection of Forest and Snow Streets. A smaller section of urbanized area
extends along North Main Street and is bordered northerly by Coolidge Street, Everett
Street, southeasterly along Indian Brook to Lake Street to Eliot Street, westerly on Butler
Street back to North Main Street.
Sherborn Form 3/4A – Notice of Intent
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
Town of Sherborn
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
Sherborn Form 3/4A – Notice of Intent – Supplementing WPA
Notice of Intent Forms and Required for Commission Review
Under Sherborn General Wetlands By-Law and Regulations for
Any Altering Activity in Resource Areas and Buffer Zones.
General Information
Applicant:
Name
Mailing Address
City/Town
State Zip Code
Phone Number
Fax Number
E-Mail Address
Representative (if any):
Name
Mailing Address
City/Town
State Zip Code
Phone Number
Fax Number
E-Mail Address
Property Owner (if different from applicant):
Name
Mailing Address
City/Town
State Zip Code
Phone Number
Fax Number
E-Mail Address
Introduction
Any activity proposed or undertaken, which, in
the judgment of the Commission, alters a
resource area or buffer zone in Sherborn is
subject to regulation under the Sherborn
General Wetlands By-Law [“Sherborn By-
Law”] and regulations adopted thereunder.
For purposes of review under the Sherborn
By-Law, any such altering activity requires the
filing of a WPA Notice of Intent Form 3 or 4,
and the filing of this form with the Sherborn
Conservation Commission.
In addition to information already required on
WPA Notice of Intent Form 3 or 4, each Notice
of Intent filed with the Commission for review
under the Sherborn By-Law requires a
complete submission of all information as
Sherborn Form 3/4A – Notice of Intent
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
provided in section 5.2 of the Sherborn
Wetlands Regulations.
Omission of information deemed pertinent by
the Commission will be grounds for not
opening an advertised public hearing, or
continuing a public hearing, or denying the
permit.
The purpose of this form is to ensure that the
applicant strictly complies to the greatest
extent possible with the duty to submit to the
Commission all information required under
section 5.2 of the Sherborn Wetlands
Regulations in advance of an advertised public
hearing.
Required Information Worksheets
Applicants shall submit together with this Form
completed Sherborn Wetlands Regulations
“Appendix D Worksheets of Information to Be
Shown on Site Plans and in Notice of Intent
Text” (copy attached). Each box shall be
checked by the Applicant to indicate whether
information has been “Provided,” “Not
Provided,” or “Not Applicable.” For any box
checked “Not Provided” or “Not Applicable,”
Applicant shall explain briefly why information
is not provided or not applicable (attach
additional sheets).
Burden of Proof
The Applicant has the burden of proving by a
preponderance of credible evidence that the
work proposed in the application does not
have significant adverse effects upon wetlands
interests protected by the Sherborn By-Law.
At its discretion, the Commission may deny a
proposed project or continue the hearing to
another date to enable the Applicant or others
to present additional evidence.
The Applicant shall summarize briefly all
evidence that the applicant submits supports a
finding that the work proposed in the
application does not have significant adverse
effects upon wetlands interests protected by
the Sherborn By-Law (attach additional
sheets).
In preparing this summary, the Applicant shall
note that it is presumed that significant
adverse effects on the interests protected by
the Sherborn By-Law result from any work or
alteration within a resource area or within a
minimum of 50 feet horizontally outward from
the upland edge of a resource area other than
the riverfront area (the No Alteration Zone),
unless the Applicant demonstrates by credible
evidence that such significant adverse effect
will not occur, and the Commission accepts
and approves such evidence.
The Applicant shall also note and address in
the summary required in this section that
buffer zones to resource areas are subject to
protection under the Sherborn By-Law to
maintain a continuous cover of locally
indigenous vegetation that shall:
? Reduce water pollution
? Slow surface water runoff to reduce soil
erosion and siltation of surface waters
? Maintain ambient shade conditions to
preserve natural water temperature
regimes to protect indigenous aquatic
amphibian and reptilian life
? Provide wildlife habitat and corridors for
wildlife movement
? Act as a filter zone to protect water
supplies and prevent pollution.
Requests for Exemption in Writing
If Applicant seeks an exemption in writing from
the Commission for any required information
by this form and under section 5.2 of the
Sherborn Wetlands Regulations, Applicant
shall explain briefly why exemption is
requested (attach additional sheets).
Hardship
The Commission will give consideration to
demonstrated hardship on the applicant
caused by a denial. If pertinent, Applicant
shall explain briefly all factors
demonstrating hardship that applicant
submits the Commission ought to consider
(attach additional sheets).
Sherborn Form 3/4A – Notice of Intent
Sherborn Wetland Regulation (2/16/2017)
Signatures and Submittal Requirements
I hereby certify under penalties of perjury that
the information provided in response to the
foregoing is true and complete to the best of
my knowledge.
Signature of applicant Date
Signature of property owner Date
Signature of representative Date
Two copies of this completed form, including
all supporting information, must be sent to the
Sherborn Conservation Commission by
certified mail or hand delivery.