Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties and enforcement — See Ch. 46.
§ 1-1. Title, authority and amendments.
§ 1-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of these bylaws, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
DEPARTMENT — A board, committee and commission of the Town and any
office thereof.
DRIVER — The person having the charge or control of a vehicle upon a
public or private street, way, off-road, sidewalk or path.
HEAD OF DEPARTMENT — The person who has responsibility for
supervision of the day-to-day activities of the department.
OWNER — As applied to a building or to land, a part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant, and tenant by the entirety of the whole or
of a part of the building or land.
PERSON — Individuals, corporations, trusts, societies, associations,
partnerships and individual business proprietorships.
PUBLIC BUILDING — All buildings belonging to or under the control of the
Town of South Hadley or any of its departments.
PUBLIC PLACE — All commons, parks, playgrounds, buildings, and public
lands belonging to or in the charge of the Town of South Hadley, or any of its
Title. These bylaws shall constitute the Bylaws of the Town of South
Hadley, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
A.
Authority. These bylaws have been approved by the Town of South
Hadley, Massachusetts, under authority granted by the Attorney
General of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
B.
Amendments. These bylaws may be amended from time to time as
authorized by the General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and adopted by the Town Meeting of the Town of South
Hadley.
C.
1:1
departments, and those portions of public squares, parking lots and places
which do not form traveled parts of public ways.
SELECTBOARD — Includes the term "Board of Selectmen" whenever so
used in the laws of the commonwealth.
SIDEWALK — Any sidewalk, footpath, bicycle path or other path commonly
used by pedestrians, situated outside that portion of a street commonly used
by vehicles for travel whether or not the sidewalk has been wrought and
constructed by or under the authority of the Town of South Hadley.
SOLICITATION — Seeking to raise funds or sell or obtain orders for goods
or services from persons in residences within the Town, not including
the weekly or daily house delivery of newspapers. The term "commercial
soliciting" shall mean soliciting in connection with a business or profitmaking
venture.
STREET — A public way, highway, Town way, alley, square, lane, court,
crossroad, sidewalk, and a part of a public place that forms a traveled part
of a highway or public way.
TOWN — The Town of South Hadley.
TOWN OFFICER — Any individual, either elected or appointed, serving as a
member of any committee, board, authority, or trusteeship of the Town.
VOTER — A duly registered voter of the Town of South Hadley.
§ 1-3. Rules for interpretation.
§ 1-4. Provisions of general applicability.
Singular and plural. A word in the singular includes the plural and a
word in the plural includes the singular.
A.
Gender. A word in either the masculine or feminine gender shall include
the other.
B.
Severability. If any of the provisions of these bylaws or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity
shall not affect other provisions of the bylaws, or the application of
such other provisions which can be given effect without the invalid
provision or application thereof, and for this purpose the provisions of
these bylaws are severable.
C.
Powers. A Town officer has the powers that are given to the officer by
these bylaws and that are given to an officer of that kind by the General
Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Notwithstanding the
definition of "Town officer" in § 1-2 of this article, no individual member
of a committee, board, authority or trusteeship shall have the power to
bind the Town of South Hadley or any committee to any official action
unless duly authorized.
A.
§ 1-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 1-4
1:2
§ 1-5. Effect on prior actions.
These bylaws shall not retroactively affect any act that has been done,
any right that has accrued, any penalty that has been incurred, any suit,
prosecution or proceeding that is pending, or the tenure of office of a person
who holds office upon the effective date of these bylaws.
§ 1-6. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 7
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission regulations — See
Ch. 305.
Council on Aging regulations — See Ch. 310.
Deputy. If a power has been given to a Town officer, the officer has
authority, with the consent of the Selectboard, to designate a specific
person to exercise the power as a deputy of the officer.
B.
Acting officer. If a power has been given to a Town officer, and if that
office is vacant, the person, if any, who has been granted authority
to act as that officer by consent of the Selectboard shall also have
authority to exercise that power.
C.
Relation to Massachusetts General Laws. If a conflict exists between a
provision in these bylaws and the laws of the commonwealth, the laws
of the commonwealth shall control.
D.
Any person who violates a provision of any bylaw or rule and regulation
of the Town, whereby any act or thing is enjoined or prohibited or
required, shall, unless other provision is expressly made, be liable to a
penalty not exceeding $300 for each offense after notice by the Town
to cease or perform, as applicable. Each day any such violation of
these bylaws shall continue after such notice shall constitute a separate
offense.
A.
All violations may be enforced or violations written by the South Hadley
Police Department. However, or further where appropriate or related to
the function of the department, violations may be written by the South
Hadley Health Department, Building Department and Waste Water
Treatment Department for violations generally considered to be within
their area of responsibility. [Added 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
B.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3

ARTICLE I
Appointed by Selectboard
§ 7-1. Appointment, term, qualifications and removal.
§ 7-2. Whiting Street Fund Commissioners.
§ 7-3. Board of Registrars.
In addition to those committees appointed by the Selectboard as
required by Massachusetts General Laws, the Selectboard may from
time to time appoint such other committees as it may believe prudent
for the governance of the Town.
A.
Appointees shall serve until the later of a specified term determined
by the Selectboard or until a successor is appointed unless otherwise
provided by statute or these bylaws. Unless otherwise provided below,
if the term of any committee or board is for more than one year and
has not been previously staggered or is to be reformed, the Selectboard
shall appoint in the first year as close as is possible to 1/3 of the
members for one year, 1/3 of the members for two years and 1/3 of the
members for three years, and thereafter appoint members to three-year
terms. In the event of a vacancy by removal, resignation or otherwise,
the Selectboard may appoint a member to complete that term, subject
to reappointment thereafter.
B.
Members of committees or Boards of the Town must be voters in Town,
unless otherwise provided for by Massachusetts General Laws or by
these bylaws.
C.
The Selectboard may, at any time, by majority vote, remove any
committee or board member appointed under this article, for cause,
including on account of a conflict of interest or failure to attend
committee or board meetings or attend to committee or board business.
No member shall be removed absent an opportunity for the member
to resign or appear at a hearing before the Selectboard, provided that
a written statement setting forth specific reasons for such removal
is filed with the Town Clerk and a copy thereof is delivered to or
sent by certified mail to said committee or board member at least
five days before the date of said proposed hearing. The actions of the
Selectboard shall be final.
D.
Duties. The Whiting Street Fund Commissioners shall distribute annual
fund income to any residents who are indigent and void of any form of
financial aid or assistance.
A.
Membership and term. The Whiting Street Fund Commissioners shall
consist of five members, each of whom shall serve for a term of one
year.
B.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:5
§ 7-4. Council on Aging.
§ 7-5. Conservation Commission.
Duties. The Board of Registrars shall perform duties enumerated in
MGL c. 51, § 15.
A.
Membership and term. The Board of Registrars shall consist of three
members, each of whom shall serve for a term of three years, pursuant
to MGL c. 51, § 15. The Town Clerk shall also serve as an ex-officio
member.
B.
Duties. The Council on Aging shall perform the duties enumerated in
MGL c. 40, § 8B. In addition, it shall:
(1) Identify the total needs of the community's elderly population;
Act as a provider of information, referral, counseling, nutrition and
health needs that will encourage independence, participation and
community involvement;
(2)
Design, advocate and/or implement programs for the elderly of
the community, including providing meaningful education, cultural,
social, recreational, and volunteer activities which will foster
individual growth and serve the life of the community;
(3)
Educate the community and enlist support and participation of all
citizens about elder needs; and
(4)
Be responsive to the changing needs of the elderly in the
community, in cooperative communication with community
organizations, agencies and individuals.
(5)
A.
Membership and term. The Council on Aging shall consist of 11
members, a majority of whom shall be at least age 60. The term of
appointment shall be three years. Members shall not serve more than
two consecutive three-year terms, or more than seven consecutive
years. Previous members shall become eligible for reappointment after
one year of absence. Honorary members may be appointed by the
Council in recognition of meritorious service to the Council.
B.
Duties. The Conservation Commission will perform duties as
enumerated in MGL c. 40, § 8C and MGL c. 131, § 40.
A.
Membership and term. The Conservation Commission shall consist of
not fewer than three members and not more than seven members, each
of whom shall be appointed for a term of three years.
B.
Associate members. The Selectboard shall also appoint up to two
associate non-voting members to the Conservation Commission for a
term not to exceed three years. Failure to have served as an associate
member shall not constitute a disqualification for appointment to fill a
vacancy in the Conservation Commission.
C.
§ 7-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 7-6
1:6
§ 7-6. Recreation Commission.
§ 7-7. (Reserved)1
§ 7-8. Cable Television Advisory Committee.
§ 7-9. Channel Marking Committee.
§ 7-10. Trustees of the Old Firehouse Museum.
§ 7-11. Historical Commission.
Duties. The Recreation Commission shall perform duties as enumerated
in MGL c. 45, § 14.
A.
Membership and term. The Recreation Commission shall consist of
seven members, each of whom shall be appointed for a term of three
years.
B.
Duties. The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall serve as a liaison
between the Town's cable provider(s) and the Selectboard; review
proposed and existing cable contracts; advocate with the Town's cable
provider(s) on behalf of the Town and its citizens; network with
municipal peer groups; and anticipate future cable needs.
A.
Membership and term. The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall
consist of five members serving three-year staggered terms.
[Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
B.
Duties. The Channel Marking Committee shall work with other nearby
riverfront communities to mark safe boating channels in the
Connecticut River.
A.
Membership and term. The Channel Marking Committee shall consist
of three members, each of whom shall be appointed for a term of three
years.
B.
Duties. The Trustees of the Old Firehouse Museum shall ensure that the
building and its contents are maintained in good condition, and shall
make provisions for reasonable public access.
A.
Membership and term. The Trustees of the Old Firehouse Museum shall
consist of nine members (five from the South Hadley Historical Society
and four from the general public), each of whom shall be appointed for
a term of three years.
B.
Duties. The Historical Commission shall perform duties as enumerated
in MGL c. 40, § 8D. The Commission shall, upon request or on its
own initiative, provide the Planning Board, Conservation Commission,
and other municipal boards and committees with an assessment as to
A.
1. Editor's Note: Former § 7-7, Forestry Committee, was repealed 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13.
§ 7-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:7
§ 7-12. Canal Park Committee.
§ 7-13. Traffic Sign Committee.
§ 7-14. South Hadley Cultural Council.
the impact of proposed developments on places of historical and/or
archaeological significance.
Membership and term. The Historical Commission shall consist of
seven members, each of whom shall be appointed for a term of three
years.
B.
Duties. The Canal Park Committee will: [Amended 1-11-2017 STM by
Art. 20]
Monitor the maintenance and safety of the Bicentennial Canal Park
and periodically report conditions as such to the Selectboard.
(1)
Document and publicize the historical importance of the South
Hadley Canal.
(2)
Advocate for the protection, conservation, and preservation of the
remains of the old canal bed, locks, and gatehouses along its entire
length.
(3)
Develop the park's potential as a recreational and significantly
unique educational attraction for residents and visitors.
(4)
A.
Membership and term. The Canal Park Committee shall consist of
seven members with staggered terms, three of whom shall initially be
appointed for a three-year term, two for a two-year term and two for a
one-year term. All future appointments shall be for three years.
B.
Duties. The Traffic Sign Committee shall review requests from Town
departments and citizens regarding traffic signs, speeding, traffic
control and hazardous situations and make nonbinding
recommendations to the Selectboard relative to same for its approval.
A.
Membership and term. The Traffic Sign Committee shall consist of
three members with a term consistent with their position. The members
of the Committee shall consist of the Town Engineer, the DPW
Superintendent and the Chief of Police. In the event of a vacancy(s), the
Town Administrator will fill the void to allow a quorum. Anyone in the
"acting" capacity in regards to the aforementioned positions will have
authority to fully participate on this committee. All meetings to discuss
requests will be posted in accordance with open meetings laws2 and
every reasonable attempt will be made to invite and inform interested
parties of said meeting.
B.
2. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
§ 7-11 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 7-14
1:8
§ 7-15. Board of Appeals.
§ 7-16. Golf Commission.
Duties. The Council has the responsibility to promote and encourage
the arts and to receive, obligate and disburse funds from the State
Arts Lottery Fund, as enumerated in MGL c. 10, § 58. The Council
shall abide by the regulations of the Massachusetts Cultural Council. In
addition to the foregoing, the Council is to identify and promote cultural
activities, communicate awareness of art and cultural activities, and
work with other entities and individuals to establish a plan and
framework for further development and promotion of cultural
opportunities.
A.
Membership and term. The Council shall consist of not fewer than
five members and not more than nine members, each of whom shall
be appointed for a term of three years. A person is not eligible to be
appointed to more than two consecutive terms, but may be reappointed
after a one-year interval. The Selectboard may also appoint up to two
associate non-voting members for terms not to exceed three years.
B.
Duties. The Board of Appeals shall perform duties as enumerated in the
laws of the commonwealth.
A.
Membership and term. The Board of Appeals shall consist of three
members plus two non-voting associates, each of whom shall be
appointed for a term of three years.
B.
Duties. The South Hadley Golf Commission shall advise the Selectboard
on the operation of golf, policies and fees, capital purchases, finances,
staffing and general management within the Town of South Hadley
and shall promote and operate golfing programs and other recreational
activities as may be deemed in the best interest of the Town. The South
Hadley Golf Commission shall prepare and submit an annual report of
its activities to the Selectboard.
A.
Membership and term. The South Hadley Golf Commission shall consist
of seven members, each of whom shall be appointed for three-year
terms. Where possible, the Selectboard shall endeavor to appoint
members to the Commission who represent a cross-section of the
community, course neighbors, and/or users of the golf course.
B.
The Selectboard may appoint alternates as it deems necessary, who
shall serve for two terms each and who, when present, may be counted
for the purpose of creating a quorum if necessary and may vote if one
or more of the seven members are unavailable, absent or choose to
abstain because of a conflict of interest.
C.
Any member of the Commission may be removed by the Selectboard
after a public vote. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by the
D.
§ 7-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-16
1:9
§ 7-17. Associate Planning Board members. [Amended 5-10-2017
ATM by Art. 13]
The Selectboard and the members of the Planning Board shall appoint an
associate voting member in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 41,
§ 81A for filling a vacancy occurring in the Board.
§ 7-18. Bylaw Review Committee.
§ 7-19. Town Meeting Review Committee.
A Town Meeting Review Committee shall be appointed every five years
beginning in 2015. Said committee shall include the Town Moderator, one
representative each from the Selectboard, School Committee,
Appropriations Committee, Planning Board, three Town Meeting members
and up to four registered voters who are not Town Meeting members to be
appointed by the Selectboard. Said committee shall report its findings and
recommendations regarding ways and means to improve the effectiveness
and efficiencies of Town Meeting to the Selectboard within six months of its
appointment or such further time as the Selectboard may grant.
§ 7-20. Master Plan Implementation Committee.
expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner
of original appointment.
Duties. The Bylaw Review Committee shall meet as needed to review
and recommend new bylaws or amendments to these bylaws.
A.
Membership and term. The Bylaw Review Committee shall consist of
up to seven members, with a quorum consisting of a simple majority of
members duly appointed, each of whom shall be appointed for a term
of three years. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
B.
Duties. The Master Plan Implementation Committee shall be
responsible for managing and reporting on the implementation of the
Town's current Master Plan.
A.
Membership. The Master Plan Implementation Committee shall consist
of no fewer than five members and no more than nine members to be
appointed jointly by the Selectboard and Planning Board. Membership
of the Committee shall consist of the following:
At least five members who are Town residents who individually
apply for membership on the committee. Three of these initial
appointments shall be from persons who served on the
Comprehensive Plan Advisory Committee.
(1)
Up to four members chosen from nominations submitted by various
boards, committees, and commissions and other municipal bodies.
(2)
B.
§ 7-16 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 7-20
1:10
§ 7-21. (Reserved)3
§ 7-22. (Reserved)4
§ 7-23. Sustainability and Energy Commission. [Amended 5-10-2017
ATM by Art. 13]
Terms. Members of the Master Plan Implementation Committee shall
be appointed for three-year terms. Initial appointments shall provide
for staggered terms, with 1/3 of the initial appointments being for
one year, two years, and three years. Upon expiration of an initial
appointee's term, the subsequent appointment shall be for a three-year
term.
C.
Duties. The Sustainability and Energy Commission shall serve to
provide a forum to achieve high levels of energy efficiency, energy
and natural resource sustainability and guard against the effects of
energy and natural resource disruption/depletion and climate change in
accordance with the Town's Master Plan.
A.
Membership. The Commission shall consist of five members appointed
by the Selectboard for three-year staggered terms.
B.
3. Editor's Note: Former § 7-21, Community and Economic Development Commission, was
repealed 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13.
4. Editor's Note: Former § 7-22, Open Space Committee, was repealed 5-10-2017 ATM by Art.
13.
§ 7-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-23
1:11

ARTICLE II
Other Appointments
§ 7-24. (Reserved)5
§ 7-25. Appropriations Committee.
Duties. The Appropriations Committee shall conduct a public hearing
and consider all articles involving the expenditure, appropriation,
raising or borrowing of money in any warrant for any Town Meeting
held during its term of office, and make report thereon, in writing,
together with its recommendations to the meeting held to consider
such article or articles. This public hearing shall be held not less
than 12 days prior to an annual meeting and five days prior to a
special meeting. It shall be the duty of the Committee to investigate the
cost of maintenance and expenditures of the different Town officers in
matters pertaining to the appropriations for their departments and to
recommend, in detail, the amounts to be appropriated for the ensuing
year. No action shall be taken on the expenditure, appropriation, raising
or borrowing of money, until such proposition has been submitted to the
committee and report made by the committee to the meeting at which
action is to be taken. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
A.
Appointment; membership; term; organization. The Town Moderator
shall appoint the Appropriations Committee. The Appropriations
Committee shall consist of nine members, all of whom shall be voters
in the Town, but none of whom shall hold an elective Town office other
than Town Meeting member. Each member shall be appointed for a
term of three years, with 1/3 of the Committee appointed annually.
In the event of a vacancy by removal, resignation or otherwise, the
Moderator shall fill the vacancy in accordance with Chapter 72, Article
III, of the Town Code. The committee shall elect a Chair and Secretary
at the first committee meeting after the Annual Town Meeting.
B.
Removal. The Moderator may, at any time, remove any member of the
Appropriations Committee after a meeting or an opportunity therefor,
provided that a written statement setting forth specific reasons for such
removal is filed with the Town Clerk and a copy thereof is delivered to
or sent by certified mail to said official at least five days before the date
of said proposed hearing. The action of the Moderator shall be final.
C.
The Appropriations Committee shall be advised of all Capital
Committee recommendations prior to Town Meeting. [Added
5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
D.
The Appropriations Committee Chair will work with the Town
Administrator to make background information available for any
appropriation or budget request to be presented at Annual Town
Meeting no less than 15 days before said meeting or five days before
E.
5. Editor's Note: Former § 7-24, Personnel Board, was repealed 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13.
§ 7-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-25
1:13
§ 7-26. Capital Planning Committee.
a Special Town Meeting. The Town Administrator will post relevant
budget material to the Town website no later than November 30 for
the successive fiscal year or as directed by the Selectboard. [Added
5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
Membership and term. The Capital Planning Committee will consist of
nine members, each of whom shall be appointed for a three-year term,
and shall consist of three individuals appointed by the Selectboard,
two members appointed by the School Committee, three individuals
appointed by the Appropriations Committee, and one member
appointed by the Planning Board. The Committee shall choose its own
officers, and in the event of a vacancy by removal, resignation or
otherwise, the remaining Committee members shall have the power to
fill the vacancy for the balance of that term. [Amended 5-10-2017
ATM by Art. 13]
A.
Duties.
The Committee shall study and make recommendations with
respect to proposed capital projects and improvements involving
major nonrecurring tangible assets and projects which:
Are purchased or undertaken at intervals of not less than fiveyears;
(a)
(b) Have a useful life of at least five years; and
(c) Cost over $10,000.
(1)
The Capital Planning Committee will on an annual basis request
all departments or boards to update the "Five Year Plan" entries,
to indicate completed projects, adjusted need, change of cost
estimates or other related information. The Town Administrator or
his/her designee will assist and facilitate the collection of material,
attend meetings when requested and provide updates to the
Selectboard or the public about projects or inquiries from the
Capital Planning Committee. The plan will be available on the Town
website and updated appropriately by the Town Administrator at
the direction of the Capital Planning Committee Chair or the
Selectboard. The plan should be considered a "draft" by its very
nature. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
(2)
B.
Report to Selectboard. The Committee shall prepare a report
recommending a capital planning budget for the next fiscal year and
a capital planning program including recommended capital
improvements for the following five fiscal years. The report shall be
submitted to the Selectboard for its consideration and approval. The
board shall submit its approved capital budget to the Annual Town
Meeting for adoption by the Town. No appropriation shall be voted for a
capital improvement requested by a department, board or commission
C.
§ 7-25 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 7-26
1:14
unless the proposed capital improvement is considered in the
committee's report or the committee shall have submitted a report to
the Selectboard explaining the omission.
Approval and implementation of report. Such capital planning report,
after its adoption, shall permit the expenditure on projects included
therein of sums from departmental budgets for surveys, architectural
or engineering advice, options or appraisals; but no such expenditure
shall be incurred on projects which have not been so approved by the
Town through the appropriation of sums in the current year or in prior
years or for preliminary planning for projects to be undertaken more
than five years in the future. Nothing herein shall restrict the School
Committee from approving an expenditure for a capital project out of a
previously approved annual appropriation by Town Meeting.
D.
Report of recommendation to Town Meeting and residents. The
Committee's report and the Selectboard's recommended capital budget
shall be published and made available in a manner consistent with the
distribution of the Town budget.6
E.
6. Editor's Note: Former § 7-27, Town Meeting Electronic Advisory Committee, and Art. III,
Agricultural Commission, which immediately followed this section, were repealed
5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13.
§ 7-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-26
1:15
Chapter 18
ELECTIONS AND ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 18-1. Annual election. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
The annual election of Town officers shall be held on the second Tuesday
of April of each year. The Selectboard may adjust this schedule to
accommodate religious holidays. The Selectboard must vote to make the
change 90 days prior to the election and inform the Town Clerk in writing.
§ 18-2. Voting hours and locations.
The location of the polls and the hours of opening and closing shall be set
by order of the Selectboard.
§ 18-3. Voting precincts.
There shall be five voting precincts containing the metes and bounds
description set forth below:
Precinct A.
SOUTHERN BOUND: Connecticut River and Chicopee City line.
EASTERN BOUND: Memorial Drive, Willimansett Street, Granby Road,
Lyman Street.
NORTHERN BOUND: McKinley Avenue, Newton Street, Purple Heart
Drive.
WESTERN BOUND: Bardwell Street, Canal Street, Route 202 and
Purple Heart Drive.
A.
Precinct B.
SOUTHERN BOUND: Route 202-Purple Heart Drive, Canal Street.
EASTERN BOUND: Bardwell Street, Purple Heart Drive, North Main
Street, Brainerd Street, College Street.
NORTHERN BOUND: Hadley Street, Ferry Street.
WESTERN BOUND: Connecticut River.
B.
Precinct C.
SOUTHERN BOUND: North Main Street, Route 202-Purple Heart
Drive, Newton Street, McKinley Avenue, Lyman Street.
EASTERN BOUND: Granby Road, Sunset Avenue, Dale Street, Lloyd
Street, Richview Avenue, Belmont Avenue, Newton Street.
NORTHERN BOUND: Brainerd Street.
C.
§ 7-26 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 18-3
1:16
§ 18-4. Duties of elected officials.
The duties of elected officials shall be those set forth in the Massachusetts
General Laws, except to the extent otherwise provided in these bylaws.
§ 18-5. Elected officers.
WESTERN BOUND: North Main Street.
Precinct D.
SOUTHERN BOUND: Ferry Street, Hadley Street, College Street,
Morgan Street.
EASTERN BOUND: Granby Town line.
NORTHERN BOUND: Amherst Town line, Hadley Town line.
WESTERN BOUND: Connecticut River.
D.
Precinct E.
SOUTHERN BOUND: Chicopee City line.
EASTERN BOUND: Granby Town line.
NORTHERN BOUND: Morgan Street.
WESTERN BOUND: College Street, Newton Street, Belmont Avenue,
Richview Avenue, Lloyd Street, Dale Street, Sunset Avenue, Granby
Road, Willimansett Street, Memorial Drive.
E.
The officers of the Town elected by the voters shall be: [Amended
5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
(1) A Moderator, elected for three years;
Five members of the Selectboard, each elected for three years,
who shall also serve as the Road Commissioners, the Sewer
Commissioners and the Police Commissioners;
(2)
Five members of the School Committee, each elected for three
years;
(3)
Three members of the Board of Health, each elected for three
years;
(4)
Three members of the Board of Assessors, each elected for three
years;
(5)
(6) Five members, of the Planning Board, each elected for three years;
Five members of the Municipal Light Board, each elected for three
years;
(7)
A.
§ 18-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-5
1:17
§ 18-6. Office of Town Auditor.
The office of Town Auditor is abolished. (MGL c. 41, § 55)
§ 18-7. Terms of office; oath. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
The term of office of an elected Town officer shall commence following his
or her election immediately upon administration by the Town Clerk of the
oath of office. The oath of office will be administered by the Town Clerk for
all elected and/or appointed officials prior to their participation on a board
or committee; and, furthermore, the Clerk may make additional requests
prescribed by Massachusetts General Laws or these General Bylaws before
the appointee may participate as a member of a board or commission.
§ 18-8. Vacancies.
Vacancies in any Town office shall be filled according to those requirements
set forth in MGL c. 41, § 10 and § 11.
Chapter 39
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Four members of the Housing Authority (exclusive of the member
selected by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts), each elected for
five years;
(8)
(9) Nine Library Trustees, each elected for three years;
One hundred and twenty Town Meeting members, each elected for
three years, comprised of 24 from each Precinct.
(10)
In each case where three or more members are to be elected for any
office, as close to 1/3 as is possible shall be elected annually.
B.
§ 18-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 18-8
1:18
ARTICLE I
Appointed by Selectboard
§ 39-1. Town Administrator.
A Town Administrator may be appointed by the Selectboard pursuant to
MGL c. 41, § 108N, for a term not to exceed five years. The Town
Administrator shall serve as the chief administrative officer under the
direction of the Selectboard, shall perform the duties that are assigned
to the Town Administrator by the Selectboard, and shall not perform any
function that has not been approved for the Town Administrator by the
Selectboard or prescribed by law.
§ 39-2. Chief of Police.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-3. Town Counsel; special counsel.
A Town Counsel may be appointed for a term not to exceed three years.
The Town Counsel shall draft all legal instruments and do every act of
professional legal service that is required of him or her by the Selectboard
or by a vote of the Town. The Town Counsel shall represent the Town or an
officer, board, committee, or commission of the Town in any proceeding to
which it is a party before any court, government agency or body, arbitration,
or mediation panel or board of referees. The Selectboard has the right to
appoint special counsel. The Selectboard can remove any counsel at any
time by a super-majority vote (4-1).
§ 39-4. Town Accountant.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-5. Superintendent of Public Works.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-6. Building Commissioner.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-7. Wiring Inspector.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-8. Animal Control Officer.
An Animal Control Officer may be appointed by the Town Administrator
upon written recommendation from the Health Director and Police Chief.
§ 39-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-9
1:19
§ 39-9. Constables.
Constables may be appointed by the Town Administrator upon
recommendation from the Police Chief.
§ 39-10. Sealer of Weights and Measures.
A Sealer of Weights and Measures shall be appointed for a term not to
exceed three years.
§ 39-11. Conservation Administrator.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-12. Recreation Director.
A Recreation Director may be appointed for a term not to exceed three
years.
§ 39-13. Council on Aging Director.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-14. Tree Warden.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-15. Emergency Management Director.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-9 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 39-15
1:20
ARTICLE II
Other Appointments
§ 39-16. Director of Public Health.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-17. Associate Assessor.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-18. Town Planner.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-19. Director of Veteran Services.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-20. Director of the Public Library.
See General Court Chapter 458, Acts of 2012.
§ 39-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-20
1:21
Chapter 46
PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, § 1-6.
§ 46-1. Enforcement officers.
Chapter 61
RECORDS AND REPORTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and committees — See
Ch. 7.
Town meetings — See Ch. 72.
The Board of Health, or its agents, has the authority to issue citations
or take action against any persons or properties relative to its
responsibilities as outlined in the State Health Code or the South
Hadley General Bylaws relative to the Board of Health and as allowed
by law.
A.
The Building Commissioner, or her/his agents, has the authority to issue
citations or take action against any persons or properties relative to
his/her responsibilities as outlined in the State Building Code or the
General Bylaws relative to her/his responsibilities and as allowed by
law.
B.
The Conservation Commission, or its agents, has the authority to issue
citations or take action against any persons or properties relative to its
responsibilities as outlined in the State Conservation Regulations/Laws
or the General Bylaws relative to or supportive of those laws contained
within and as allowed by law.
C.
The DPW Superintendent, or his/her agents, has the authority to issue
citations or take action against any persons or properties relative to
his/her responsibilities as outlined in state law or the General Bylaws
relative to DPW responsibilities and as allowed by law.
D.
The South Hadley Police Chief or his/her designees may empower or
instruct sworn South Hadley police officers to issue citations or take
action against any person or property in respect to any and all the
General Bylaws contained within the Code of the Town of South Hadley;
furthermore, the Police Chief may call on any department head or
manager to determine noncompliance if the Chief deems it appropriate
or necessary.
E.
§ 39-20 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 46-1
1:22
ARTICLE I
Annual Report
§ 61-1. Contents.
The Selectboard shall compile and publish an annual Town report for each
fiscal year, which shall include:
An annual report of each Town officer, board, committee and
commission (except that the Selectboard may omit from the printing of
the annual report of an officer, board, committee or commission such
financial data relating to the activities of that officer, board, committee
or commission as is reflected in the report of the Town Treasurer);
A.
B. A complete list of the elected Town officers;
A clear and concise account of the activities of the Selectboard,
together with a statement of the expenditures of the Board in as much
detail as is practicable;
C.
A list of all elected officers and/or appointees to each board, committee
or commission and the expiration of the term of office of each member;
D.
E. A copy of each Town Meeting warrant;
A statement, in detail, of the votes cast by the Town at Town elections
and at the Town Meetings; and
F.
Such other matters as are determined by the Selectboard or required
by law.
G.
§ 61-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-1
1:23

ARTICLE II
Meeting Minutes
§ 61-2. Posting on Town website required.
Each board, committee or commission as defined under MGL c. 30A, §§ 18
through 25 (the Open Meeting Law) shall post its meeting minutes on the
Town's website as soon as practicable next following the adjournment of its
meeting.
§ 61-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-2

Chapter 65
REVOLVING FUNDS
§ 65-1. Purpose.
This bylaw establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by Town
departments, boards, committees, agencies or officers in connection with
the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other
receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or
activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by
General Laws, Chapter 44, § 53E 1/2.
§ 65-2. Expenditure limitations.
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur
liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and
authorized by this bylaw without appropriation subject to the following
limitations:
§ 65-3. Interest.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
bylaw shall be credited to the general fund.
§ 65-4. Procedures and reports.
Except as provided in General Laws, Chapter 44, § 53E 1/2 and this bylaw,
the laws, charter provisions, bylaws, rules, regulations, policies or
procedures that govern the receipt and custody of Town monies and the
expenditure and payment of Town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving
fund established and authorized by this bylaw. The Town Accountant shall
include a statement on the collections credited to each fund, the
encumbrances and expenditures charged to the fund and the balance
available for expenditure in the regular report the Town Accountant
provides the department, board, committee, agency or officer on
appropriations made for its use.
A. Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid
from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
B. No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the
fund.
C. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by Town Meeting on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or
any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved
during that fiscal year by the Selectboard and Finance Committee.
65:1
§ 65-5. Authorized revolving funds.
The table establishes:

Chapter 72
TOWN MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Records and reports — See Ch. 61.
§ 61-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 61-2
1:26
ARTICLE I
Types of Meetings
§ 72-1. Annual Town Meeting.
The Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the second Wednesday in May
of each year at the hour and location designated by the Selectboard, and
continue the business of same on any subsequent day or days thereafter
until the business of the meeting is completed.
§ 72-2. Special Town Meetings.
The Selectboard may call a Special Town Meeting at the date, hour and
location designated by it. The Selectboard shall call a Special Town Meeting
upon the written petition of no fewer than 200 registered voters or 20% of
the total number of registered voters of the Town, whichever is the lesser,
and such meeting must be held not later than 45 days after receipt of the
request.
§ 72-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2
1:27

ARTICLE II
Warrants for Town Meetings
§ 72-3. Preparation; articles by petition.
The Selectboard shall be responsible for preparing all Town Meeting
warrants and for the insertion of articles therein, except that the School
Committee shall be responsible for the preparation of all articles which
relate to the public schools. The warrants shall state the time and place of
holding the meeting and the subjects to be acted upon. The Selectboard
shall also insert in the warrant for the Annual Town Meeting articles
requested by petition of no fewer than 10 registered voters submitted to
the Selectboard no later than 60 days prior to the Annual Town Meeting;
and in the warrant for Special Town Meetings articles requested by petition
of no fewer than 100 registered voters or by 10% of the total number
of registered voters of the Town, whichever number is the lesser, and
submitted to the Selectboard no later than 28 days prior to the Special Town
Meeting. Petitions for insertion of an article shall include the name and
residence (street and number) of each petitioner. Upon receipt of any such
petition, the Selectboard shall forward the petition to the Town Clerk, who
shall forthwith check the names and certify which are registered voters.
Only the names of certified voters shall be counted.
§ 72-4. Delivery.
§ 72-5. Articles for appropriations.
The warrant for any Town Meeting shall contain separate articles asking
for appropriations for each specific department, or use, for which the
appropriation is intended. No appropriations shall be made in any Town
Attested copies of warrants for all Town Meetings shall, at least seven
days before the Annual Town Meeting and 14 days before a Special
Town Meeting, be (i) delivered by electronic transmission to an e-mail
address submitted to the Town Clerk upon election to Town Meeting, to
each voting member (as hereafter defined), and printed copies shall be
otherwise made available for member retrieval upon individual request
in the office of the Town Clerk, and (ii) directed to a constable or a
police officer of the Town for posting in at least one public location
in each precinct. The Town Clerk shall also request any provider of
local cable television access to provide notice of any Annual or Special
Town Meeting. Nothing herein shall preclude the Selectboard from
employing any additional methods of communicating the contents of
the warrant.
A.
Electronic transmission via personal e-mail of warrants, revision,
updates and necessary material shall be allowed. All Town Meeting
members shall choose their electronic mail delivery address upon
election by notifying the Town Clerk via electronic mail. [Amended
5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
B.
§ 72-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-5
1:29
Meeting except under an article setting forth briefly, but specifically, the
general purpose, use, and the department of the Town in which such
appropriations are to be expended.
§ 72-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 72-5
1:30
ARTICLE III
Appropriations Committee
§ 72-6. Vacancies; duties.
At Town Meeting, the Moderator shall appoint persons to fill any vacancies
in the Appropriations Committee, whose duties are set forth in Chapter 7,
Article II, § 7-25, of these bylaws.
§ 72-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-6
1:31

ARTICLE IV
Conduct of Town Meeting
§ 72-7. Duties of Town Moderator; rules of procedure.
All Town Meetings shall be called to order and presided over by the Town
Moderator. However, in the absence of the Town Moderator, the Town Clerk
shall preside until the election of a temporary moderator by the members
in attendance at that meeting. The Moderator is authorized to speak on
points of order and to decide each question of order and has the duty
to preserve order, decorum and civility in Town Meeting. Except where
otherwise specifically provided by law or these bylaws, the Moderator shall
be guided by the principles and rules of practice contained in the work
entitled "Town Meeting Time, a Handbook of Parliamentary Law, Third
Edition," by Johnson Trustman and Wadsworth, published by Little Brown,
as further revised from time to time.
§ 72-8. Voting members.
Those entitled to vote at an Annual or Special Town Meeting on any article
in a warrant are only the elected Town Meeting members (hereinafter the
"voting members").
§ 72-9. Quorum.
The minimum number of voting members necessary to constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business at any duly called Annual or Special Town
Meeting or any adjournments thereof shall be a majority of the voting
members.
§ 72-10. Materials distributed at Town Meetings. [Amended
5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
At any Annual or Special Town Meeting, the Town Clerk shall provide
to voting members and shall ensure a reasonable amount of additional
copies of such written materials for nonvoting members of the public in
attendance. All relevant material to any Town Meeting will be provided
electronically and be available on the website or by request in printed form.
All requests for printed material should be received by electronic mail,
telephone, a letter and/or in person at least 24 hours prior to the start of
the meeting. All persons, including but not limited to citizens, interested
parties or Town Meeting members, are entitled to make a printed material
request (and receive it electronically if preferred). If a person cannot make
the request 24 hours prior to the Town Meeting, the Town will make every
effort to provide the material if possible. All requests should be made to
either the Selectboard office or the Town Clerk's office.
§ 72-11. Order of consideration of articles.
All articles shall be acted on in the order of their arrangement in the
warrant, except that when an Annual Town Meeting and a Special Town
§ 72-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-11
1:33
Meeting are set for the same date, the articles of the Special Town Meeting
shall take precedence. Town Meeting members may vote to take articles out
of order. Voting members may, by a majority, determine to defer action on
any article of an Annual or Special Town Meeting until after action on a
specific subsequent article of an Annual or Special Town Meeting scheduled
for the same date.
§ 72-12. Motions on articles relating to finances. [Amended
5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
All motions on articles having to do with the expenditure of money or
incurring of debt shall be made as set forth in the warrant by the Town
Administrator, Selectboard Chair or Appropriations Chair or their designee
with the consent of the Moderator, if applicable, or a representative of the
petitioners who requested insertion of the article. After the motion is made,
if seconded, the maker of the motion shall be granted an opportunity to
offer an amendment thereto, prior to any further discussion, and to speak in
favor of the amendment. Upon completion of such presentation, if any, and
before the commencement of any general discussion on the motion by all
voting members, the Appropriations Committee shall advise Town Meeting
of its recommendation(s) with respect to the motion and amendment and
the reasons therefor, and whether its recommendation is unanimous or by
majority vote.
§ 72-13. Speaking at Town Meeting.
Only voting members are entitled to address any Annual or Special Town
Meeting, except that others may speak to articles at the discretion of the
Town Moderator or upon a majority vote of the voting members. All persons
desiring to speak shall signify their interest by a show of hands and, upon
obtaining recognition from the Town Moderator, each speaker shall state
his or her name and stand while speaking, unless the Town Moderator
otherwise directs. The extent and frequency of any comments or debate
shall be at the discretion of the Moderator or by a majority vote of the voting
members present and voting.
§ 72-14. Motions in writing.
All motions shall be reduced to writing and submitted to the Town Clerk.
§ 72-15. Determination of voting.
All votes, including those requiring two-thirds approval or more, shall be
taken in the first instance by a "yes" and "no" voice vote. If the Moderator
is in doubt as to the vote s/he shall call for a show of hands or for a
standing vote, or, if seven or more voters immediately question the vote, the
Moderator shall call for a standing vote.
§ 72-11 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 72-16
1:34
§ 72-16. Division of motions.
At the discretion of the Town Moderator or at the request of at least seven
voting members, any motion susceptible of division shall be divided.
§ 72-17. Precedence of motions.
When a question is under debate, motions shall be received to adjourn, to
lay on the table, to call the previous question, to postpone to a certain time,
to commit, or to amend; which several motions shall have precedence in the
order stated. The first three shall be decided without debate.
§ 72-18. Reconsideration of motions.
A motion to reconsider any vote must be made before the final adjournment
of the meeting. There can be no reconsideration of a vote once
reconsidered, or after a vote not to reconsider.
§ 72-19. Dissolution and adjournment of meetings.
No Annual or Special Town Meeting shall be dissolved until all of the
articles contained in the warrant for such meeting shall have been acted
upon. No Town Meeting may be adjourned unless the date, time and
location of the adjourned meeting are publicly stated at the time of
postponement or, in the event of inclement weather or other public safety
emergency, in accordance with MGL c. 39, § 10A.
§ 72-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-19
1:35
Chapter 77
TOWN PROPERTY
§ 72-19 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 72-19
1:36
ARTICLE I
Facility Closings
§ 77-1. Authority to order closings.
In the event of necessitated closings of Town facilities declared by the Town
Administrator or his or her designee, on behalf of the Selectboard, the
Town Administrator or his or her designee may order the closing of one or
more Town facilities (including the Senior Center, but excluding the public
schools) or the stoppage or relocation of any non-school Town operations
for a full or part of any day or for more than one day.
§ 77-2. Reasons for closing.
For the purposes hereof, closing of Town facilities may be declared in
the event of any foreseen or unforeseen occurrence which disrupts or
threatens to disrupt Town operations and/or threatens the well-being of
Town employees, including, without limitation, snowstorms or other
inclement weather (e.g., hurricanes or floods), earthquakes, fires, power
failures, acts of terrorism or bomb threats.
§ 77-3. Procedure. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
Any such closing order will be made by the Town Administrator or his or her
designee after consultation, as may be feasible under the circumstances,
with the Police Department and/or Department of Public Works and shall be
noticed by municipal notification system, social media, television, radio or
any other means practicable which are readily available to widely circulate
a closure or other emergency.
§ 77-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 77-3
1:37
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 105
ALARMS
§ 105-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any assembly of equipment and/or devices that are
designed to be activated either manually or automatically for the purpose
of drawing attention to the presence of a hazard, intruder, or situation,
criminal or otherwise, to which the police are expected to respond.
ALARM USER — Any person or business on whose premises an alarm
system is installed and maintained within the Town of South Hadley, except
for alarm systems that are installed in motor vehicles. Municipal buildings
are hereby excluded from the provisions of this bylaw.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system or any signal or
communication transmitted to the Police Department requesting, requiring,
or resulting in a response from the police when, in fact, there has been
no unauthorized entry or intrusion into the premises, and there has been
no attempted robbery or burglary at the premises. Excluded from this
definition shall be the activation of an alarm system by power outages,
utility companies, motor vehicle accidents, severe storms and general
maintenance and/or repairs to the alarm systems when the Police
Department has been notified in advance of potential alarm activation.
§ 105-2. Audible alarm limits.
All alarm systems that emit an audible signal shall be equipped with a
device for limiting the length of the audible signal to 15 minutes.
§ 105-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art.
13]
After the Police Department has recorded three separate false alarms, be
they audible or otherwise, within a calendar year, the alarm user shall be
assessed the following fees by the South Hadley Police Department:
Chapter 110
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
A. For the fourth false alarm within that calendar year: $25.
For the fifth and subsequent false alarm(s) within that calendar year:
$50.
B.
§ 77-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 110-1
1:38
§ 110-1. Public possession prohibited.
A person on a public way or in a public place to which the public has access
shall not have in his or her possession an opened container of an alcoholic
beverage.
§ 110-2. Public consumption prohibited.
A person shall not consume an alcoholic beverage in a public building or
on public property, including a park, cemetery, or school or on a public way
to which the public has access or on a parking area regulated under the
provisions of MGL c. 90, § 18.
§ 110-3. Exception.
The two preceding sections shall not apply to an activity which has been
duly authorized by the Selectboard under the applicable provisions of the
General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 110-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art.
13]
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $25 and not more than $300 by the South Hadley Police
Department.
Chapter 115
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties and enforcement — See Ch. 46. Zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 115-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any mechanism whereby, upon the
deposit therein of a coin or token, any apparatus is released or set in
motion or put in a position where it may be set in motion for the purpose
of playing any game involving, in whole or in part, the skill of the player,
including, but not exclusively, such devices as are commonly known as
"pinball machines," include free-play pinball machines, but not including
slot machines as defined in MGL c. 23K.
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-2
1:39
§ 115-2. License and inspections.
In accordance with MGL c. 140, § 177A, as amended from time to time,
any individual or business desiring to keep and operate an automatic
amusement device for hire, gain or reward shall secure an annual license
from the Selectboard. No license shall be granted for any automatic
amusement device which presents a risk of misuse as a gaming device, and
no person shall operate or allow the operation of an automatic amusement
device which presents a risk of misuse as a gaming device. Automatic
amusement devices which present a risk of misuse as gaming devices
are those devices which simulate actual gaming or actual gaming devices
and games which involve matching of random numbers, patterns or color
combinations. Any change of automatic amusement devices shall be subject
to inspection as well as relicensing if the new devices are materially
different from the devices originally licensed. All premises designated on
a license for automatic gaming devices granted by the Selectboard shall
be subject to inspection by the South Hadley Police Department to ensure
conformance with the submitted application information and the provisions
of this section.
§ 115-3. Number.
The maximum number of automatic amusement devices allowed on any
single business premises shall be six, with no such device able to accept
a bill larger than $5. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to
the contrary, the limitation upon the maximum number of automatic
amusement devices allowed on any single business premises of six shall
not be applicable to the operation of a business that constitutes public
recreation operated as a business, including facilities for assembly,
billiards, bowling, soccer, roller skating and similar activities, provided
that the following conditions are satisfied as determined by the
Planning Board:
The operation of automatic amusement devices is accessory to the
principal use of public recreation operated as a business; and
(1)
More than six amusement devices shall only be operated within the
business premises that have as their principal use public recreation
operated as a business in conjunction with and as accessory to the
public recreation activities carried out within any such business
premises.
(2)
A.
Upon receipt by the Selectboard of a certification from the Planning
Board that an establishment satisfies both of the foregoing conditions,
the Selectboard may issue a license permitting the operation of more
than six automatic amusement devices at the business premises where
public recreation operated as a business constitutes the principal use,
with no limitation imposed upon the number of automatic amusement
devices that may be permitted by the Selectboard pursuant to any such
license. Nothing contained in this section shall modify or otherwise
affect the prohibition set forth in § 115-2 that no license shall be
B.
§ 115-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 115-3
1:40
§ 115-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
as referenced in Chapter 46, Penalties and Enforcement. Any unlicensed
automatic amusement device (or automatic amusement device which
presents a risk of misuse as gaming device) shall be subject to immediate
seizure by the South Hadley Police Department. Any expense incurred by
the South Hadley Police Department related to the seizure of such devices
shall become the responsibility of the person that controls the premises
where the devices were located. This section may be enforced by all state
and local law enforcement officials and may be administered under the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D or any of the laws of the commonwealth
or any Town bylaw implementing enforcement of its bylaws. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to change any provision of the Town Zoning
Bylaw.7
Chapter 120
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 123.
granted for any automatic amusement device which presents a risk of
misuse as a gaming device and no person shall operate or allow the
operation of an automatic amusement device which presents a risk of
misuse as a gaming device.
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 115-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-4
1:41

ARTICLE I
Stretch Energy Code
[Adopted 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 22]
§ 120-1. Findings.
Stretch Energy Code, codified by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA of the Massachusetts Building
Code, the Stretch Energy Code is an appendix to the Massachusetts
Building Code, based on further amendments to the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) to improve the energy efficiency of buildings
built to this code.
§ 120-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE (IECC) — A building
energy code created by the International Code Council. It is a model code
adopted by many state and municipal governments in the United States for
the establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for
energy efficiency, and is updated on a three-year cycle. The baseline energy
conservation requirements of the Massachusetts State Building Code are
the IECC with Massachusetts amendments, as approved by the Board of
Building Regulations and Standards.
§ 120-3. Purpose.
The purpose of 780 CMR 115.AA is to provide a more energy-efficient
alternative to the Base Energy Code applicable to the relevant sections of
the Building Code for new buildings.
§ 120-4. Applicability.
This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not
included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 115.AA, as indicated.
§ 120-5. Incorporation of Stretch Code; enforcement.
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and
Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions,
amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into
the Town of South Hadley General Bylaws.
A.
The Stretch Code is enforceable by the Inspector of Buildings or
Building Commissioner.
B.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5
1:43
Chapter 123
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties and enforcement — See Ch. 46.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 360.
§ 123-1. Designation of numbers.
The Inspector of Buildings, in cooperation with the Board of Assessors,
shall determine and designate numbers for all buildings abutting upon
or adjacent to a street as s/he may deem appropriate for the public
convenience using the criteria set forth in this chapter.
§ 123-2. Affixing of numbers required.
No owner of any building set forth in § 123-1 shall neglect or refuse to
affix to such building any street number designated by the Inspector of
Buildings.
§ 123-3. Visibility of numbers from street.
In cases where a building set forth in § 123-1 is not clearly visible from the
street, the Inspector of Buildings shall require that said numbers be placed
such that they are clearly visible from the street at the point of entry to the
property.
§ 123-4. Numbering system; appearance and location.
Buildings set forth in § 123-1 on streets off a main artery shall be numbered
from low to high, with even numbers on one side and odd numbers on the
other. The main artery shall be the street closest to the center of Town. All
numbers shall be in whole Arabic numerals, a minimum of five inches in
height, contrasting in color to the structure, and shall be placed on the knob
side of the door of the structure.
§ 123-5. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine as
referenced in Chapter 46, Penalties and Enforcement, § 46-1. This chapter
shall be enforced by the Inspector of Buildings or agent under the direction
of the Inspector of Buildings.
§ 120-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 123-5
1:44
Chapter 138
FARMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 360.
§ 138-1. Legislative purpose, authority and intent.
§ 138-2. Terms defined.
The purpose and intent of this bylaw is to restate the right to farm
accorded to all citizens of the commonwealth under Article 97 of the
Constitution, and all state statutes and regulations thereunder,
including but not limited to MGL c. 40A, § 3, Paragraph 1; MGL c.
90, § 9, MGL c. 111, § 125A, and MGL c. 128, § 1A. We the citizens of
South Hadley restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town's
authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution ("Home Rule Amendment").
A.
This general bylaw supports the pursuit of agriculture, promotes
agriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmlands
within the Town of South Hadley by allowing agricultural uses and
related activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and
Town agencies, when done in compliance with state laws and Town
bylaws and regulations. Nothing in this bylaw should be construed
to allow a use not already permitted by the Zoning Bylaw,8 private
covenant, or state or local law.
B.
The words "farming" or "agriculture" or their derivatives shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
Farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the
soil;
(1)
(2) Dairying;
Production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any
agricultural, floricultural, viticultural, or horticultural
commodities;
(3)
(4) Growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land;
(5) Breeding of livestock, including horses;
A.
8. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 123-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-2
1:45
§ 138-3. Right to farm declaration.
The right to farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of South
Hadley. The above-described agricultural activities may occur on holidays,
weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall include the attendant
incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally accepted
agricultural practices. The benefits and protections of this bylaw are
intended to apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural and farming
operations and activities conducted in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices and local zoning and other regulations. Moreover,
nothing in this Right to Farm Bylaw shall be deemed as acquiring any
interest in land, or as imposing any land use regulation, which is properly
the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning law, or other bylaw
or regulation.
§ 138-4. Disclosure notification.
Within 30 days after this bylaw becomes effective, the Selectboard shall
prominently post in the Town Hall the following disclosure:
"It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and support the
maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the production of
Keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle, sheep, goats, rabbits,
ratites (such as emus, ostriches and rheas) and camelids (such
as llamas and camels), and other domesticated animals for food
and other agricultural purposes, including bees and fur-bearing
animals such as mink.
(6)
"Farming" shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the
following:
Operation and transportation of slow-moving and/or oversized farm
equipment over roads within the Town;
(1)
(2) Use of legally established rights-of-way over private property;
Control of pests and application of manure, fertilizers and
pesticides, as permitted under and in compliance with state law;
(3)
Conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based
recreational activities, including agritourism, provided that the
activities are related to marketing the agricultural output or
services of the farm; maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal
equipment, or apparatus owned or leased by the farm owner or
manager used expressly for the purpose of propagation,
processing, management, or sale of agricultural products, insofar
as not in conflict with Town bylaws; and
(4)
On-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming
operations, insofar as permitted by the Wetlands Protection Act and
Town regulations.
(5)
B.
§ 138-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 138-4
1:46
food, and other agricultural products, and also for its natural and ecological
value. This disclosure notification is to inform buyers or occupants that
the property they are about to acquire or occupy lies within a town where
farming activities occur. Such farming activities may include, but are not
limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and odors. Buyers or occupants
are also informed that the location of property within the Town may be
affected by commercial agricultural operations."
§ 138-5. Resolution of disputes.
§ 138-6. Severability.
If any part of this bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
invalid, such decision shall not affect the remainder of this bylaw. The
Town of South Hadley hereby declares the provisions of this bylaw to be
severable.
Chapter 141
FEES AND CHARGES
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may,
notwithstanding pursuing any other available remedy, file a grievance
with the Selectboard, the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the Board
of Health, depending upon the nature of the grievance. The filing of
the grievance does not suspend the time within which to pursue any
other available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning
Enforcement Officer or Selectboard may forward a copy of the
grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall
review and attempt to facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and
report its recommendations to the referring Town authority within an
agreed-upon time frame.
A.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public
health risk, may forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and attempt to facilitate
the resolution of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the
Board of Health within an agreed-upon time frame.
B.
§ 138-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-6
1:47

ARTICLE I
Municipal Liens for Unpaid Fees
§ 141-1. Landfill tipping fees.
If a landfill (transfer station/recycling area only) tipping fee remains unpaid
after six months from the due date, it shall become a municipal charge lien
pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 58. If the bill(s) remains unpaid
when the Assessors are preparing a real estate tax list and warrant to be
committed under MGL c. 59, § 53, the board or officer in charge of the
collection of the municipal fee or charge shall certify such charge or fee to
the Assessors, who shall add such to the tax bill on the property to which it
relates and commit it with their warrant to the Tax Collector as part of such
tax bill.
§ 141-2. Trash collection fees.
If a trash collection fee remains unpaid after six months from the due date,
it shall become a municipal charge lien pursuant to the provisions of MGL
c. 40, § 58. If the bill(s) remains unpaid when the Assessors are preparing a
real estate tax list and warrant to be committed under MGL c. 59, § 53, the
board or officer in charge of the collection of the municipal fee or charge
shall certify such charge or fee to the Assessors, who shall add such to the
tax bill on the property to which it relates and commit it with their warrant
to the Tax Collector as part of such tax bill.
§ 141-3. Street excavation permits.
If a street excavation permit charge remains unpaid after six months from
the due date, it shall become a municipal charge lien pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 58. If the bill(s) remains unpaid when the
Assessors are preparing a real estate tax list and warrant to be committed
under MGL c. 59, § 53, the board or officer in charge of the collection of the
municipal fee or charge shall certify such charge or fee to the Assessors,
who shall add such to the tax bill on the property to which it relates and
commit it with their warrant to the Tax Collector as part of such tax bill.
§ 141-4. Sewer connection and application fees.
If a sewer use fee remains unpaid after six months from the due date, it
shall become a municipal charge lien pursuant to the provisions of MGL c.
40, § 58. If the bill(s) remains unpaid when the Assessors are preparing a
real estate tax list and warrant to be committed under MGL c. 59, § 53, the
board or officer in charge of the collection of the municipal fee or charge
shall certify such charge or fee to the Assessors, who shall add such to the
tax bill on the property to which it relates and commit it with their warrant
to the Tax Collector as part of such tax bill.
§ 141-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 141-4
1:49
Chapter 145
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
§ 145-1. Discharge of firearms; archery.
§ 145-2. Discharge of air, pellet or paint-ball guns.
No person shall discharge an air, pellet, paint-ball or other weapon used to
shoot projectiles on Town-owned land, public ways, or on private property
other than said person's own property or the property of the person's
parents, children, grandparents or their respective spouses without
permission of the owner of the land upon which discharge of such weapons
will take place.
Chapter 153
ICE CREAM TRUCK VENDORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 190. Vehicles — See Ch. 230.
§ 153-1. Purpose; fingerprinting of permit applicants.
Town-owned land. No person shall discharge a firearm or arrow on any
land owned by the Town, except on land designated by the Selectboard
and on file with the office of the Town Clerk.
A.
Private property. No person shall hunt or discharge a firearm on posted
private property without the permission of the owner, pursuant to MGL
c. 131.
B.
Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the lawful defense of life
or property, or to any discharge of firearms in accordance with law
enforcement, at any military exercise, for the purpose of construction
or sport shooting at an established gun-sporting club.
C.
This bylaw implements the requirements of MGL c. 270, § 25 and the
regulations promulgated thereunder, as may be amended, relative to
the permitting of ice cream trucks within the Town of South Hadley.
A.
The South Hadley Police Department, under the direction of the Police
Chief, is allowed to fingerprint all applicants for an ice cream vendor's
permit as part of the application process in accordance with MGL c.
6, § 172B 1/2; to authorize the use of Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) records data base; and to conduct a state and national criminal
history records check. Information obtained from said FBI criminal
history check may not be disseminated to unauthorized entities. All
B.
§ 141-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 153-1
1:50
§ 153-2. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ICE CREAM — Any frozen dairy or frozen water-based food product.
ICE CREAM TRUCK — Any motor vehicle used for selling, displaying or
offering to sell ice cream.
ICE CREAM TRUCK VENDING — The selling, displaying or offering to sell
ice cream or any other prepackaged food product from an ice cream truck.
PERMITTING AUTHORITY — The South Hadley Chief of Police or a
qualified person authorized by him.
§ 153-3. Permit required; violations and penalties.
Chapter 158
JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 166.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 190.
Tag sales — See Ch. 207.
applicants must be fingerprinted specifically as part of an application
for an ice cream vendor's permit. There will be a $50 fee in respect to
the fingerprint process application in addition to any other application
fees for an ice cream vendor's permit from the Board of Health. No
background check will commence until all application fees are received
by the Town of South Hadley. [Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 8]
No person shall engage in ice cream truck vending in the Town of South
Hadley unless s/he shall have been issued a valid permit to do so by
the permitting authority. Such permit shall be conspicuously displayed
and clearly visible on the windshield of any ice cream truck operated or
from which ice cream or any other prepackaged food product is sold.
A.
Whoever violates this section shall be assessed a fine of $300. Each
day that such person is in operation in violation of this section may be
considered a separate violation. [Amended 1-10-2018 STM by Art.
8]
B.
Permits issued hereunder shall conform to regulations, rules, forms and
policies of the Massachusetts Department of Public Safety.
C.
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 158-1
1:51
§ 158-1. License required.
No person shall be a dealer in or keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or
barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles or go about collecting the
same in the Town unless s/he is duly licensed therefor by the Selectboard.
§ 158-2. Record of purchases.
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals
or secondhand articles shall keep paper or electronic records in which shall
be entered, at the time of every purchase of any such articles, a description
thereof, the name, age and residence of the person from whom, and the date
and hour when such purchase was made. Such records shall at all times be
open to inspection by the Selectboard and by any person authorized by it to
make such inspection.
§ 158-3. Inspection by police.
Any police officer may enter the shop of any dealer in junk or secondhand
articles and examine the books and property in the shop.
§ 158-4. Purchases from minors prohibited.
No keeper of a shop licensed as provided in § 158-1 and no junk collector,
directly or indirectly, shall either purchase or receive by way of barter or
exchange junk or secondhand articles from a minor, knowing or having
reason to believe him or her to be such.
§ 158-5. Display of license and badges.
Every keeper of the shop licensed as provided in § 158-1 shall put in some
suitable and conspicuous place in his or her shop a copy of the license and
a sign having his or her name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon in
large letters, and every collector so licensed shall have placed upon some
conspicuous part of his or her clothing, and upon each side of all vehicles
used for such collection, a badge or sign giving the number of the license in
plain, legible figures of not less than one inch in length.
§ 158-6. Hours of operation.
The keeper of the shop licensed pursuant to § 158-1 shall not have the same
open for the transaction of business except during the time between 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of each day, and no keeper of such junk or no junk
collector shall purchase any of the articles aforesaid except during such
hours.
§ 158-7. Holding period for articles.
No article purchased or received by a keeper of a shop licensed pursuant
to this chapter for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metal or
§ 158-1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 158-7
1:52
secondhand articles shall be sold until at least 15 days from the date of its
purchase or its receipt have elapsed.
Chapter 166
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 166-1. When required; fees.
The Selectboard shall have the power to require licenses for all businesses,
trades and occupations which towns may license under the provisions of the
General Laws and may make such rules and regulations pertaining thereto
as to it seems pertinent. The fees for such licenses shall be as prescribed by
the General Laws.
§ 166-2. Denial, revocation or suspension for failure to pay
municipal taxes or charges.
The Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of
all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal
charges, hereinafter referred to as the "Collector," shall annually
furnish each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter
referred to as the "licensing authority," that issues licenses or permits,
including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation or
business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the "party," that has
neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelvemonth
period and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending
application for an abatement for such taxes or a pending petition before
the Appellate Tax Board.
A.
Notice; hearing; reissuance or renewal.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license
or permit, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose
name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from
the Collector or with respect to any activity, event or other matter
which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity,
event or matter is carried out or exercised on or about real estate
owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to
the licensing authority from the Collector; provided, however, that
written notice is given to the party and the Collector, as required
by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing,
to be held not earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list
shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension
of said license or permit to any party. The Collector shall have
the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to
such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made
by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial,
revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purpose of
(1)
B.
§ 158-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-2
1:53
§ 166-3. Refusal to issue permits and/or licenses due to taxes or
fees owed. [Added 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 12]
such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any
other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from license denial,
revocation or suspension.
Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this
section shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensing
authority receives a certificate issued by the Collector that the
party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes,
fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges,
payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said
certificate.
(2)
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment
agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a
certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit, and the
validity of said license shall be conditioned upon satisfactory
compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement
shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or
permit; provided, however, that the holder is given notice and a hearing
as required by applicable provisions of law.
C.
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits
pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws:
(1) Open burning: MGL c. 48, § 13.
(2) Sales of articles for charitable purposes: MGL c. 101, § 33.
(3) Children work permits: MGL c. 149, § 69.
Clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses: MGL c.
140, § 21E.
(4)
(5) Dog licenses: MGL c. 140, § 137.
(6) Fishing hunting, trapping licenses: MGL c. 131, § 12.
(7) Marriage licenses: MGL c. 207, § 28.
(8) Theatrical events, public exhibition permits: MGL c. 140, § 181.
D.
The Tax Collector shall provide a delinquency list annually as of July 1 to
any department issuing permits, licenses or otherwise charging a fee.
The information contained within the annual delinquency list should be
updated for specific properties, corporations or taxpayers upon request
of any department made to the Tax Collector or the Tax Collector's
office during the year.
A.
No department shall grant or issue a permit or license to any person
or entity which appears on the annual delinquency list, until such
B.
§ 166-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 166-3
1:54
Chapter 171
LIGHTING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 171-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, safety, and the
environment by:
§ 171-2. Applicability; exceptions.
The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all outdoor lighting in the
Town, except that the permitting (§§ 171-4 and 171-5) and review (§ 171-6)
requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
time as the permit and/or license has been allowed to be issued by
a department until such time as a payment is made or agreement
accepted by the Tax Collector.
The local licensing authority (South Hadley Selectboard) will not issue
an alcoholic beverage license without review and approval by the Tax
Collector for any applicant who has outstanding fees, taxes or
otherwise has lien(s) due the Town of South Hadley. The local license
authority may revoke any license if the licensee is subsequently found
to be in violation of this bylaw in respect to taxes or fees outstanding to
the Town of South Hadley.
C.
All powers contained within this South Hadley general bylaw and the
administration thereof must be consistent with Massachusetts General
Laws and in particular MGL c. 50, § 57, Local licenses and permits;
denial, revocation or suspension for failure to pay municipal taxes or
charges.
D.
A. Providing for adequate and appropriate outdoor lighting;
B. Providing for lighting that will complement the character of the Town;
C. Reducing glare;
D. Minimizing light trespass;
E. Reducing the cost and waste of unnecessary energy consumption; and
Requiring proper management and disposal of lighting fixtures, lamps,
and associated elements.
F.
§ 166-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-2
1:55
§ 171-3. Waiver of provisions.
§ 171-4. Permit required; consultant review.
Lighting on individual lots used principally for residential occupancy as
one-, two-, or three-family dwellings; or
A.
Lighting for parking areas of fewer than 10 parking spaces if the
lighting fixtures are less than 14 feet in height and the project lighting
is approved by the Planning Board with input from the South Hadley
Electric Light Department as a provision of a special permit; or
B.
Streetlighting, traffic control lighting and other lighting for public
safety along streets or ways if approved by the Town's Traffic Sign
Committee and the streets or ways are on plans approved by the
Planning Board; or
C.
Signs or illumination of any signs which are subject to the Zoning
Bylaw.9
D.
The Selectboard may waive the requirements of this chapter upon
application of the property owner. Any such application for waiver of
said requirements shall contain a detailed description of the proposed
lighting and how the lighting will achieve the purposes of this chapter
if the waiver is granted.
A.
The Selectboard may grant a waiver for projects for which the Planning
Board has granted a special permit or site plan review only if:
The conditions of the special permit or site plan review decision
expressly support waiving portions of this chapter; and
(1)
The Planning Board has imposed alternative standards on outdoor
lighting which the Selectboard determines achieve the purposes of
this chapter.
(2)
B.
Prior to installation of any outdoor lighting subject to this chapter, the
applicant must obtain a permit from the Selectboard, unless excepted
pursuant to § 171-2 or waived pursuant to § 171-3. To obtain such a
permit, the applicant must submit an application on forms set forth
by the Selectboard along with any required application fee and plan(s)
containing at least the information required by § 171-5. The number of
plans and the scale of plans to be submitted shall be as set forth by the
Selectboard.
A.
In the event that the Selectboard determines that a third-party review
by a qualified lighting engineer or lighting specialist is necessary or
advisable to better inform its determination, the Selectboard may
require the applicant to pay into the special municipal account a sum
necessary to pay for that review.
B.
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 171-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 171-5
1:56
§ 171-5. Plan information.
Plans submitted with the application for approval under § 171-4 shall
include, at a minimum:
§ 171-6. Review process.
Prior to acting on any application for a permit or a waiver thereof, the
Selectboard shall have the application reviewed by the Planning Board
and such other boards and departments deemed appropriate by the Town
Administrator and shall hold a public hearing on said application. However,
the Selectboard may waive the public hearing requirement if it determines
that prior public hearings held by other Town boards have provided a
satisfactory forum for public review of the lighting plans and the minutes of
the other public hearings have been provided to the Selectboard for review.
§ 171-7. Standards for approval.
Approval by the Selectboard of any application for a permit under § 171-4
or a waiver under § 171-3 shall be based on the following:
A. The location and type of any outdoor lighting luminaires;
B. The proposed height of all proposed luminaires;
C. The proposed height of all poles;
The elevation of the base of all proposed poles and proposed
luminaires;
D.
Identification of any existing vegetation proposed to be removed which
may alter the view of and glare from the proposed luminaires;
E.
The luminaire manufacturer's specification data, including, but not
limited to, lumen output and photometric data showing cutoff angles;
F.
The type of lamps proposed, such as metal halide, compact fluorescent,
high-pressure sodium, etc.;
G.
A photometric plan showing the intensity of illumination at ground
level, expressed in footcandles;
H.
I. Identification of surface area intended to be illuminated;
J. Details of the hours of operation for the lighting;
A description of how the lighting will be regulated for turning on and
turning off; and
K.
L. A plan for disposal of expended lighting fixtures and lamps.
Conformity with purposes. The application must conform to the
purposes of this chapter.
A.
§ 171-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-7
1:57
§ 171-8. Lighting requirements and restrictions.
Any lighting subject to this chapter shall conform to the following
requirements and restrictions:
Glare into community or surrounding neighborhood. The proposed
lighting must not create glare which is adverse to the community or
surrounding neighborhood.
B.
Light trespass. The proposed lighting must not create any light trespass
onto any abutting street or abutting lot or parcel.
C.
Downcast of illumination. All illumination must be downcast and not
emit any direct light above a horizontal plane passing through the
lowest part of the light-emitting luminaire.
D.
Conformity with lighting requirements and restrictions. The proposed
lighting fixtures and luminaire must conform to the lighting
requirements and restrictions set forth in § 171-8 herein.
E.
Control of glare and light trespass. The luminaires must be fully
shielded so as to control glare and light trespass.
A.
Directed to surface intended to be illuminated. The luminaires must
be designed, placed, and maintained so as to only illuminate the area
identified in the project plans as intended to be illuminated. The area
to be illuminated must be restricted to the property on which the
luminaires are located or other properties also owned by the parties
having said illumination installed.
B.
Prohibited fixtures. Mercury vapor fixtures must not be used in new
installations. Where existing mercury vapor fixtures are being replaced
with new such fixtures, the owner must provide a plan for the safe
disposal of the existing and replacement fixtures.
C.
Hours of operation. Outdoor lighting shall not be illuminated between
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. with the following exceptions:
If the facility for which the lighting is being utilized is legally
and properly open and being used, such as (but not limited to) a
business open to customers or an athletic facility being used for an
event, normal illumination shall be allowed during the activity, but
for not more than 1/2 hour after the activity or use ceases.
(1)
Low-level lighting sufficient for the security of persons or property
on the lot or parcel may be in operation between 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m., provided the level of illumination on the ground or on
any vertical surface is not greater than 0.5 footcandle.
(2)
Any other variation as determined by the Selectboard if it finds
that proposed illumination will not adversely impact any nearby
residences on account of longer periods of operation and the
(3)
D.
§ 171-7 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 171-8
1:58
§ 171-9. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Building
Commissioner. Penalties for violation of any portion of this chapter shall be
as provided in § 1-6 of the General Bylaws.
Chapter 175
MARIJUANA
applicant provides an appropriate technology for ensuring that the
fixtures are not operated 24 hours per day.
Height of luminaires. Luminaires must not exceed 35 feet in height
unless the Selectboard expressly finds that a greater height will further
the purposes of this chapter when applied to the particular property,
facility, and surrounding neighborhood.
E.
Minimum lumens. Any outdoor lighting fixture or lamp must have a
sustained rating of 50 lumens per watt.
F.
§ 171-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 171-9
1:59

ARTICLE I
Licensed and Other Related Establishments
[Adopted 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 610]
§ 175-1. Establishment of ban.
The Town, consistent with MGL c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), bans all types of marijuana
establishments as defined in MGL c. 94G, § 1(j), including commercial
cultivation, retail sales, testing, manufacturing, packaging, distribution or
any other type of licensed cannabis/marijuana related businesses.
10.Editor's Note: This article required submission of the question to the Town at a Town
Election. The question passed at the April 2018 Annual Town Election.
§ 175-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-1
1:61
Chapter 179
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Farming — See Ch. 138. Board of Health solid waste regulations — See
Ch. 300, Art. II and Art. III.
§ 179-1. Dead animals and offensive substances.
Dead animals will be removed by the Board of Health and/or the Town
Department of Public Works. No person shall place or cause to be placed or
left in or upon any public or private street or way, enclosure or grounds, or
in any body or stream of water within the limits of this Town, the body of
any dead animal, fowl, or any substance or material that is or may become
offensive or cause a nuisance, or may tend to obstruct the flow of any
stream.
§ 179-2. Unreasonable noise.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to create, assist in
creating, continue or allow to continue any excessive, unnecessary
or unusually loud noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the reasonable quiet, comfort, repose, or the health and
safety of others within the Town, including, without limitation:
The playing of any radio, phonograph, television set, amplified
or musical instruments, loudspeakers, tape recorder, or other
electronic sound-producing devices in such a manner or with
volume at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the
reasonable quiet, comfort or repose of any person;
(1)
The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or
long-continued noise, shall disturb the reasonable quiet, comfort or
repose of any person;
(2)
The use of any drum or other instrument or device of any kind for
the purpose of attracting by the creation of noise, unless the person
is a participant in a school band activity or duly authorized parade
or has been otherwise authorized to engage in such activity by the
Selectboard;
(3)
The operation of vehicles, equipment, tools or machines used as
a means of construction, maintenance, repair or demolition of a
building site, building, bridge, tower or road between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; and
(4)
A.
§ 175-1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 179-2
1:62
§ 179-3. Blighted and vacant property.
Engine noise during or incidental to the repair of motor vehicles
between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on commercial premises or at any
time on residential premises.
(5)
The foregoing restrictions shall not apply or be enforced against:
(1) Emergency vehicles;
Highway and utility maintenance and construction, necessary
excavation in or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, or any
public utility installation by or on behalf of the Town, any public
utility or any agency of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts;
(2)
Snow removal or street cleaning or maintenance of commercial
parking lots;
(3)
The reasonable use of amplifiers or loud speakers for public
addresses, which are noncommercial in nature;
(4)
Noise caused by agricultural, farm-related activities as defined by
MGL c. 128, § 1A, as amended from time to time, including but not
limited to the operation of farm equipment, harvesting equipment,
noises from farm animals and the like;
(5)
Noise caused by lawful hunting or other lawful discharge of
firearms;
(6)
Noise from activities that have been duly authorized by the
Selectboard; and
(7)
Organized sporting events on designated fields as sanctioned by
the Town or sports organizations.
(8)
B.
No owner of real property within the Town of South Hadley will allow,
create, maintain, or cause to be created a blighted property. With
respect to a property which has a building or structure within its
bounds, the owner of said property will notify the Building
Commissioner by registered letter that the property is vacant, in disuse
or unoccupied within 60 days of vacancy. The owner must supply
primary and secondary contact information for the property to the
Building Commissioner. The owner will be assessed $100 for an annual
inspection and must make the property reasonably available to the
Building Commissioner and/or the Fire District with ten-day notice or
sooner if the situation demands. Failure to register a vacant property
may cause the Town of South Hadley to fine the property owner $300 a
day.
A.
The owner's primary contact information must be posted conspicuously
at or near the front entrance to the building or each significant
entrance if appropriate to the structure. The property must be kept
secure at all times and safe from vandals, squatters or others who
B.
§ 179-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-3
1:63
§ 179-4. Property maintenance.
§ 179-5. Discarded furniture.
Chapter 190
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 179, § 179-2.
Tag sales — See Ch. 207.
Vending machines — See Ch. 235.
may be a public safety threat or may cause further damage to the
structure itself. If the Town is compelled to secure said property, it
will lien the property or otherwise seek recompense for related and
reasonable costs associated with making the property secure and/or
addressing debris on the physical property. If a structure is unoccupied
for more than 30 months without cause or reason as determined by
the Building Commissioner, an additional fine of $300 per month may
be levied or otherwise allowed under MGL c. 40U. The property owner
will be notified 10 days in advance of the impending fine via registered
USPS mail to the last address registered with the Building Department
or the last address available to the Town. An appeal of fines or a request
for extension for extenuating circumstances may be requested to the
Selectboard.
All property owners will be responsible to keep their property in a
reasonable state of repair. Grass will be kept no higher than six inches;
leaves, excessive grass clippings will be removed, composted or
otherwise properly disposed of; damaged branches will be addressed;
and other debris or litter will be eliminated from the property.
A.
Violation of this bylaw may result in a fine of $100 per day. The
enforcement authority for this bylaw shall be the South Hadley Police
Department or South Hadley Health Department.
B.
Discarded furniture, mattresses, building material, appliances,
electronic equipment or other surplus home goods will not be left on
the curb or tree belt unless allowed or approved by the DPW for pickup.
A.
Violation of this bylaw may result in a fine of $100 per day. The
enforcement authority for this bylaw shall be the South Hadley Police
Department or South Hadley Health Department.
B.
§ 179-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 179-5
1:64
ARTICLE I
Solicitors
§ 190-1. Certificate of registration for commercial solicitation.
§ 190-2. Fees.
Each application for a certificate of registration shall be accompanied by
a fee of the lesser of $50 for each solicitor or $150 for the soliciting
organization.
§ 190-3. Revocation of certificate.
The Chief of Police may revoke any certificate of registration for cause,
including violation of this article or the discovery of misleading or
fraudulent information on the application for the certificate of registration.
Immediately upon revocation, written notice thereof shall be sent by the
Chief of Police to the holder of the certificate by certified U.S. mail,
addressed to the holder's residence address as shown on the application.
A record of the date of the revocation will be made upon the original
application.
Every person desiring to engage in commercial soliciting, as defined
in the definition of "solicitation" in Chapter 1, § 1-2, of the General
Bylaws, except fund-raising by children on behalf of local schools or
organizations for children, shall make a written application to the
Police Department for a certificate of registration. Such certificate shall
be carried by the solicitor while engaging in soliciting and must be
presented upon request by a police officer or persons being solicited.
Application for a certificate of registration shall be made upon a form
provided by the Town of South Hadley and filed with the Police
Department at least 10 days prior to soliciting. The certificate of
registration will require the following information with respect to each
solicitor:
Name, description and home and present business addresses of
solicitor(s);
(1)
(2) Registration number and description of the vehicles of all solicitors;
The name and address of the employers of all solicitors and the
length of employment; and
(3)
(4) Description of the purpose for the solicitation.
A.
The Police Department shall maintain an accurate record of every
application received and acted upon together with all other information
and dates pertaining thereto and copies of all certificates of registration
issued under the provisions of this bylaw.
B.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-4
1:65
§ 190-4. Hours of solicitation.
Soliciting will be permitted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m.
§ 190-5. State law to prevail.
Nothing in this bylaw shall be construed as conflicting with any license
issued under the authority of the commonwealth.
§ 190-6. Soliciting prohibited where posted.
All commercial and noncommercial soliciting shall be prohibited for any
purpose at a residence upon which a sign is conspicuously placed
requesting no solicitation.
§ 190-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art.
13]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this bylaw shall be subject to
a fine of not more than $300 for each offense by the South Hadley Police
Department.
§ 190-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 190-7
1:66
ARTICLE II
Hawkers, Peddlers and Transient Vendors
§ 190-8. Operation during Town celebrations.
No transient vendor, hawker or peddler as defined in MGL c. 101 shall sell
or barter, or carry for sale or barter, any goods, wares, or merchandise
in the Town of South Hadley on any day of special Town celebration so
proclaimed by the Selectboard unless a permit has been issued by said
Board or its delegate under such terms and conditions and for such a fee as
said Board or its delegate shall determine.
§ 190-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-8
1:67
Chapter 194
PETS AND DOMESTICATED ANIMALS
§ 194-1. Removal of waste.
§ 194-2. Running at large.
No owner of a pet/domesticated animal shall allow the pet/domesticated
animal to roam at large upon a public walk or street or upon the private
property of another, except on the premises of another person with the
actual knowledge and permission of such other person. All pets/
domesticated animals not on the premises of their owner or the private
property of another person with the knowledge and permission of such
person shall be restrained by a chain or leash not exceeding 12 feet in
length.
§ 194-3. Playground areas and athletic fields.
No owner of a pet/domesticated animal shall allow the pet/domesticated
animal to enter upon any Town playground area and athletic field. The
foregoing shall not apply to guide or service dogs.
§ 194-4. Enforcement; violations and penalties; appeals.
Failure to comply with provisions of this bylaw or any part thereof may
result in a first offense fine of $50, and a second or additional violation
of this bylaw within a two-year period may result in a fine of up to $300.
The enforcement of this penalty is given to the Health Department, Police
Department and/or the Animal Control Officer. A hearing for appeal of this
bylaw can be made to the South Hadley Board of Health. Uncollected fines
may be levied against future licenses or permits if unpaid.
The owner of a pet/domesticated animal shall be responsible for the
removal of any fecal matter deposited by his/her pet(s)/domesticated
animal(s) on public walks, recreation areas, private property of another
and trails on property under the jurisdiction of the Conservation
Commission. The term "owner" as used in this section shall include the
person(s) who control(s) the pet/domesticated animal.
A.
The owner accompanying a pet/domesticated animal in a public walk,
street, recreation area or private property of another shall possess the
means of removal of any fecal matter deposited by the pet/domesticated
animal. For purposes of this section, the means of removal shall include
any tool, implement or other device carried for the purpose of picking
up and containing such fecal matter. Disposal shall be accomplished
by transporting such fecal matter to a place suitable for the disposal
of pet/domesticated animal fecal matter or otherwise as designated as
appropriate by the Director of the Board of Health.
B.
§ 190-8 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 194-5
1:68
§ 194-5. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
PET/DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — Includes, but not limited to, dogs, pigs,
monkeys or any animal which is kept for companionship, entertainment, or
deemed by the Health Department through consultation with the Animal
Control Officer and/or the Building Commissioner, when appropriate, to be
defined as a pet/domestic animal.
Chapter 196
PLASTIC BAGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Use of polystyrene food containers — See Ch.
300, Art. XIV.
Solid Waste Department regulations — See
Ch. 315, Art. V.
§ 196-1. Scope.
The Town of South Hadley hereby finds that the reduction in the use of
disposable checkout bags by retail establishments in the Town is a public
purpose that protects the environment, advances solid waste reduction,
reduces greenhouse gas emissions, and protects waterways. The Town
seeks to reduce the number of plastic bags that are being used, discarded
and littered, and to promote the use of reusable checkout bags by retail
establishments located in the Town.
§ 196-2. Terms defined.
Definitions.
ASTM — A testing standard developed by the American Society for
Testing and Materials.
BIODEGRADABLE PACKAGING — Packaging, other than plastic or
Styrofoam, which composts into beneficial breakdown components.
COMPOSTABLE PACKAGING — Packing that is made of material that
conforms to the current American Society for Testing and Materials
International D6400 for compostability.
MERCHANDISE — Products that are purchased in the retail
establishments.
RECYCLABLE — Material that can be sorted, cleansed, and
reconstituted using available recycling collection programs for the
purpose of using the altered form in the manufacture of new product.
"Recycling" does not include burning, incinerating, converting, or
otherwise thermally destroying solid waste.
A.
§ 194-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-2
1:69
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — All sales outlets, stores, shops,
restaurants, markets, supermarkets, clubs or other places of business
located within the Town of South Hadley which sell or convey
merchandise directly to the ultimate consumer.
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — All sales outlets, stores, shops,
restaurants, markets, supermarkets, clubs or other place of business
which sell, serve or convey foods directly to the ultimate consumer.
This definition shall include but is not limited to any place where
food is prepared, mixed, cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled,
packaged, handled, stored, manufactured, sold or offered to the public;
similar places in which food or drink is prepared for sale or service on
the premises or elsewhere; and any other establishment or operation,
including in-home caterers, where food is processed, prepared, stored,
served or provided for the public, regardless of whether there is a
charge for the food.
RETAIL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — All places of business located
within the Town of South Hadley where a service, specialized or
professional work is offered to the public, regardless of whether there
is a charge for the service.
Bag definitions.
BIODEGRADABLE BAGS — Bags that:
COMPOSTABLE PLASTIC BAGS — Plastic bags that:
REUSABLE BAGS — Bags that have a thickness greater than 4.0 mils
and are specifically designed for multiple use and are made of thick
recyclable plastic, cloth, fabric or other durable materials that do not
decompose into harmful chemical components. A reusable bag may
be recyclable or compostable and is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse.
THIN-FILM SINGLE-USE PLASTIC BAGS — Bags with a thickness of
4.0 mils or less and which are intended for single-use transport of
purchased products.
(1) Contain no polymers derived from fossil fuels; and
Are intended for single use and will decompose in a natural setting
to an environmentally beneficial material at a rate comparable
to other biodegradable materials such as paper, leaves, and food
waste.
(2)
Conform to the current American Society for Testing and Materials
International D6400 for compostability;
(1)
Are certified and labeled as meeting the ASTM D6400 standard
specification by a recognized verification entity; and
(2)
(3) Conform to any other standards deemed acceptable by this section.
B.
§ 196-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 196-3
1:70
§ 196-3. Regulation.
No retail establishment, retail food establishment, or retail service
establishment as defined in § 196-2A, Definitions, shall sell or convey
merchandise to ultimate consumers in said establishments and shall only
use such bags that are:
§ 196-4. Exemptions.
This regulation shall not apply to the following:
§ 196-5. Enforcement.
For purposes of this section, if a violation of any section of this regulation
has occurred, the Health Department, and/or its designee and/or the DPW,
Solid Waste Division, and/or its designee shall issue the following penalties.
§ 196-6. Violations and penalties.
Penalties shall be paid to the Town Clerk's office within 21 days;
nonpayment of such fines may be enforced through noncriminal disposition
as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
§ 196-7. Hardship deferment.
A. Reusable bags; or
B. Biodegradable bags; or
C. Compostable plastic bags.
Thin-film plastic bags used to contain dry cleaning, newspapers,
produce, meat, bulk foods, wet items and other similar merchandise,
typically without handles;
A.
Any flexible transparent covering for uncooked or raw meat, poultry,
raw fish, hard cheese, cold cuts, fruit, and vegetable products, baked
goods or bread.
B.
A. For the first offense: $100.
B. For the second offense: $200.
C. For the third and subsequent offenses: $300.
Upon written application, the enforcing designee may defer application
of any section of this regulation for a six-month period after the
effective date, upon showing any of the following hardships:
Compliance with any section of this regulation would cause
significant economic difficulty;
(1)
(2) There is no readily available compliant substitute.
A.
§ 196-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 196-7
1:71
§ 196-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on July 1, 2018.
§ 196-9. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full
force and effect.
Chapter 200
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties and enforcement — See Ch. 46.
Wetlands — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
Conservation Commission regulations — See
Ch. 305.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 360.
Any entity granted a deferment must reapply prior to the end of the sixmonth
exemption period and demonstrate continued undue hardship
if it wishes to have the deferment extended. Deferments may only be
granted in intervals not to exceed six months.
B.
A deferment granted in accordance with this section may be extended
for no more than two six-month periods, upon written request to the
enforcing designee at least two months prior to the expiration of the
prior deferment period and upon a showing that the circumstances
justifying the deferment continue to exist.
C.
A deferment application shall include all information necessary for the
enforcing designee to make its decision, including, but not limited to,
documentation showing the factual support for the claimed deferment
period and upon a showing that the circumstances justifying the
deferment continue to exist.
D.
The enforcing designee may approve the deferment application, in
whole or part, with or without conditions that it deems necessary to
protect the environment and public health and further the interests of
this regulation.
E.
F. Deferment decisions are effective immediately and final.
§ 196-7 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 196-9
1:72
ARTICLE I
Purpose and Authority
§ 200-1. Purpose.
§ 200-2. Enforcement.
The South Hadley Planning Board shall administer, implement and enforce
this bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Planning
Board may be delegated in writing by the Planning Board to employees or
agents of the Town of South Hadley.
The purpose of this bylaw is to better manage land development in
order to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens, property owners and businesses of
South Hadley by establishing minimum requirements and procedures
to control the adverse impacts associated with stormwater runoff preand
post-construction and site development.
A.
The proper management of stormwater runoff will meet the following
objectives:
Reduce the adverse water quality impacts of stormwater
discharges to rivers, lakes, reservoirs and streams in order to
attain federal water quality standards;
(1)
Prevent the discharge of pollutants, including hazardous
chemicals, into stormwater runoff;
(2)
Minimize the volume and rate of stormwater which is discharged to
rivers, streams, reservoirs, lakes and combined sewers that flows
from any site during and following development;
(3)
Prevent erosion and sedimentation from land development, and
reduce stream channel erosion caused by increased runoff;
(4)
Provide for the recharge of groundwater aquifers and maintain the
base flow of streams;
(5)
Provide stormwater facilities that are attractive, maintain the
natural integrity of the environment, and are designed to protect
public safety;
(6)
Maintain or reduce pre-development runoff characteristics after
development to the extent feasible;
(7)
(8) Minimize damage to public and private property from flooding;
Ensure that these management controls are properly maintained;
and
(9)
Provide construction site management practices for waste
materials and debris.
(10)
B.
§ 200-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-2
1:73

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 200-3. Terms defined.
The following definitions describe the meaning of the terms used in this
bylaw:
ADVERSE IMPACT — Any deleterious effect on waters or wetlands,
including their quality, quantity, surface area, species composition,
aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural uses, which are or may
potentially be harmful or injurious to human health, welfare, safety or
property, to biological productivity, diversity, or stability or which
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property, including
outdoor recreation.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — Refers to the Planning Board,
its employees or agents designated to enforce this bylaw. The Planning
Board may delegate this authority in writing to employees or agents of the
Town of South Hadley.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Structural or biological
devices that temporarily store or treat urban stormwater runoff to reduce
flooding, remove pollutants, and provide other amenities. They can also be
nonstructural practices that reduce pollutants at their source. BMPs are
described in a stormwater design manual as defined and designated herein.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY — Disturbance of the ground by removal of
vegetative surface cover or topsoil, grading, excavation, clearing or filling.
DESIGN STORM — A rainfall event of specified size and return frequency
that is used to calculate the runoff volume and peak discharge rate to a
BMP.
DETENTION — The temporary storage of storm runoff in a BMP, which is
used to control the peak discharge rates and which provides gravity settling
of pollutants.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — Any approval by the Planning Board, including,
but not limited to, a definitive plan or Form H plan under the Subdivision
Regulations,11 or site plan review, special permit, or earth removal, fill, or
excavation permit under the Zoning Bylaw.12
DISTURBANCE — Any land clearing, grading, bulldozing, digging or similar
activities, including any activities not exempt under Article III of this bylaw.
DRAINAGE AREA — That area contributing runoff to a single point
measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridgeline.
DRY WELL — Similar to an infiltration trench but smaller with inflow from
a pipe; commonly covered with soil and used for drainage areas of less than
one acre such as roadside inlets and rooftop runoff.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Subdivision Regulations.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:75
EASEMENT — A grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of
such land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be
included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement.
FLOW ATTENUATION — Prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce the
peak discharge.
HYDROLOGY MODEL — May include one of the following:
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Areas, such as pavement or rooftops, which
prevent the infiltration of water into the soil.
INFILTRATION — The downward movement of water from the surface to
the subsoil.
INFILTRATION TRENCH — A stormwater management excavation filled
with aggregate which removes both soluble and particulate pollutants.
Trenches are not intended to trap coarse sediments.
OUTFALL — The terminus of a storm drain or other stormwater structure
where the contents are released.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum instantaneous rate of flow during a
storm, usually in reference to a specific design storm event.
PERMEABLE SOILS — Soil materials with a sufficiently rapid infiltration
rate so as to greatly reduce or eliminate surface and stormwater runoff.
These soils are generally classified as NRCS hydrologic soil types A and B.
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership,
corporation, company, business, organization, trust, estate, administrative
agency, public or quasi-public corporation or body, the commonwealth or
political subdivision thereof.
RETENTION — The holding of runoff in a basin without release except by
means of evaporation, infiltration, or emergency bypass.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — The first land-disturbing activity associated
with a development, including land preparation such as clearing, grading
and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements,
footings, piers or foundations; erection of temporary forms; and installation
of accessory buildings such as garages.
TR-20, a watershed hydrology model developed by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service Act that is used to route a design storm
hydrograph through a pond;
A.
TR-55, or Technical Release 55, "Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds," is a publication developed by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service to calculate stormwater runoff and aid in
designing detention basins;
B.
C. HydroCAD;
Any alternative model as approved and deemed acceptable by the Town
Engineer.
D.
§ 200-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 200-3
1:76
STORMWATER DESIGN MANUAL — Any single manual or set of multiple
volumes of manuals promulgated by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection (or a successor agency) which sets forth best
management practices, stormwater management design concepts, and/or
stormwater management standards which must be adhered to in the
management of stormwater resulting from development activity. A copy of
the current stormwater design manual shall be kept on file in the office of
the Planning Board.
SWALE — A natural depression or wide shallow ditch used to temporarily
store, route, or filter runoff.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS, MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any
material which, because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive,
flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either
separately or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes
a present or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the
environment. Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic
chemical, petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste,
acid, alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c.
21C and c. 21E, and regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.000.
§ 200-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-3
1:77

ARTICLE III
Applicability
§ 200-4. Compliance required.
§ 200-5. Exemptions.
The following activities are exempt from the requirements for submittal
and approval of a stormwater management plan under Article IV, but must
comply with the stormwater performance standards in Article VI:
Prior to the issuance of any site plan approval or development permit
for any proposed development listed below, a stormwater management
permit, or a waiver of the requirement for a stormwater management
permit, must be approved by the Planning Board or its designee under
this bylaw. No person shall, on or after the effective date of this bylaw,
initiate any land clearing, land grading, earth moving or development
activities without first complying with this bylaw.
A.
The following uses and activities shall be required to submit drainage
reports, plans, construction drawings, specifications and asconstructed
information in conformance with the requirements of this
bylaw:
Subdivisions and construction activities of any kind disturbing one
or more acres, including multiple separate disturbances of less
than one acre in discontinuous locations or on different schedules,
if the activities are part of a larger common plan of development.
(1)
B.
Any agricultural activity which is consistent with an approved soil
conservation plan prepared or approved by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service;
A.
Any logging which is consistent with a timber management plan
approved under the Forest Cutting Practices Act by the authorized state
agency;
B.
Additions or modifications to existing residential structures disturbing
less than one acre;
C.
Developments that disturb less than one acre of land, provided that
they are not part of a larger common development plan;
D.
Repairs and maintenance to any stormwater collection system, sanitary
sewer collection system, or roadway system deemed necessary by the
South Hadley Department of Public Works;
E.
Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection
of life, property or the environment, as determined by the Department
of Public Works or its designee;
F.
G. Residential uses disturbing less than one acre; and
§ 200-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5
1:79
§ 200-6. Stormwater design manual.
§ 200-7. Erosion and sediment control guidelines.
To furnish additional policy, criteria and information, including
specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the
requirements of this bylaw for erosion and sediment control, the Erosion
and Sediment Control Guidelines for Urban and Suburban Areas and
Nonpoint Source Pollution Management Guidelines as promulgated by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection or its successor
organization are incorporated into and made part of this bylaw.
Repairs and maintenance of municipal facilities (buildings and grounds,
fields, etc.) which do not involve a change in flow of stormwater runoff
onto adjoining property.
H.
The stormwater design manual as defined and described in § 200-3 is
hereby incorporated by reference as part of this bylaw, and shall furnish
additional policy, criteria and information, including specifications and
standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this
bylaw.
A.
This manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment
practices, including the specific design criteria for each stormwater
practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to
time, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and
local maintenance experience, at the discretion of the South Hadley
Department of Public Works, its designee, or the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection. Stormwater treatment
practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these
design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum
water quality performance standards. Unique site circumstances, as
determined by the Town Engineer, may require design and sizing which
exceed the minimum water quality performance standards.
B.
§ 200-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 200-7
1:80
ARTICLE IV
Permit Procedures and Requirements
§ 200-8. Permit required.
No landowner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading,
or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities,
and no landowner shall commence land disturbance activities, without
approval of a stormwater management permit from the Planning Board and
meeting the requirements of this bylaw.
§ 200-9. Application requirements. [Amended 1-10-2018 STM by
Art. 3]
§ 200-10. Review and approval of permits or waivers.
Rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt rules and
regulations setting forth reasonable and necessary application
requirements and processing procedures. These procedures shall
provide for a reasonable and timely review of all applications in
accordance with the Stormwater Management Bylaw.
A.
Applications to conform. All applications for permits under this
Stormwater Management Bylaw shall demonstrate conformity to this
Stormwater Management Bylaw and must conform to the Planning
Board's rules and regulations unless a waiver is being requested or has
been granted.
B.
The applicant may request, and the South Hadley Planning Board may
grant, a waiver from any information requirements it judges to be
unnecessary to the review of a particular plan.
C.
The procedures for review and approval of stormwater management
permits shall be consistent with the review procedures of the Planning
Board as appropriate to the use/activity.
A.
The Planning Board shall refer copies of the stormwater management
permits to the Town Engineer and other appropriate Town boards/
departments for review, and shall consider any comments submitted
by the Town Engineer and other appropriate Town boards/departments
during the review period.
B.
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of the
receipt of a complete application and shall take final action within 21
days from the close of the hearing unless such time is extended by
agreement between the applicant and the Planning Board. Notice of
the public hearing shall be given by publication in a local paper of
general circulation, by posting and by first-class mailings to abutters at
least seven days prior to the hearing. When the application is part of a
definitive subdivision plan, site plan, or special permit application, the
notice and hearing for the permit requested under This BYLAW shall be
C.
§ 200-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-10
1:81
§ 200-11. Criteria for review of permit applications.
In addition to other criteria used by the South Hadley Planning Board in
making permit decisions, for the uses/activities specified in this bylaw, the
Planning Board must also find that the stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control plan submitted with the permit application meets the
following criteria:
§ 200-12. Planning Board action.
carried out as part of the notice and hearing for the other application
submitted to the Planning Board unless requested otherwise by the
applicant.
Notification of project changes must be submitted to the Planning
Board following the procedures for new submittals. However, the
Planning Board may waive, as it determines consistent with the
purposes of this bylaw, parts of the otherwise required procedures.
D.
The stormwater management and erosion and sediment control plan
are consistent with the purposes and objectives of this bylaw in Article
I;
A.
Provisions for stormwater management meet the performance
standards described in Article VI;
B.
Provisions for erosion and sediment control meet the design
requirements in Article VII.
C.
The Planning Board's action, rendered in writing, shall consist of either:
Approval of the stormwater management permit application based
upon determination that the proposed plan meets the purposes in
Article I and the standards in Article VI and design requirements in
Article VII and will adequately protect the water resources and is
in compliance with the requirements set forth in this bylaw;
(1)
Approval of the stormwater management permit application
subject to any conditions, modifications or restrictions required by
the Board which will ensure that the project meets the purposes in
Article I and the standards in Article VI and design requirements in
Article VII and adequately protects water resources, as set forth in
this bylaw;
(2)
Disapproval of the stormwater management permit application
based upon a determination that the proposed plan, as submitted,
does not meet the purposes in Article I and the standards in Article
VI and/or design requirements in Article VII or adequately protect
water resources, as set forth in this bylaw.
(3)
A.
Failure of the Board to take final action upon an application within the
time specified above shall be deemed to be approval of said application.
B.
§ 200-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 200-12
1:82
§ 200-13. Inspections.
§ 200-14. Right of entry for inspection.
When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property,
or when any new connection is made between private property and a
public drainage control system or sanitary sewer, the filing of an application
shall be deemed as the property owner's permission to the South Hadley
Department of Public Works or its designee for the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose
of the inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a
reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this bylaw is occurring or has
occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance
or correction of a violation of this bylaw.
§ 200-15. Fees.
The Planning Board shall establish a schedule for application fees,
inspection fees, and review fees and appropriate application forms.
Upon certification by the Town Clerk that the allowed time has passed
without Board action, the Board must issue a stormwater management
permit.
No Plan will be approved without adequate provision for inspection
of the property before development activity commences. The applicant
shall arrange with the Department of Public Works, and other
departments as appropriate, for scheduling the following inspections:
(1) Initial inspection; prior to approval of any plan.
Erosion and sediment control inspections; after site clearing, rough
grading and final grading to ensure erosion and sediment control
practices are in accord with the plan.
(2)
Bury inspection; prior to backfilling of any underground drainage
or stormwater conveyance structures.
(3)
Final inspection; when all work, including construction of
stormwater management facilities and landscaping, has been
completed. Final inspection shall include a full, dated TV inspection
of all stormwater pipes installed.
(4)
A.
The Department of Public Works or its agent shall inspect the work
and either approve it or notify the applicant in writing in what respects
there has been a failure to comply with the requirements of the
approved plan. Any portion of the work which does not comply shall be
promptly corrected by the applicant or the applicant will be subject to
the bonding provisions of Article IX or the penalty provisions of Article
X. The Town may conduct random inspections to ensure effective
control of erosion and sedimentation during all phases of construction.
B.
§ 200-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-15
1:83
The application fee shall be paid in full along with the application
required under this bylaw.
A.
In addition to an application fee, the Planning Board may also charge
an application review fee under MGL c. 44, § 53G to cover third-party
review, if needed.
B.
Inspection fee. The fee for site inspections shall be based on the fee
structure established by the South Hadley Planning Board. The fee shall
be paid to prior to initiation of any work on the site which requires
compliance with the provisions of this bylaw.
C.
§ 200-15 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 200-15
1:84
ARTICLE V
Stormwater Management and Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
§ 200-16. Contents.
The application for a stormwater management permit shall consist of
submittal of a stormwater management and erosion and sediment control
plan, prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, which meets the design requirements provided by this
bylaw. The plan shall include a description of the proposed project,
sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the
affected and adjacent areas, the potential impacts of the proposed
development on water resources; and the effectiveness and acceptability
of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. The plan must be
designed to meet the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards
as set forth in Article VI of this bylaw and the stormwater design manual
as previously referenced. The applicant shall certify on the drawings that
all clearing, grading, drainage, construction, and development shall be
conducted in strict accordance with the plan. The minimum information
submitted for support of a stormwater management plan shall be as follows:
Contact information: the name, address, and telephone number of all
persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference
number and parcel number of the property or properties affected;
A.
B. A locus map;
C. The existing zoning and land use at the site;
D. The proposed land use;
E. The location(s) of existing and proposed easements;
F. The location of existing and proposed utilities;
The site's existing and proposed topography, with contours at two-foot
intervals;
G.
H. Proposed limits of disturbance;
Estimate of the total area expected to be disturbed by excavation,
grading or other construction activities;
I.
J. A description of the existing site hydrology;
A description and delineation of existing stormwater conveyances,
impoundments, and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which
stormwater flows;
K.
L. A delineation of one-hundred-year floodplains, if applicable;
Habitats mapped by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage and
Endangered Species Program as endangered, threatened or of special
concern, estimated habitats of rare wildlife and certified vernal pools,
M.
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-16
1:85
and priority habitats of rare species within 500 feet of any construction
activity;
Estimated seasonal high groundwater elevation in areas to be used for
stormwater retention, detention, or infiltration;
N.
The existing and proposed vegetation and ground surfaces, with runoff
coefficients for each;
O.
A drainage area map showing pre- and post-construction watershed
boundaries, drainage area and stormwater flow paths, including
municipal drainage system flows;
P.
A description and drawings of all components of the proposed
stormwater management system, including:
Locations, cross sections, and profiles of all brooks, streams,
drainage swales and their method of stabilization;
(1)
(2) All measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water;
(3) All measures for the protection of water quality;
The structural details for all components of the proposed drainage
systems and stormwater management facilities;
(4)
Notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, construction
specifications, and expected hydrology, with supporting
calculations;
(5)
Proposed improvements, including location of buildings or other
structures, impervious surfaces, and drainage facilities, if
applicable;
(6)
(7) Any other information requested by the stormwater authority.
Q.
Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development
and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this
regulation. Such calculations shall include:
(1) Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration;
(2) Time of concentration;
Soil runoff curve number (RCN) based on land use and soil
hydrologic group;
(3)
(4) Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area;
Information on construction measures used to maintain the
infiltration capacity of the soil where any kind of infiltration is
proposed;
(5)
(6) Infiltration rates, where applicable;
R.
§ 200-16 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 200-16
1:86
(7) Culvert capacities;
(8) Flow velocities;
Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the specified
design storms; and
(9)
Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field
test results.
(10)
Post-development downstream analysis, if deemed necessary by the
stormwater authority. The downstream analysis will evaluate the
hydrologic impacts of the project downstream of the project to a
location where the watershed to project size is approximately equal to
10:1;
S.
Soils information from test pits performed at the location of proposed
stormwater management facilities, including soil descriptions, depth
to seasonal high groundwater, depth to bedrock, and infiltration rates.
Soils information will be based on site test pits logged by a
Massachusetts registered soil evaluator, a Massachusetts registered
sanitarian, or a Massachusetts registered professional engineer;
T.
Landscaping plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetative
stabilization and management techniques to be used within and
adjacent to the stormwater practices;
U.
Drainage patterns and approximate slopes anticipated after major
grading activities;
V.
W. A description of provisions for project phasing;
Erosion and sediment control plan, consisting of:
Location and details of erosion and sediment control measures with
a narrative of the construction sequence/phasing of the project,
including both operation and maintenance for structural and
nonstructural measures, interim grading, and material stockpiling
areas;
(1)
Path and mechanism to divert uncontaminated water around
disturbed areas, to the maximum extent practicable;
(2)
Location and description of and implementation schedule for
temporary and permanent seeding, vegetative controls, and other
stabilization measures;
(3)
A description of construction and waste materials expected to be
stored on-site. The plan shall include a description of controls to
reduce pollutants from these materials, including storage practices
to minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater, and spill
prevention and response.
(4)
X.
§ 200-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-16
1:87
Testing results and documentation. Results and documentation of any
tests as required by the DEP, DPW, and/or Board of Health shall be
included. Further, any such tests shall be witnessed by an authorized
representative of the Town of South Hadley DPW and/or Board of
Health.
Y.
§ 200-16 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 200-16
1:88
ARTICLE VI
Performance Standards
§ 200-17. Purpose.
To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the stormwater
performance standards in this Article VI must be met at new development
sites. These standards apply to construction activities as described under
§ 200-4.
§ 200-18. Minimum control requirements.
§ 200-19. Stormwater management measures.
Projects must meet the standards of the Massachusetts Stormwater
Management Standards as promulgated by the Massachusetts DEP. A
copy of these standards is maintained by the office of the Planning
Board.
A.
When the proposed discharge may have an impact upon a sensitive
receptor, including streams, storm sewers, and/or combined sewers,
the Planning Board may require an increase in these minimum
requirements, based on existing stormwater system capacity and
standards of other Town boards, including, but not limited to, the Board
of Health and the Conservation Commission.
B.
Stormwater management measures shall be required to satisfy the
minimum control requirements and shall be implemented in the
following order of preference:
Infiltration, flow attenuation, and pollutant removal of runoff onsite
to existing areas with grass, trees, and similar vegetation and
through the use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions;
(1)
Use of stormwater on site to replace water used in industrial
processes or for irrigation;
(2)
Stormwater detention structures for the temporary storage of
runoff which is designed so as not to create a permanent pool of
water;
(3)
Stormwater retention structures for the permanent storage of
runoff by means of a permanent pool of water; and
(4)
Retention and evaporation of stormwater on rooftops or in parking
lots.
(5)
A.
Infiltration practices shall be utilized to reduce runoff volume
increases. A combination of successive practices may be used to
achieve the applicable minimum control requirements. Justification
shall be provided by the applicant for rejecting each practice based on
site conditions.
B.
§ 200-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-19
1:89
§ 200-20. Specific design criteria.
Additional policy, criteria, and information, including specifications and
design standards, may be found in the Stormwater Design Manual and the
erosion and sediment control guidance documents and may also be utilized.
Best management practices shall be employed to minimize pollutants
in stormwater runoff prior to discharge into a separate storm drainage
system or water body.
C.
All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to provide an
emergency overflow system, and incorporate measures to provide a
nonerosive velocity of flow along its length and at any outfall.
D.
The designed release rate of any stormwater structure shall be
modified if any increase in flooding or stream channel erosion would
result at a downstream dam, highway, structure, or normal point of
restricted stream flow.
E.
Infiltration systems.
Infiltration systems shall be equipped with clean stone and/or filter
fabric adjacent to the soil or other sediment removal mechanisms;
(1)
Infiltration systems greater than three feet deep shall be located at
least 10 feet from basement walls;
(2)
Due to the potential for groundwater contamination from dry wells,
they shall not be an acceptable method for management of runoff
containing pollutants;
(3)
Infiltration systems designed to handle runoff from commercial or
industrial impervious parking areas shall be a minimum of 100 feet
from any drinking water supply well;
(4)
Infiltration systems shall not be used as sediment control basins
during construction unless specific plans are included to restore or
improve the basin surface;
(5)
Infiltration basins shall be constructed with a three-foot minimum
separation between the bottom of the structure and the seasonal
high groundwater elevation, as determined by a certified soil
evaluator; and
(6)
Provisions shall be made for safe overflow passage, in the event of
a storm which exceeds the capacity of an infiltration system.
(7)
A.
Retention and detention ponds shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the criteria set forth in the stormwater design manual.
B.
The applicant shall give consideration in any plan to incorporating the
use of natural topography and land cover such as natural swales and
C.
§ 200-19 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 200-20
1:90
depressions as they exist prior to development to the degree that they
can accommodate the additional flow of water.
The Planning Board shall give preference to the use of swales in place
of the traditional use of curbs and gutters based on a case-by-case
review of stormwater management plans by the Town Engineer and
Planning Board.
D.
The applicant shall consider public safety in the design of any
stormwater facilities. The banks of detention, retention, and infiltration
basins shall be sloped at a gentle grade into the water as a safeguard
against personal injury, to encourage the growth of vegetation and to
allow the alternate flooding and exposure of areas along the shore.
Basins shall have a 4:1 slope to a depth two feet below the control
elevation. Side slopes must be stabilized and planted with vegetation to
prevent erosion and provide pollutant removal The banks of detention
and retention areas shall be designed with sinuous rather than straight
shorelines so that the length of the shoreline is maximized, thus
offering more space for the growth of vegetation.
E.
Where a stormwater management plan involves direction of some or
all runoff off of the site, it shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to obtain from adjacent property owners any easements or other
necessary property interests concerning flowage of water. Approval of a
stormwater management plan does not create or affect any such rights.
F.
All applicants for projects which involve the storage or use of hazardous
or toxic chemicals, materials or waste shall incorporate handling and
storage best management practices that prevent such chemicals,
materials and waste from contaminating runoff discharged from a site
into infiltration systems, receiving water bodies or storm drains, and
shall include a list of such chemicals, materials and waste and their
amounts in the application.
G.
Runoff from parking lots shall be treated by oil and water separators or
other controls to remove oil and sediment;
H.
The basic design criteria methodologies, and construction
specifications, subject to the approval of the Planning Board and Town
Engineer, shall be those generally found in the most current edition of
the stormwater design manual.
I.
§ 200-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-20
1:91

ARTICLE VII
Design Requirements for Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
§ 200-21. Requirements.
The design requirements of the erosion and sediment control plan are:
A. Minimize total area of disturbance.
B. Sequence activities to minimize simultaneous areas of disturbance.
Minimize peak rate of runoff in accordance with the MA DEP
Stormwater Management Standards.
C.
Minimize soil erosion and control sedimentation during construction.
Prevention of erosion is preferred over sedimentation control.
D.
E. Divert uncontaminated water around disturbed areas.
F. Maximize groundwater recharge.
Install and maintain all erosion and sediment control measures in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and good
engineering practices.
G.
H. Prevent off-site transport of sediment.
Protect and manage on- and off-site material storage areas (overburden
and stockpiles of dirt, borrow areas, or other areas used solely by the
permitted project are considered a part of the project).
I.
Comply with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations,
including waste disposal, sanitary sewer or septic system regulations,
and air quality requirements, including dust control.
J.
Prevent adverse impact from the proposed activities to habitats
mapped by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage and Endangered
Species Program as endangered, threatened or of special concern,
estimated habitats of rare wildlife and certified vernal pools, and
priority habitats of rare species.
K.
Institute interim and permanent stabilization measures. The measures
shall be instituted on a disturbed area as soon as practicable but
no more than 14 days after construction activity has temporarily or
permanently ceased on that portion of the site.
L.
M. Properly manage on-site construction and waste materials.
N. Prevent off-site vehicle tracking of sediments.
§ 200-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-21
1:93

ARTICLE VIII
Maintenance.
§ 200-22. Operation, maintenance and inspection agreement.
Prior to any site work for which stormwater management is required,
the Planning Board shall require the applicant or owner to execute
an operation, maintenance and inspection agreement binding on all
subsequent owners of land served by the private stormwater
management facility. The agreement shall be designed to ensure that
water quality standards are met in all seasons and throughout the
life of the system. Such agreement shall provide for access to the
facility at reasonable times for regular inspections by the Town or its
authorized representative and for regular or special assessments of
property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper
working condition to meet design standards and any provision
established. The agreement shall include:
(1) The name(s) of the owner(s) for all components of the system.
Maintenance agreements that specify:
The names and addresses of the person(s) responsible for
operation and maintenance.
(a)
The person(s) responsible for financing maintenance and
emergency repairs.
(b)
A maintenance schedule for all drainage structures, including
swales and ponds.
(c)
(d) A list of easements, with the purpose and location of each.
(e) The signature(s) of the owner(s).
(2)
Stormwater management easements as necessary for:
(a) Access for facility inspections and maintenance.
Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and facilities, including flood routes for the
one-hundred-year storm event.
(b)
Direct maintenance access by heavy equipment to structures
requiring regular cleanout.
(c)
(3)
Stormwater management easement requirements.
The purpose of each easement shall be specified in the
maintenance agreement signed by the property owner.
(a)
Stormwater management easements are required for all areas
used for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted
by the Town of South Hadley.
(b)
(4)
A.
§ 200-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-22
1:95
§ 200-23. Maintenance responsibility.
Easements shall be recorded with the Registry of Deeds prior
to issuance of a certificate of completion.
(c)
Changes to operation and maintenance plans.
The owner(s) of the stormwater management system must
notify the Planning Department/DPW of changes in ownership
or assignment of financial responsibility.
(a)
The maintenance schedule in the maintenance agreement may
be amended to achieve the purposes of this bylaw by mutual
agreement of the Planning Board/DPW and the responsible
parties. Amendments must be in writing and signed by all
responsible parties. Responsible parties must include the
owner(s), persons with financial responsibility, and persons
with operational responsibility. A copy of any such approved
amendments shall be filed with the office of the Planning Board
by the owner(s) of the stormwater management system.
(b)
(5)
The agreement shall be recorded by the applicant and/or owner in the
land records of the Registry of Deeds.
B.
The agreement shall also provide that if, after notice by the Planning
Board or Department of Public Works to correct a violation requiring
maintenance work, satisfactory corrections are not made by the
owner(s) within 30 days, the Department of Public Works may perform,
but is not required to do so, all necessary work to place the facility in
proper working condition. The owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed
the cost of the work and any penalties.
C.
The owner of the property on which work has been done pursuant to
this bylaw for private stormwater management facilities, or any other
person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good
condition and promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, walls,
drains, dams and structures, vegetation, erosion and sediment control
measures and other protective devices. Such repairs or restoration and
maintenance shall be in accordance with approved plans.
If the DPW has reason to believe that the facilities are not properly
maintained or need repair, the DPW may require such tests/
inspections as the DPW Superintendent deems necessary. The
party responsible for maintenance of the facilities shall undertake
the test/inspections required by the DPW Superintendent within
the reasonable time set forth by the DPW Superintendent. A copy
of all results and documentations of the tests/inspections shall be
submitted to the DPW Superintendent within seven calendar days
of their completion.
(1)
If the tests/inspections required under Subsection A(1)
demonstrate that repairs or modifications of the facilities are
(2)
A.
§ 200-22 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 200-23
1:96
necessary, the party responsible for maintaining the facilities shall
make the necessary repairs/remedial actions as necessary within
such time period as directed by the DPW Superintendent. Any such
time period shall be reasonable and be set in consideration of the
degree of complexity and cost for their undertaking, but also in
consideration of the potential for impact on the environment and
public health for delays in implementation.
A maintenance schedule shall be developed for the life of any
stormwater management facility and shall state the maintenance to be
completed, the time period for completion, and who shall be legally
responsible to perform the maintenance. This maintenance schedule
shall be included with the stormwater management permit application.
B.
Records of installation are to be maintained in perpetuity. All records
of maintenance and inspections must be retained for a minimum of
three years by the owner as measured from the date of the maintenance
activity or inspection. A copy of all maintenance and inspection records
and reports shall be submitted to the DPW Superintendent within 30
calendar days of completion of the maintenance activity or inspection.
C.
Failure to adhere to approved maintenance practices (including, but
not limited to, schedules) is considered a violation of the stormwater
permit.
D.
§ 200-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-23
1:97

ARTICLE IX
Performance Guarantees
§ 200-24. Requirements.
The Planning Board shall require from the developer/applicant/owner
a financial guarantee in a form acceptable to the Planning Board prior
to any site work for the construction of a development requiring a
stormwater management facility. The amount of the financial guarantee
shall be in the amount set by the Planning Board, but shall not be
less than the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater
management facility. The financial guarantee so required in this article
shall include provisions relative to forfeiture for failure to complete
work specified in the approved stormwater management and erosion
and sediment control plan, compliance with all of the provisions of
this bylaw and other applicable laws and regulations, and any time
limitations. The financial guarantee shall not be fully released without
a final inspection of the completed work by the Town Engineer,
submission of "as-built" plans, and certification of completion by the
Planning Board of the stormwater management facilities being in
compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this bylaw.
A.
The performance guarantee required under this bylaw may be in
addition to the performance guarantee required for the development
under any other Town bylaw or regulation. The Planning Board may,
at its sole discretion, allow the performance guarantee required under
another South Hadley bylaw or regulation to substitute for the
performance guarantee required under this bylaw if the Board
determines the two guarantees serve the same function, the purposes
of this bylaw are adequately furthered, and the Town Engineer does not
object to the substitution.
B.
The performance guarantee is intended to be used for ensuring that
the stormwater management system functions as designed. In the event
the Planning Board determines (based on input from the Town Engineer
and/or a consultant engineer retained by the Planning Board) that
the system is not functioning as designed (such as, retaining water
in the detention basins for a period of time longer than anticipated
or at levels higher than anticipated), the Board may utilize proceeds
of the performance guarantee to have work undertaken to remedy
the deficiencies. Terms of the performance guarantee shall be spelled
out in a performance guarantee agreement. If the Planning Board
determines that a third-party engineer should review the site and make
recommendations as to whether the system needs to be modified and/or
identify modifications needed to achieve the stormwater management
system's goals, the Board may utilize portions of the performance
guarantee for employment of such an engineer. If this review
determines that the system needs to be modified to achieve the
stormwater management system's goals, the developer is required to
make such modifications as so directed.
C.
§ 200-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-24
1:99

ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 200-25. Enforcement authority.
The Planning Board and DPW Superintendent shall share enforcement
authority and may delegate said authority to appropriate Town officials,
including, but not limited to, the Town Planner and the Town Engineer.
Enforcement authority will rest with the Planning Board up until the time
that the Planning Board has approved the construction of the project and
returned any unused portion of the performance guarantee to the applicant.
Upon notification of the DPW Superintendent by the Town Planner that the
above-mentioned has occurred, enforcement authority thereafter will rest
with the DPW Superintendent.
§ 200-26. Violations.
Any development activity that has commenced or is conducted contrary to
this bylaw may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner
provided by law.
§ 200-27. Notice of violation.
When the Planning Board determines that an activity is not being carried
out in accordance with the requirements of this bylaw, it shall issue a
written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of
violation shall contain:
§ 200-28. Stop-work orders.
Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all
construction activities. This "stop-work order" will be in effect until the
Planning Board confirms that the development activity is in compliance and
the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice
A. The name and address of the owner applicant;
The address, when available, or the description of the building,
structure, or land upon which the violation is occurring;
B.
C. A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this bylaw and a time
schedule for the completion of such remedial action;
D.
A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed
against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed;
E.
A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of
service of notice of violation.
F.
§ 200-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-28
1:101
of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary
penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this
bylaw.
§ 200-29. Criminal and civil penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw, valid regulation, or the
terms or conditions in any permit or order prescribed or issued thereunder
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $300 per lot for each day such
violation occurs or continues or be subject to a civil penalty, which may be
assessed in an action brought on behalf of the Town of South Hadley in any
court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 200-30. Noncriminal disposition of violations.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town of South
Hadley may elect to utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth
in South Hadley bylaws.13 The penalty for the first violation shall be $100.
The penalty for the second violation shall be $200. The penalty for the third
and subsequent violations shall be $300. Each day or part thereof that such
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 200-31. Restoration of lands.
Any violator shall be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition
or another solution deemed appropriate by the Planning Board. In the event
that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the
Department of Public Works may, but shall not be required to do so, take
necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the
property until paid.
§ 200-32. Holds on occupancy permits.
Occupation permits will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater
practices have been made and accepted by the Planning Board.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 46, Penalties and Enforcement.
§ 200-28 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 200-32
1:102
Chapter 207
TAG SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties and enforcement — See Ch. 46.
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 158.
Licenses and permits — See Ch. 166.
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 190.
§ 207-1. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAG SALE — The sale of new and/or used items offered for sale, barter or
trade to the general public when conducted in whole or in part within a
residential or agricultural zone.
§ 207-2. License required; display; period of sale; fees.
No person shall conduct a tag sale in the Town unless s/he shall have
obtained a license therefor from the Selectboard. The license shall be
exhibited in a conspicuous place during the sale. All tag sale licenses shall
be for not more than a seventy-two-hour period, and the sale shall be limited
to hours of operation from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Fees for such tag sale
licenses shall be $10 per license.
§ 207-3. Location and frequency.
A tag sale may be conducted only from the owner's primary residence,
and no more than four tag sales may be conducted from a residence per
calendar year.
§ 207-4. Signs posted on utility poles prohibited.
No notices, advertising signs or directional signs are to be attached to utility
poles.
§ 207-5. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended
5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
as set forth in Chapter 1, § 1-6, of the Town Code. Enforcement of penalties
is granted to the South Hadley Police Department.
§ 200-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-5
1:103
Chapter 218
TRAILERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties and enforcement — See Ch. 46. Zoning — See Ch. 255.
§ 218-1. Use of trailers.
No person shall occupy a trailer or other structure designed to be mobile,
whether or not permanent additions are planned or constructed, for
dwelling or business purposes within the Town of South Hadley, with the
following exception: the Selectboard may issue, subject to applicable zoning
bylaws,14 a permit for the use of a trailer or mobile structure as a temporary
office incidental to construction on or development of the land on which the
trailer or mobile structure is to be located, such permit to be valid for a
period of six months and renewable for additional six-month periods at the
discretion of the Selectboard.
§ 218-2. Effect on existing structures.
No structure existing in the Town on the date of passage of this bylaw shall
be in any way affected by the provisions thereof.
§ 218-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine as
referenced in Chapter 46, Penalties and Enforcement, § 46-1. Each 24 hours
of illegal occupancy shall be regarded as a separate violation.
Chapter 223
TREES
§ 223-1. Authorization required prior to work.
A person shall not trim, cut down or remove a tree or shrub from land that
is owned or controlled by the Town unless s/he has first obtained written
authorization from the Tree Warden or his or her deputy and from the
Conservation Commission if under its jurisdiction.
§ 223-2. Maintenance of tree belt.
The owner of any real estate in the Town which abuts on any public or
private way within the Town where there is a tree belt shall keep said
tree belt mowed and free and clean of all litter, debris, noxious woods and
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 207-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 223-2
1:104
brush, and encroaching bushes, and shall maintain the same in a clean and
sanitary manner.
Chapter 230
VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Penalties and enforcement — See Ch. 46. Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 190.
§ 223-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-2
1:105

ARTICLE I
Off-Road Vehicles
§ 230-1. Operating restrictions.
No person shall use or operate a motorized off-road vehicle, including,
but not limited to, a motorcycle, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, or similar
motorized vehicle which is eligible for registration or any vehicle as
described in MGL c. 90B, § 20 on Town owned property, except vehicles
used for agriculture, forestry, lumbering, golf, construction, police and
fire protection, without prior written consent of the Selectboard and the
Conservation Commission with respect to property under its jurisdiction.
Further, no person shall use or operate such a vehicle on private property
without the consent of the landowner having the responsibility for the
management of such property.
§ 230-2. Consent requirements.
Any such consent shall be temporary in nature, shall specify the authorizing
person's name, telephone number, period of time during which it is in force,
and shall be subject to the prohibitions, restrictions, and requirements of
Town of South Hadley bylaws and Massachusetts General Laws, including,
without limitation, MGL c. 90B, § 26.
§ 230-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-2
1:107

ARTICLE II
Nonmotorized Vehicles
§ 230-3. Bicycles.
All bicycle operations and operators will comply with and meet all standards
and regulations set forth in MGL c. 85, § 11B. Furthermore, no operator
will allow a passenger; however, an operator may transport a child in
a Consumer Product Safety Commission approved helmet and properly
installed carrier seat and act in a safe and prudent manner at all times. No
infant under the age of one may be transported at any time.
§ 230-4. Other vehicles.
No person shall ride, drive, propel or wheel any sled, roller blades
(including but not limited to in-line skates), sidewalk surfboard or
skateboard within 100 feet of Town Hall, the police station, Council on
Aging, and libraries, or on any portion of state numbered highways for
which there is no sidewalk. Persons using such devices on sidewalks shall
yield the right-of-way to pedestrians; persons traveling upon streets shall
keep as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable and shall
yield the right-of-way when entering an intersection.
§ 230-5. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine
as referenced in Chapter 46, Penalties and Enforcement, § 46-1. Copies of
said violation notices will be forwarded to the parents or legal guardians of
violators under the age of 18.
§ 230-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-5
1:109

ARTICLE III
Motorized Scooters
§ 230-6. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOTORIZED SCOOTER — Any wheeled device, including, but not limited
to, the so-called mini-bikes, mini-choppers, pocket rockets, or motorized
skateboards, that has handlebars and is powered by a gas or electric motor
that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion at
any speed; but shall not include any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorized
bicycle as defined in MGL c. 90, § 1, or personal mobility assistance vehicles
in use by disabled persons, landscaping and similar equipment, and
scooters owned and operated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or
any subdivision thereof.
§ 230-7. Prohibited operation.
Motorized scooters shall not be operated upon any way, as defined in
MGL c. 90, § 1; shall not be operated upon any sidewalk; and shall not be
operated on any designated bicycle path.
§ 230-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-7
1:111

ARTICLE IV
Traffic
§ 230-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
BUS STOP — An area in the roadway set aside for the boarding of or
alighting from and the parking of buses.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections
or at any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossings by
lines on the road surface or by other markings or signs.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department, police vehicles,
ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state and municipal
departments or public service corporations when responding to an
emergency.
FUNERAL — Any procession of mourners properly identified as such
accompanying the remains of a human body.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width
to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles.
OFFICER — Any police officer, any investigator, examiner or inspector of
the Registry of Motor Vehicles, any constable or special officer.
OFFICIAL CURB MARKING — That portion of a curbing, the painting of
which has been authorized by the Selectboard and which has the written
approval of the Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
OFFICIAL STREET MARKING — Any painted line, legend, marking or
marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports to
direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the Selectboard
and which has the written approval of the Massachusetts Department of
Transportation.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS — All signs, markings and devices approved by
the Massachusetts Department of Transportation and placed or erected by
the authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose
of guiding, directing, warning or regulating traffic.
PARKING — A vehicle being stationary, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading, or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals, or while
making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being
made to move such vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by
human power, except bicycles or tricycles.
RAILROAD CROSSING — Any intersection of ways with a railroad right-ofway.
§ 230-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-8
1:113
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and
intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street or highway set aside for pedestrian
travel.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every
way open to the use of the public for purposes of travel.
TAXICAB — A motor vehicle used for the conveyance of persons for hire, but
not including motor vehicles operated in the manner and for the purpose
stated in MGL c. 159A, nor motor vehicles hired for livery purposes.
TAXICAB STAND — An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are
required to park while waiting to be engaged.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars or
other conveyances, either single or together, while using any street or
highway for the purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights, conforming
to the standards as prescribed by the Department of Transportation of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic may be alternately directed to stop
and proceed.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 230-9. Operation of motor vehicles.
Obedience to traffic signs and signals. No driver of any vehicle shall
disobey the instructions of any official traffic-control signal, sign,
marking, marker or legend, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer. Obedience to traffic control signals shall conform to applicable
sections of the Massachusetts General Laws and the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the Massachusetts
Department of Transportation.
A.
Passing. The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass a vehicle
proceeding in the same direction unless there is sufficient clear space
ahead on the right side of the roadway to permit the overtaking to be
completed without impeding the safe operation of any vehicle ahead.
B.
Operator of passed vehicle to give way. The driver of a vehicle when
about to be overtaken and passed by another vehicle approaching from
the rear shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle,
on visible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his or her vehicle
until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
C.
Obstructing traffic prohibited; when vehicles to pull to side of road. No
person shall drive in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily the
D.
§ 230-8 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 230-9
1:114
normal movement of traffic upon any street or highway. Officers are
hereby authorized to require any driver who fails to comply with this
subsection to drive to the side of the roadway and wait until such traffic
as has been delayed has passed.
Obstructing intersections and crosswalks. No driver shall enter an
intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space
on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk and on the right
half of the roadway to accommodate the vehicle s/he is operating
without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
E.
Following too closely. The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another
vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard
to the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and condition of the
street or highway.
F.
Slow vehicles to stay 200 feet apart; exception. When traveling outside
of a business or residential district, upon roadways less than 27 feet
wide and upon which vehicular traffic is permitted to operate in both
directions, the driver of any slow-moving vehicle shall not follow
another slow-moving vehicle within 200 feet, but this shall not be
construed to prevent a slow-moving vehicle from overtaking and
passing another slow-moving vehicle. This subsection shall not apply to
funerals or other lawful processions.
G.
Stopping and turning signals. Any stopping or turning signal shall be
given in sufficient time in advance of the movement indicated to give
ample warning to any person who may be affected by such movement,
and shall be given either by means of the hand and arm in the manner
specified below, or by a suitable mechanical or electrical device; except
that when a vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent the hand
and arm signal from being made or from being visible both to the front
and rear, the signal shall be given by a suitable mechanical or electrical
device. Hand and arm signals, as required herein, shall be made as
follows:
An intention to stop shall be indicated by extending the arm
horizontally to the left of and beyond the side of the vehicle.
(1)
An intention to turn to the left shall be indicated by extending the
arm horizontally to the left of and beyond the side of the vehicle,
and by pointing to the left with the index finger.
(2)
An intention to turn to the right shall be indicated by extending the
arm horizontally to the left of and beyond the side of the vehicle,
and by moving the hand in a circle.
(3)
H.
Driving on divided roads. Upon such roadways as are divided by a
parkway, grass plot, reservation, viaduct, subway or by any structure
or area, drivers shall keep to the right of such a division except when
otherwise directed by an officer, signs, signals or markings which shall
I.
§ 230-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-9
1:115
conform to the Massachusetts General Laws and the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices as adopted by the Massachusetts
Department of Transportation.
Driving on roads under construction. No operator shall enter upon
the road surface of any street or highway or section thereof when, by
reasons of construction, surface treatment, maintenance or the like, or
because of some unprotected hazard, such road surface is closed to
travel, and one or more signs, lights or signals have been erected to
indicate that all or part of the road surface of the street or highway is
not to be used, or when so advised by an officer, watchman, member of
a street or highway crew or employee of the Town, either audibly or by
signals conforming to the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as
adopted by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
J.
Driving on sidewalks prohibited. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive
upon any sidewalk except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
K.
Dropping or leaking loads. No vehicle shall be driven or moved on
any street or highway nor shall any owner of any vehicle knowingly
permit such vehicle to be driven or moved on any street or highway
unless such vehicle is so constructed or so loaded as to prevent its
contents from spilling, dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Vehicles loaded with any material which may be blown about
by the wind shall be suitably covered to prevent the contents from
being blown upon the streets or highways. All vehicles shall conform
to applicable standards of the Massachusetts General Laws and the
current regulations on solid waste disposal and collection as approved
by the Selectboard.15
L.
Bridge load limits. The Town Engineer shall determine the appropriate
load limit in conformance with the Massachusetts Highway Standards.
The Town Clerk and Department of Public Works shall maintain on
file a current list of Town bridges and their ratings and restrictions as
established by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
M.
Impeding traffic. No person shall obstruct or impede pedestrian traffic
upon any sidewalk or public pedestrian easement, or obstruct or
impede vehicular traffic upon any street in the Town, absent prior
permission from the Selectboard or the Department of Public Works.
Whoever violates this subsection shall pay a fine of not more than $50
for each violation.
N.
Officers to direct traffic. Officers designated by the Chief of Police are
hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by means of
visible or audible signals in conformance with the provisions of this
article; provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency, officers
of the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic as conditions may
require to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians.
O.
15.Editor's Note: See the Board of Health solid waste regulations in Ch. 300, Art. XII, Refuse
and Recycling Collection.
§ 230-9 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 230-9
1:116
§ 230-10. Traffic signs, signals, marking and zones.
Police may close streets temporarily. The Chief of Police may order the
temporary closure of any street or highway in an impending or existing
emergency or for any lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession,
provided that there is reasonable justification for the closing of such
street.
P.
Experimental or emergency regulations. For purposes of trial, the
Selectboard may make temporary or emergency rules regulating traffic
or test, under actual conditions, traffic signs, markings or devices other
than signals. No such experimental or emergency rule regulating traffic
shall remain in effect for a period of time longer than 30 days.
Q.
Exemptions from obedience. The provisions of this article shall not
apply to operators actually engaged in work upon a street or highway
closed to travel or under construction or repair, to officers when
engaged in the performance of public duties nor to drivers of
emergency vehicles while operating in an emergency and in
performance of public duties when the nature of the work of any of
these necessitates a departure from any part of this article. These
exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from
the consequences of a reckless disregard for the safety of others.
R.
Speed limit zones. The Town Clerk and Department of Public Works
shall maintain on file a current list of speed limits and restrictions
on Town ways as approved by the Selectboard. The provisions of this
regulation shall not, however, abrogate in any sense MGL c. 90, § 14.
A.
Stop signs. The Town Clerk and Department of Public Works shall
maintain on file a current list of stop sign locations on Town ways
as approved by the Selectboard. Every driver of a vehicle, railway
car or other conveyance approaching an intersection of ways where
there exists facing him or her an official sign bearing the word "STOP"
or a flashing red signal indication, such sign or signal having, apart
from these rules and orders, the written approval of the Massachusetts
Department of Transportation and the provisions of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and such approval being in effect,
shall, before proceeding through the intersection, bring such vehicle or
other conveyance to a complete stop at such point as may be clearly
marked by a sign or line, or if a point is not so marked, then at the
nearer line of crosswalk of the intersection. This subsection shall not
apply when the traffic is otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful
traffic-regulating sign, signal or device, or as provided in § 230-9O.
B.
Procedure at underpasses, overpasses and intersections with islands.
At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have
been separated and where the ways are connected by ramps and at
any intersection of ways in which there are traffic islands, drivers
of vehicles shall proceed only as indicated by official signs, signals
C.
§ 230-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-10
1:117
§ 230-11. Parking.
or markings, and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices as
adopted by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
One-way streets. The list of one-way streets is available and on file at
the Town Clerk's office.
D.
Signs and signals to be erected; when parking restrictions effective.
The Town Engineer is hereby authorized, and as to those signs
and signals required hereunder it shall be his or her duty, to place
and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official
traffic signs, signals, markings and safety zones. All signs, signals,
markings and safety zones shall conform to the standards as
prescribed by the Department of Transportation of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(1)
Parking restrictions shall be effective only during such time as a
sufficient number of official signs are erected and maintained in
each block and located so as to be easily visible to approaching
drivers.
(2)
E.
Authority to designate prohibited right turns on red traffic signals. The
Selectboard shall be authorized, except as otherwise determined by
state or federal law, to designate those intersections in Town where
right turns on red traffic signals are prohibited.
F.
Display of unauthorized signs, signals and markings prohibited;
removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to
display upon or in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal, marking
or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an
official traffic sign, signal, marking or device or which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view any official
sign or signal. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to remove
every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device or cause it to be
removed, without notice.
G.
Interference with signs, signals and markings prohibited; penalty. Any
person who willfully defaces, injures, moves, obstructs or interferes
with any official traffic sign, signal or marking shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding $100 for each and every offense.
H.
Designation and use of bus stops and taxicab stands. The location of all
bus stops and taxicab stands shall be specified by the Selectboard, and
in the case of taxicab stands the Selectboard shall designate who may
use them as such.
I.
General prohibitions. The Town Clerk and Police Department shall
maintain on file a current list of parking restrictions on Town ways as
approved by the Selectboard. In addition to the foregoing, no person
shall park a vehicle in any of the following places, and vehicles found
A.
§ 230-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 230-11
1:118
parked in violation of the provisions of this section may be moved by or
under the direction of an officer and at the expense of the owner:
(1) Within an intersection;
(2) Upon any sidewalk;
(3) Upon any crosswalk;
(4) Upon the roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district;
Upon a roadway where parking is permitted unless both wheels on
the right side of the vehicle are within 12 inches of the curb or
edge of the roadway, except streets or parts of streets where angle
parking is required;
(5)
On one-way streets, unless parked in the same direction in which
vehicles are required to move and with both wheels within 12
inches of the curb;
(6)
Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a
clear and unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic;
(7)
(8) Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant; and
Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of an intersecting way,
except alleys.
(9)
Handicapped parking.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any vehicle within
parking spaces on public or private property which are required,
under any provision of federal, state or local laws or regulations,
to be designated and are clearly marked as reserved for vehicles
owned and operated by disabled veterans or handicapped persons,
except a vehicle transporting a handicapped person and displaying
the special identification plate issued by any state or any Canadian
province, or to park in such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp
designed for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to a
street or public way.
(1)
The penalty for a violation of this bylaw shall be $100; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the
removal, in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 22D, of
any vehicle which is in violation of this bylaw.
(2)
B.
Parking time limitations. Parking time limitations are provided on the
list on file and available at the Town Clerk's office.
C.
Time limit for parking to load and unload commercial vehicles.
Operators of commercial vehicles may park in a prohibited zone on the
roadway or at the edge or curb of a street for the purpose of loading
or unloading of trucks or delivery wagons for a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
D.
§ 230-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-11
1:119
§ 230-12. Snow removal.
Parking on Town property. Town boards charged by law with custody
and control of Town property, other than public ways, may from time
to time, after a public hearing, adopt or amend rules and regulations
governing the parking of motor vehicles on said property. Said rules
and regulations may include a specified fine for violation thereof not
to exceed $25. Any regulation so adopted shall be effective 10 days
following posting in the Town Hall and publication in a newspaper
with general circulation in the Town. This subsection and any rules
or regulations adopted pursuant hereto may be enforced by the Police
Department pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D.
E.
Police may prohibit parking temporarily; removal of vehicles. The Chief
of Police may prohibit, temporarily, parking on any street or highway
or part thereof in an impending or existing emergency or for a lawful
assemblage, demonstration or procession, provided that there is
reasonable justification for such prohibition. Vehicles parked in places
where parking is prohibited temporarily may be moved by or under the
direction of an officer.
F.
Taxicab stands.
No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab upon any street
within a business district in any taxicab stand for a period of time
longer than 15 minutes except while actually engaged in loading
or unloading, provided that such loading and unloading does not
exceed a period of time longer than 1/2 hour.
(1)
No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business
district at any place other than the taxicab stand or stands
designated for the use of his or her taxicab or taxicabs except while
engaged or while waiting for an opportunity to use a taxicab stand
designated for his or her use.
(2)
G.
Owner of vehicle prima facie responsible for violations. If any vehicle is
found upon any street or highway in violation of any provisions of this
section and the identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner
or the person in whose name such vehicle is registered shall be held
prima facie responsible for such violations.
H.
Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to MGL c. 90, § 20C, and any person violating any of the rules
and regulations applicable to state highways made by the Department
of Transportation of the commonwealth, under authority of MGL c.
85, § 2, shall be subject to the penalty provided in such rules and
regulations. Parking violation procedures shall conform to MGL c. 90,
§ 20A 1/2 and any other applicable sections. The Town Clerk,
Department of Public Works and Police Department maintain a current
list of restrictions and prohibitions on parking on Town ways as
approved by the Selectboard.
I.
§ 230-11 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 230-12
1:120
Removal of vehicles which impedes snow plowing, etc.
The Town hereby adopts the terms and provisions of MGL c. 40,
§ 22D, providing for the removal of motor vehicles which impede
snowplowing or snow removal operations from municipal ways.
For the purpose of removing or piling snow or removing ice from
a public way or a private way to which the public has access,
the DPW Superintendent has authority, after providing reasonable
notice, to remove to a convenient place, including a public garage,
any vehicle that interferes with the snow or ice removal process. If
a vehicle is ordered removed by the Town, the contractor employed
by the Town for this purpose shall: [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by
Art. 13]
Keep a record of the registration number of each vehicle and
the place to which it is removed;
(a)
Immediately inform the Police Department that the vehicle has
been towed; and
(b)
Within 48 hours after the removal of the vehicle, send notice
by mail to the owner of the vehicle at his or her address as
recorded at the Registry of Motor Vehicles of the place to
which the vehicle has been removed. If the owner of the vehicle
is not known or is not on the record of the Registry of Motor
Vehicles for the commonwealth, the contractor shall, within
48 hours after removal of the vehicle, publish in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Town notice of the removal, the
registration number, if any, the type of vehicle, and the place
to which the vehicle was removed.
(c)
(1)
A person is not entitled to recover a vehicle that has been removed
under this section until s/he has:
Furnished to the Police Department satisfactory evidence of
his or her identity and of his or her ownership or right to
possession of this vehicle; and
(a)
Paid the reasonable costs, not exceeding the maximum charges
allowed by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation
for this area, of removing the vehicle to the place of storage
and all reasonable charges, if any, for storage, together with
the costs of publication or the sending of any notice required
under this section.
(b)
(2)
A.
Removal of snow from sidewalks. Within 48 hours after a parking ban
has been rescinded by the DPW Superintendent or, when no such
parking ban has been in place, 24 hours after the snow has ended,
the owner of property abutting a public way shall remove the snow
from the sidewalk(s) abutting such property. The South Hadley Police
Department may assess a fine of $100 for each twenty-four-hour period
B.
§ 230-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-12
1:121
§ 230-13. Taxicabs.
the walk remains impassable to pedestrians or the sidewalk is not
otherwise treated. [Amended 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
No person shall move snow by any means into or across a public
way without prior consent from the South Hadley Selectboard. This
allowance should be requested no later than October 15 for each winter
season (fiscal year should be referenced as a "season"), by electronic
e-mail to the Town Administrator for the Selectboard to consider. The
correspondence should include the specific address, the street which
the snow will cross or be stored and the reason for this allowance.
[Added 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 13]
C.
Licenses.
Operator licenses. No person shall operate a taxicab upon any
public way in the Town unless s/he has first been licensed by the
Selectboard pursuant hereto; provided, however, that no license
shall be required during 30 calendar days from the initial date
of employment as a taxicab operator. Any person seeking to be
licensed pursuant to this section for operation of a taxicab shall
apply to the Selectboard upon such form or in such manner as
the Selectboard may determine and shall simultaneously file with
the Chief of Police his or her name, address and descriptive data
from his or her license to operate motor vehicles, including any
restrictions thereon, together with a photograph comparable to any
photograph on his or her license to operate motor vehicles.
(1)
Vehicle licenses.
No taxicab shall be operated upon any public way in the Town
unless the taxicab has been licensed by the Selectboard
pursuant hereto. The owner of a taxicab shall apply to the
Selectboard for licenses upon such form or in such manner as
the Board may determine but shall present, together with such
application, the following:
Certificate of registration issued by Registrar of Motor
Vehicles;
[1]
Evidence of liability insurance upon the taxicab, together
with a statement of the insurance carrier that such
insurance shall not be cancelled or revoked without first
giving 15 days' notice thereof to the Selectboard; and
[2]
Evidence that the taxicab in equipped with a taximeter by
which the charge for hire is mechanically calculated for
distance and which has been tested and certified by the
Sealer of Weights and Measures pursuant to MGL c. 98,
§ 45.
[3]
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 230-12 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 230-13
1:122
All licenses issued pursuant hereto shall be signed by a majority of
the Selectboard, shall set forth the name, residence and place of
business of the licensee, and in the case of taxicab licenses shall
further set forth the identification number, current registration
number and the number of persons, exclusive of the operator,
which the vehicle may carry, and shall be prominently displayed
within the taxicab.
(3)
Each taxicab license shall expire simultaneously with the
registration of the vehicle and shall be annually renewed. Each
operator's license shall expire on December 31 of the year issued
and shall be annually renewed.
(4)
No license shall be issued until the fee allowed by MGL c. 40, § 22
therefor has been paid to the Town Clerk.
(5)
Nontransferability. No license issued pursuant hereto shall be
transferable or used for any person or vehicle other than the one
described on its face.
(6)
Revocation and suspension. The Selectboard may, after reasonable
notice and hearing, revoke or suspend any license issued pursuant
hereto.
(7)
Holders subject to rules and regulations. All licensees hereunder
shall be subject to such rules, orders or regulations as may from
time to time be promulgated by the Selectboard.
(8)
Inspection of taximeters. The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall,
from time to time, inspect taximeters in licensed taxicabs. In the event
that his or her inspection reveals any defect in a taximeter it shall be
forthwith removed from the taxicab and such taxicab shall not be used
until the defective taximeter is repaired or replaced, such repaired or
replacement taximeter to be inspected and sealed as aforesaid before
such taxicab is used.
B.
Operation of taxicabs. No operator of a taxicab shall operate more than
12 hours during any consecutive twenty-four-hour period, nor carry
more passengers than the number allowed by the taxicab license of the
vehicle.
C.
D. Rates. Rate authority and approval are vested in the licensing board.
Penalties. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be
punished by a fine as referenced in Chapter 46, Penalties and
Enforcement, § 46-1.
E.
§ 230-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 230-13
1:123
Chapter 235
VENDING MACHINES
§ 235-1. Location restrictions; applicability.
No vending machines, including, but not limited to, newspaper vending
machines, shall be placed in any outdoor areas (including, but not limited to,
public rights-of-way) under the care and control of the Town except where
permitted at parks and athletic facilities. This restriction shall be applicable
to all vending machines, regardless of whether or not the contents thereof
are offered for a fee.
Chapter 237
WATER
§ 230-13 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 235-1
1:124
ARTICLE I
Testing in Public Buildings and Municipal Facilities
[Adopted 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 11]
§ 237-1. Testing permitted.
The Town creates a General Bylaw to allow the testing of water in public
buildings and other municipal facilities for the presence of lead and copper.
The appliances and systems tested should be those which could likely and/
or reasonably present a health consequence for the public.
§ 237-2. Report of results.
A report of all testing should be available on the Town of South Hadley
website and a copy posted in each building participating in said test.
§ 237-3. Oversight; promulgation of regulations.
This testing should be overseen, and regulations promulgated, by the South
Hadley Board of Health and be consistent with the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection, and as further expressed in
Appendix B.16
§ 237-4. Expansion of testing.
The Health Director may subsequently instruct the municipal agent in
control of a building or facility which does not meet the health and safety
standards for lead and copper to expand testing to additional outlets or
appliances and to take action forthwith to mitigate the exposure to the
public.
16.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 237-4
1:125
Chapter 240
WETLANDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 200.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
Conservation Commission regulations — See
Ch. 305.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 360.
§ 240-1. Purpose and authority.
The purpose of this bylaw is to maintain the quality of the surface water,
the quality and level of the groundwater table and water recharge areas
for existing or potential water supplies; to protect the public health
and safety; to protect persons and property against the hazards of
floodwater inundation; and, to provide for the reasonable protection
and conservation of certain irreplaceable natural features, resources
and amenities for the benefit and welfare of the present and future
inhabitants of the Town of South Hadley. [Amended 1-10-2018 STM
by Art. 7]
A.
Accordingly, this bylaw protects the wetlands, water resources, and
adjoining land areas in the Town of South Hadley by providing prior
review and control of activities deemed by the Conservation
Commission (hereinafter the "Commission") to have significant or
cumulative detrimental effect upon the following resource area values.
These values (collectively, the "resource area values protected by this
bylaw") include, but are not limited to:
(1) Protection of public or private water supply.
(2) Protection of groundwater.
(3) Flood control.
(4) Erosion and sedimentation control.
(5) Storm damage prevention.
(6) Prevention of water pollution.
Protection of fisheries and wildlife habitat and rare species habitat,
including rare plant species.
(7)
(8) Recreation and agriculture values.
B.
This bylaw is intended to utilize the Home Rule authority of this
municipality to protect additional resource areas, with additional
standards and procedures to augment those of the Wetlands Protection
Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations thereunder (310 CMR 10.00).
C.
§ 237-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 240-2
1:126
§ 240-2. Jurisdiction.
In accordance with the above purpose, no person shall commence to
remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, pollute, discharge into, or
otherwise alter the following resource areas: any freshwater wetlands
(including marshes, wet meadows, bogs and swamps); vernal pools;
banks; the water column of and the land under lakes, ponds, reservoirs,
creeks, rivers, and streams; lands within 100 feet of any of the aforesaid
resource areas (the "buffer zone"); isolated and bordering lands subject
to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface water; and the twohundred-
foot riverfront areas, without a permit from the Commission,
or as provided in this bylaw. Said resource areas shall be protected
whether or not they border surface water.
A.
Any activity proposed or undertaken within the aforesaid one-hundredfoot
buffer zone is subject to regulation under this bylaw. Buffer zones
are vital in protecting the resource area values of this bylaw in many
ways, including, but not limited to:
Slowing water flow, thereby decreasing water velocities, allowing
infiltration, providing flood control and reducing the erosion
potential of stormwater runoff;
(1)
Trapping sediment and other insoluble pollutants, thereby
decreasing or preventing pollution of the wetlands and water
bodies;
(2)
Reducing nutrient overloading by filtering nutrients bound to
sediment in the surface flow, and removing nutrients from
groundwater through uptake in vegetation;
(3)
Providing permeable soils that contribute to groundwater
recharge;
(4)
Producing leaf litter and biomass which increases the humus
content of the soil and increase in absorption and infiltration;
(5)
Scattering sunlight and providing shade, thereby lowering water
temperature within wetlands and water bodies;
(6)
(7) Providing essential habitat for wetland-associated species; and
Providing a visual separation between wetlands and developed
environments.
(8)
B.
Lands within 100 feet of specific resource areas are presumed to be
important to the protection of these resources because activities
undertaken in close proximity to wetlands and other resources have a
high likelihood of adverse impact upon the wetland or other resource,
either immediately, as a consequence of construction, or over time,
as a consequence of daily operation or existence of the activities.
These adverse impacts from construction and use can include, without
C.
§ 240-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-2
1:127
§ 240-3. Conservation zone.
limitation, erosion, siltation, loss of groundwater, degraded, poor water
quality, and loss of wildlife habitat.
Intermittent streams are important for storm damage prevention, flood
control, groundwater protection, wildlife habitat, and recreation values.
During the spring, summer and fall these streams disperse snow melt
and storm runoff across the landscape, thereby preventing dangerous
volumes and flows from spilling over roadways and property. This broad
dispersal also allows for larger volumes of water to infiltrate into the
ground, recharging groundwater supplies. Intermittent streams are an
essential source of food and water for wildlife and are often the only
source of water in higher elevations in Town. During all seasons, but
especially in winter and spring, intermittent streams act as essential
corridors for animal movement, especially when food is scarce.
Accordingly, this bylaw protects intermittent streams and their
associated bordering vegetated wetlands.
D.
The Commission shall presume that all areas meeting the definition of
"vernal pools" under § 240-12 of this bylaw, and the adjacent upland
area, perform essential habitat functions. This presumption may be
overcome only by the presentation of credible evidence which, in the
judgment of the Commission, demonstrates that the basin or depression
does not provide essential vernal pool habitat functions. Any formal
evaluation should be performed by an individual meeting the
qualifications under the wildlife habitat section of the Wetlands
Protection Act regulations.
E.
The Commission shall require that a fifty-foot-wide strip of undisturbed
vegetation, called the "conservation zone," be maintained adjacent to
any freshwater wetland, bank, or water body, but not including lands
subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or surface water, and
the two-hundred-foot riverfront area. No work, structures or alterations
will be allowed within the conservation zone, except for minor
activities, such as mowing, gardening, and pruning within existing
lawn, garden or landscaped areas, as described in the regulations
adopted by the Commission. The conservation zone shall not apply
to artificially created stormwater management structures such as
detention and retention basins, artificially lined ponds, and constructed
wastewater treatment lagoons.
A.
The conservation zone for vernal pools will be based on the size of
the basin; with a twenty-five-foot setback of undisturbed vegetation for
vernal pools less than 10,000 square feet, and a fifty-foot setback of
undisturbed vegetation for vernal pools 10,000 square feet or greater
in size.
B.
Where the conservation zone is already altered in such a manner
that the presumed protection offered by the buffer zone is not being
met, the Commission may issue an order of conditions for a project,
C.
§ 240-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 240-3
1:128
§ 240-4. Exemptions and exceptions.
provided that it finds that the proposed alterations will not increase
adverse impacts on that specific portion of the conservation zone or
associated wetland resource areas, and that there is no technically
feasible construction alternative. In such cases, the Commission may
modify the scope and detail of the proposed project to minimize impact
on or improve protection of the values protected by this bylaw.
The application and permit required by this bylaw shall not be required
for maintaining, repairing, remodeling, but not substantially changing
or enlarging an existing and lawfully located single-family residential
structure or customary appurtenance thereto, as long as the footprint
of any proposed addition is not any closer to the wetland or other
resource areas than the existing structure, and there is no reasonable
alternate location on the owner's property for the new structure that is
further from the resource areas, as determined by the Commission.
A.
The Commission may issue a generic or ongoing permit for maintaining,
repairing, or replacing an existing and lawfully located structure or
facility used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, steam,
water, telephone, telegraph or other telecommunication services, storm
drainage, and sewer, provided that the structure or facility is not
substantially changed or enlarged, as determined by the Commission,
and provided that written application has been given to the Commission
prior to commencement of work, and provided that the work conforms
to performance standards and design specifications in regulations
adopted by the Commission. These standards and specifications shall
conform to the best management practices in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. This ongoing permit may apply to other institutions in
Town with facilities and structures, for normal maintenance activities
within the buffer zone, as determined by the Commission. Examples
include but are not limited to educational institutions, fire districts, golf
courses, and residential retirement communities.
B.
The application and permit required by this bylaw shall not apply to
emergency projects necessary for the protection of the health or safety
of the public, provided that the work is to be performed by or has
been ordered to be performed by an agency of the commonwealth, or
a political subdivision thereof, provided that advance notice, oral or
written, has been given to the Commission prior to commencement of
work or within 24 hours after commencement of the emergency project,
and provided that the work is performed only for the time and place
certified by the Commission for the limited purposes necessary to abate
the emergency. Upon failure to meet these and other requirements of
the Commission, the Commission may, after notice and public hearing,
revoke or modify an emergency project approval and order restoration
and mitigation measures.
C.
The application and permit required by this bylaw shall not be required
for work performed for normal maintenance or improvement of land
D.
§ 240-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-4
1:129
§ 240-5. Application for permits and requests for determination.
which is lawfully in agricultural use, as defined in the Wetlands
Protection Act regulations, 310 CMR 10.04, at the time the work takes
place.
The Commission, at its sole and reasonable discretion, may issue a
permit for the limited projects identified in 310 CMR 10.53(3), with
the same or additional performance standards, such as limits on road
width or location or multiple driveway crossings. Proposed activities
that qualify as limited projects per 310 CMR 10.53 (e.g., maintenance
of public roadways, water-dependent uses, public water supply
exploration and access driveways) must be reviewed by the
Conservation Commission, which has the discretion to permit with
conditions to ensure that the interests of the Wetlands Protection Bylaw
are protected.
E.
The application and permit required by this bylaw shall not be required
for minor activities within the one-hundred-foot buffer zone and twohundred-
foot riverfront area, as defined in the Wetlands Protection Act
regulations, 310 CMR 10.02(2)(b), including the "simplified review"
process. Such minor activities include, but are not limited to, unpaved
pedestrian walkways, fencing (provided it does not constitute a barrier
to wildlife), vista pruning, and planting of native plant species of trees,
shrubs or groundcover. Under this bylaw they will also include
maintaining and repairing existing roads and driveways (excluding
bridges and culverts), provided there is no additional alteration of
resource areas, maintaining and repairing existing buildings and
structures, provided the footprint remains the same and there is no
additional alteration of resource areas, mowing of existing lawns, and
normal maintenance of trees and shrubs.
F.
Where this bylaw and the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40,
and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00, have concurrent jurisdiction, the
Commission may accept the notice of intent, abbreviated notice of
intent, request for determination of applicability, abbreviated notice of
resource area delineation and other forms and plans filed under the
Wetlands Protection Act as the permit application and plans under this
bylaw. The Commission may amend what forms it accepts and issues in
its Bylaw regulations.
A.
The Commission shall develop a set of presubmission requirements
for the assistance of persons making application to the Commission,
a current copy of which shall be on file with the Commission. Any
person filing a RFD or other permit application with the Commission
shall complete the filing in accordance with such of those requirements
which are reasonable and necessary as determined by the Commission
or its staff. The Commission reserves the right to ask for any additional
information it deems reasonable and necessary to evaluate the project.
[Amended 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 7]
B.
§ 240-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 240-5
1:130
§ 240-6. Notice and hearings. [Amended 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 7]
Written application in the form of a notice of intent or abbreviated
notice of intent shall be filed with the Commission to perform activities
affecting resource areas and the inner 50 feet of the buffer zone
protected by this bylaw. The permit application shall include such
information and plans as are deemed reasonable and necessary by the
Commission and as specified in bylaw and its regulations to describe
proposed activities and their effects on the resource areas protected by
this bylaw. No activity shall commence without receiving and complying
with a permit issued pursuant to this bylaw.
C.
Any person desiring to know whether proposed work or an area is
subject to this bylaw, or proposing work in the outer 50 feet of the
buffer zone, may in writing request a determination of applicability
from the Commission. Such a request for determination of applicability
(RFD) shall include information and plans as are deemed reasonable
and necessary by the Commission.
D.
Any person desiring to certify, for purposes of this bylaw, the limits
of resource areas on a site may submit as application an abbreviated
notice of resource area delineation (ANRAD) for Commission
confirmation. Such an ANRAD shall include such information and plans
as deemed reasonable and necessary by the Commission to describe
and define the wetland resources areas. The Commission will also
accept the ANRAD as an application for a simplified review as defined
in the Wetlands Protection Act regulations, 310 CMR 10.02(2)(b)2.
E.
At the time of the permit application or RFD, the applicant shall pay
a filing fee according to the schedule in the associated regulations
adopted by the Commission. This fee is not refundable and is only for
applications where a filing fee is not already required by the Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
The Commission may waive the filing fee for an application or request
filed by a government agency, or if the applicant can prove financial
hardship, or other extenuating circumstances.
F.
Request for Determination of Applicability (RFD). A RFD shall be
submitted by certified mail or hand delivery to the Commission. The
Commission shall conduct a public meeting on the RFD after written
legal notice, given at the expense of the applicant, has been published
at least five business days (not including Saturdays or Sundays) prior
to the meeting, in a newspaper of general circulation in South Hadley.
The Commission shall commence the public meeting on any RFD within
21 days from receipt of the properly completed application, unless an
extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.
A.
Notice of Intent (NOI), Abbreviated Notice of Intent, and Abbreviated
Notice of Resource Area Delineation (ANRAD). A permit application
shall be submitted by certified mail or hand delivery to the Commission.
Any person submitting a permit application to perform work in an area
B.
§ 240-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-6
1:131
§ 240-7. Coordination with other boards. [Amended 1-10-2018 STM
by Art. 7]
The Conservation Commission shall include in their regulations the number
and form of applications to be required by all applicants. Further, the
Commission shall also provide in its regulations, that all applications are
distributed to and coordinated with departments, boards, and officials
which the Commission determines may have an interest in or be impacted
by the proposed activity. The Commission shall consider any comments or
recommendations such departments, boards, and officials may submit to the
regulated by this bylaw or certify resource boundaries shall at the same
time give written notice thereof, by mailing by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or by hand delivery, to all abutters according to the
most recent records of the Board of Assessors, including those across
a traveled way or across a body of water (excluding the Connecticut
River) from the parcel which is the subject of this application. The
notice shall include a copy of the application or request, with plans,
or shall state where copies may be examined. If the person filing
the permit application is not the owner of the area subject to the
request or application, the applicant shall also give written notice of the
permit application and hearing to the owner of the parcel. The person
providing such notices to abutters or other property owners shall file an
affidavit affirming that notification was done, with a copy of the notice,
with the Commission.
The Commission shall conduct a public hearing on any permit
application after written legal notice, given at the expense of the
applicant, has been published at least five working days (not including
Saturdays or Sundays) prior to the hearing, in a newspaper of general
circulation in South Hadley. The Commission shall commence the public
hearing on any permit application within 21 days from receipt of the
properly completed application, unless an extension is authorized in
writing by the applicant.
C.
Whenever possible, the Commission shall combine its meeting or
hearing under this bylaw with the meeting or hearing conducted under
the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310
CMR 10.00, and may combine the public notices thereof.
D.
The Commission shall have the authority to continue the meeting or
hearing to a certain date announced at the meeting or hearing, for
reasons stated at the hearing, which may include the receipt of
additional information from the applicant or others deemed reasonable
and necessary by the Commission in its discretion, or comments and
recommendations of the Department of Public Works, Planning Board,
Board of Health, and Building Inspector. In the event that the
Commission determines that snow cover, ice, or other weather
conditions prevent the verification of the wetland boundary line, the
Commission shall continue the meeting or hearing to a date certain
when the determination can be made.
E.
§ 240-6 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 240-7
1:132
Commission. Any such comments or recommendations are deemed a public
record and the applicant shall have the right to receive and respond to any
such comments or recommendations.
§ 240-8. Burden of proof.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving, by a
preponderance of credible evidence, that the work proposed in the permit
application will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative effects
upon the resource area values protected by this bylaw. Failure to provide
adequate evidence to the Commission supporting this burden shall be
sufficient cause for the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with
conditions.
§ 240-9. Permit determinations and conditions.
If the Commission, after a public meeting or hearing, determines that
the activities which are the subject of the RFD or permit application
are likely to have a significant individual or cumulative effect upon the
resource area values protected by this bylaw, the Commission, within
21 days of the close of the hearing, shall issue or deny a permit for the
activities requested. If it issues a permit, the Commission shall impose
conditions which the Commission deems reasonable and necessary or
desirable to protect those values, and all activities shall be done in
accordance with those conditions. [Amended 1-10-2018 STM by Art.
7]
A.
Where no conditions are adequate to protect those resource area
values, the Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to
meet the requirements of this bylaw. It may also deny a permit for
failure to: 1) submit necessary information and plans requested by the
Commission; 2) meet the design specifications, performance standards
and other requirements in the regulations of the Commission; or 3)
avoid or prevent unacceptable significant or cumulative adverse effects
upon the resource area values protected by this bylaw. Due
consideration shall be given to any demonstrated hardship on the
applicant by reason of denial, as presented at the public hearing.
[Amended 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 7]
B.
The Commission shall have the right to deny or delay a permit if a
previous permit on the same property or on contiguous properties
under the same or affiliated ownership has not been complied with or
has not received a certificate of compliance.
C.
When the applicant requesting a determination, permit, certification,
amendment or extension is not the owner of the area subject to the
request or application, the Commission shall send the determination,
orders or other action to the owner as well as to the person making the
request.
D.
§ 240-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-9
1:133
§ 240-10. Waivers.
Permits and determinations shall expire three years from the date of
issuance. At the discretion of the Commission, any permit may be
renewed for up to three additional years, provided that the Commission
receives a request for an extension in writing prior to expiration of the
permit, with sufficient time for the Commission to issue an extension
prior to the permit expiration. Applicants are advised to submit
requests for extensions at least 30 days prior to the permit expiration
date. Said request shall include the expected completion date and the
reasons for the requested extension.
E.
Violations to this bylaw, submission of false or erroneous information,
new information that substantially alters the likely impact of the project
on wetland resources or values, or clear evidence that an error has
been made may cause the Commission to revoke or modify any permit,
determination or resource area boundary confirmation issued under
this bylaw, after notice to the permittee and holding a public meeting.
F.
The Commission, in an appropriate case, may combine the permit
orders or determination issued under this bylaw with the determination
of applicability, order of conditions, order of resource area delineation,
certificate of compliance, or other forms issued under the Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
G.
No work in any permit application shall be undertaken until the permit
issued by the Commission with respect to such work has been recorded
in the Registry of Deeds, or, if the land affected is registered land,
in the Registry Section of the Land Court for the district wherein the
land lies, and until the holder of the permit certifies in writing to the
Commission that the permit has been recorded. Such certification shall
include the book and page or instrument number and date. Recording
is not necessary for RFDs.
H.
To prevent wetland loss, the Commission shall require applicants to
avoid all wetlands alteration wherever feasible; shall minimize wetlands
alteration; and where alteration is unavoidable, shall require full
mitigation. The Commission may authorize or require replication of
wetlands as a form of mitigation, but only with adequate security, or
professional design, a 2:1 replacement ratio, and monitoring to ensure
success, because of the high likelihood of failure of replication.
I.
Strict compliance with this bylaw may be waived when, in the judgment
of the Commission, such action is in the public interest and is consistent
with the intent and purpose of this bylaw. Any request for a waiver must
be submitted to the Commission in writing and presented at the time of
filing, along with a written justification stating why a waiver is desired
or needed, is in the public benefit, and is consistent with the intent and
purpose of this bylaw. The waiver is intended to be employed only in
rare and unusual cases.
A.
§ 240-9 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 240-10
1:134
§ 240-11. Regulations.
After public notice and public hearing, the Commission shall promulgate
rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this bylaw. Failure by the
Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal declaration
of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate
the effect of this bylaw. Public notice shall be given at least three weeks
prior to such hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation
in South Hadley and by posting with the Town Clerk. At a minimum, these
regulations shall define key terms in this bylaw not inconsistent with this
bylaw.
§ 240-12. Definitions.
Except as otherwise provided in this bylaw or regulations of the
Commission, the definitions of terms in this bylaw shall be as set forth in
the Wetlands Protection Act, which terms, as used herein, shall include
the provisions of MGL c. 131, § 40, and in the regulations hereunder, 310
CMR 10.00 et seq. The following terms shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this bylaw:
ALTER — The following actions, without limitation, when undertaken in
resource areas subject to this bylaw:
Waivers may be granted on a case-by-case basis by the Commission
allowing work within the conservation zone when it can be
demonstrated by the applicant to the satisfaction of the Commission
that work or alterations within the conservation zone:
Will not have a significant detrimental impact to the resource area
values specified under this bylaw; or
(1)
That any impact is offset by the need to accommodate a public
benefit such as public health and safety, handicapped accessibility,
or community enhancement relative to its cultural, environmental,
educational, or recreational interests; or
(2)
That the project will result in a long-term improvement to the
natural capacity of a resource area to protect the resource area
values of this bylaw, while minimizing any adverse impacts with a
carefully considered and environmentally sensitive design; or
(3)
Avoid a decision that so restricts the use of property that it
constitutes an unconstitutional taking without compensation.
(4)
B.
In such cases, the Commission may modify the scope and detail of the
proposed project to minimize impact on the values protected by this
bylaw. Nothing herein shall preclude the maintenance of an existing
structure located within the conservation zone.
C.
Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregate
materials of any kind;
A.
§ 240-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-12
1:135
APPURTENANCE — Any structural adjunct or incidental construct to a
single-family residential structure or on any parcel of land, such as a septic
system, garage, shed, deck, dock, porch, patio, or swimming pool.
BUFFER ZONE — Lands within 100 feet of any wetland resource area or
water body, except bordering land subject to flooding, isolated land subject
to flooding that is not vernal pool habitat, and riverfront area.
CUMULATIVE EFFECT — An effect that is significant when considered
in combination with other activities that have occurred, are going on
simultaneously, or that are likely to occur, whether such other activities
have occurred or are contemplated as a separate phase of the same project,
such as the build-out of a subdivision or an industrial park, or unrelated but
reasonably foreseeable actions, including other development projects that
are currently under construction, under review, or that may be expected to
come forward.
ISOLATED LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING — An isolated depression or
closed basin at least 500 square feet in size, which serves as a ponding
area for run-off or high groundwater which has risen above the ground
surface. These may include vernal pools. Not included are swimming pools,
artificially lined ponds or pools, or wastewater lagoons, the construction of
which may be regulated, but do not themselves constitute resource areas
protected under this bylaw.
MAINTENANCE — Routine and/or periodic activity undertaken to prevent,
stop, or to correct deterioration of an existing condition, facility or structure
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristics, sedimentation patterns, flow patterns, or flood
retention characteristics;
B.
C. Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may degrade
water quality;
D.
E. Placing of fill or removal of material which would change elevation;
Driving of piles, erection, or expansion of buildings, or structures of any
kind;
F.
G. Placing of obstructions or objects in water or waterways;
H. Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees;
Changing water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other
physical, biological, or chemical characteristics of any waters;
I.
Any activities, changes or other work which may cause or tend to
contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater;
J.
Incremental activities that have or may have a cumulative adverse
impact on the resource areas protected by this bylaw.
K.
§ 240-12 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 240-12
1:136
so that, after completion, the condition, facility, or structure is as near as
possible to that which originally existed.
PERMIT APPLICATION — Any application for a permit of action under the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, or the South
Hadley Non-Zoning Wetlands Bylaw. Examples include, but are not limited
to, a notice of intent, abbreviated notice of intent, abbreviated notice of
resource area delineation, or request for an amendment to a notice of intent
or extension to an order of conditions.
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership,
corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the
commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to
Town bylaws, administrative agencies, public or quasi-public corporations
or bodies, the Town of South Hadley, and any other legal entity, its legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.
POND — Any open body of fresh water, either naturally occurring or manmade,
which is never without standing water due to natural causes except
during periods of extended drought. Notwithstanding the above, the
following are not protected as ponds under this bylaw: swimming pools or
other basins lined with impervious material, wastewater treatment lagoons,
and water bodies excavated from upland within active gravel pits or
quarries.
RARE SPECIES — All vertebrate and invertebrate animal and all plant
species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the
Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife, regardless of whether the
site in which they occur has been previously identified by the Division.
RECREATION — Any passive leisure activity that does not conflict with
or diminish other wetland functions and values. Examples include, but are
not limited to, the following: legally licensed fishing or hunting, boating,
swimming, walking and hiking, canoeing, and bird watching.
RIVER OR PERENNIAL STREAM — A naturally flowing body of water that
empties into any ocean, lake, pond, or other river and which normally
flows throughout the year. The Commission may by regulations set criteria
for determining whether a particular stream or section of stream flows
throughout the year.
RIVERFRONT AREA — The area of land between a river's mean annual
high water line and a parallel line measured horizontally 200 feet away. The
riverfront area may include or overlap other resource areas or their buffer
zones. Further definition of "riverfront" is in 310 CMR 10.58.
STREAM — Any body of running water, including brooks and creeks, which
moves in a definite channel in the ground, due to hydraulic gradient, and
which flows within, into or out of an area subject to protection under MGL
c. 131, § 40. A portion of a stream may flow through a culvert or beneath
a bridge. Such a body of water which does not flow throughout the year is
intermittent. Streams may be perennial (see "river") or intermittent. For the
purposes of this bylaw, only those streams shown on a map created for the
regulations associated with this bylaw shall be protected under this bylaw.
§ 240-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-12
1:137
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGING OR ENLARGING — As pertaining to § 240-4
of this bylaw, limited to no more than a one-thousand-square-foot footprint
addition in the conservation zone.
VERNAL POOL — In addition to that already defined under the Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations thereunder, 310 CMR
10.00, any confined basin or depression not occurring in existing lawns,
gardens, landscaped areas, or driveways which, in at least most years, holds
water for a minimum of two continuous months during the spring and/or
summer, is at least 500 square feet in size at some time during most years,
is free of adult predatory fish populations, and provides essential breeding
and rearing habitat functions for amphibian, reptile, or other vernal pool
community species, regardless of whether the site has been certified by
the Massachusetts Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program. The
buffer zone for vernal pools shall extend 100 feet from the mean annual
high water line defining the depression, but shall not extend over existing
lawns, gardens, landscaped or developed areas. For the purposes of this
bylaw, only certified vernal pools, and potentially certifiable vernal pools as
shown on a map created for the regulations associated with this bylaw shall
be protected, if they meet the certification standards.
§ 240-13. Security.
§ 240-14. Enforcement.
The intent of this section is to secure against the potential of significant
environmental damage. As part of a permit issued under this bylaw,
in addition to any security required by any other Town or state board,
agency or official, the Commission may require that the performance
and observance of the conditions imposed hereunder (including
conditions requiring mitigation work) be secured wholly or in part by
one or more of the methods described below:
By a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities
or other undertaking of financial responsibility sufficient, in the
opinion of the Commission, to be released in whole or in part
upon issuance of a certificate of compliance for work performed
pursuant to the permit.
(1)
By a conservation restriction, easement, or other covenant
enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the
owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of the Town
of South Hadley and members of the public, whereby the permit
conditions shall be performed and observed before any lot may be
conveyed, other than by mortgage deed. This method shall be used
only with the consent of the applicant.
(2)
A.
The bond or covenant shall, in the case of the bond, be given to the
Town, and in the case of a covenant, shall be recorded in the Registry
of Deeds at least 10 business days before the start of any work under
the permit.
B.
§ 240-12 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 240-14
1:138
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, or otherwise
alter resource areas protected by this bylaw, or cause, suffer, or allow
such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill, or otherwise fail to
restore illegally altered land to its original condition, or fail to comply
with a permit or an enforcement order issued pursuant to this bylaw.
A.
The filing of a permit application or RFD shall constitute the consent of
the owner and grant the authority for the Commission and its agents,
officers and employees, with proper identification, to enter upon
privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under
this bylaw. The Commission may make or cause to be made such
examinations, surveys or sampling as the Commission deems
reasonable and necessary, subject to the laws of the United States and
the commonwealth.
B.
The Commission shall have the authority to enforce this bylaw, its
regulations, and permits issued thereunder by violation notices,
noncriminal citations under MGL c. 40, § 21D, administrative orders,
and civil and criminal court actions. Any person who violates provisions
of this bylaw may be ordered to restore the property to its original
condition and/or take other action deemed reasonable and necessary to
remedy such violations, or may be fined, or both.
C.
Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen shall direct
the Town Counsel to take legal action for enforcement under civil law.
Upon request of the Commission, the Chief of Police shall take legal
action for enforcement under criminal law.
D.
Town boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer
having police powers, shall have authority to assist the Commission in
enforcement.
E.
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw, regulations,
permits or administrative orders issued thereunder, shall be served
with a notice of violation enumerating the alleged violations. If after
10 business days the Commission has not received what it deems to
be either 1) sufficient evidence demonstrating that no violations have
occurred, or 2) a filing that will remove the violations along with
evidence that sufficient progress is being made to correct the violation,
then the violator shall be punished by a fine of $100 per offense.
Beginning 10 business days after the date of the notice of violation,
each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues, or
unauthorized fill or other alteration remains in place, shall constitute a
separate offense, and each provision of this bylaw, regulations, permits,
or administrative orders violated shall constitute a separate offense.
F.
In addition to any fine, the Town shall be entitled to reimbursement
for all expenses, including legal fees, incurred in prosecuting said
violation, either civilly or criminally.
G.
§ 240-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-15
1:139
§ 240-15. Appeals.
A decision of the Conservation Commission may be appealed by the
following persons: the applicant, the owner if not the applicant, any person
aggrieved by a determination or order, any owner of land abutting the land
on which the work is to be done, or any 10 residents of the Town, in the
following manner(s):
Local administrative appeal.
Any Commission decision shall become final 10 days after the
Commission mails notice thereof to the applicant unless the
applicant, or other persons listed above, after mailing and before
the expiration of 10 days, requests in writing an appeal through
a local administrative review. The appeal shall be heard by a
committee appointed by the Selectboard, and consisting of: two
members of the Planning Board, a Selectboard member, a
representative from the Board of Health, and a representative from
the Department of Public Works. This committee shall be appointed
annually in advance of any appeal request. The request for a local
administrative appeal shall state with reasonable specificity the
issues the applicant requests the committee to consider.
(1)
Within 10 days of receipt of the request for a local administrative
appeal, the Chair of the Selectboard shall call a meeting of the
committee, and written notice shall be made to the applicant,
the Conservation Commission, and to all committee members. The
scope of review shall be to determine if there was an error of law or
abuse of discretion as measured by the "arbitrary and capricious"
standard. After hearing all the evidence provided by the appellant
and the Conservation Commission, said committee shall, by
majority vote, render a written opinion within 14 days of the close
of the presentations by both sides.
(2)
The Commission shall hold a public meeting to review the opinion
of the local administrative appeal committee. Within 21 days of
delivery of the opinion of the committee to the appellant and the
Commission, the Commission shall issue a further decision, which
decision shall be final upon issuance and mailing to the appellant.
(3)
No request for local administrative appeal under this bylaw shall
affect the finality of or appeal deadlines applicable to any decisionmaking
of the Commission under the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL
c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
(4)
A.
Legal appeal. A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable in the
Superior Court in an action filed within 60 days thereof, in accordance
with MGL c. 249, § 4.
B.
§ 240-15 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 240-16
1:140
§ 240-16. Relation to Wetlands Protection Act.
This bylaw is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule statutes, independent of the
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and the regulations thereunder,
310 CMR 10.00.
§ 240-17. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other section or provision or phrase thereof, nor shall it invalidate any
permit which previously has been issued.
§ 240-18. Effective date.
The effective date of this bylaw is the date after this bylaw has been
approved by the Attorney General and published by the Town Clerk as set
forth in MGL c. 40, § 32. This bylaw shall not, however, apply to:
Any structure or activity lawfully in existence or lawfully begun prior to
the effective date;
A.
Any structure or activity which is the subject of a pending notice of
intent, ANRAD, or request for determination of applicability filed under
the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) prior to
the effective date;
B.
Any structure or activity which has an order of conditions, order of
resource area delineation, or determination of applicability or other
Commission decision filed under the Massachusetts Wetlands
Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and that is still in effect prior to the
effective date. These orders or determinations shall expire at the end of
their legally regulated term, which is usually three years from date of
issuance, after which any new work will be subject to the provisions of
this bylaw;
C.
Any structure or activity for which any extensions of or modifications or
amendments to a current order of conditions or notice of intent were
approved prior to the effective date. These extensions, modifications
and amendments shall remain in effect until the end of their legally
regulated term, which is usually three years from date of issuance, after
which any new work will be subject to the provisions of this bylaw;
D.
Any lot or other areas included within a definitive subdivision plan,
special permit plan, site plan, or Form H subdivision plan which has
been submitted to the South Hadley Planning Board and/or has been
approved by the South Hadley Planning Board prior to the effective
date pursuant to Article V of the Subdivision Regulations in regard to
a definitive subdivision plan, Article VI of the Subdivision Regulations
in regard to a Form H subdivision plan,17 Article IX of the Zoning
E.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 240-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 240-18
1:141
Chapter 255
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Farming — See Ch. 138.
Outdoor lighting — See Ch. 171.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 200.
Trailers — See Ch. 218.
Wetlands — See Ch. 240.
Conservation Commission regulations — See
Ch. 305.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 360.
Bylaw in regard to a special permit plan, and Article XII of the Zoning
Bylaw in regard to a site plan.18 In the event the Planning Board fails
to endorse the definitive subdivision plan or Form H subdivision plan
before November 8, 2006, the provisions of this bylaw shall be deemed
to apply to the subject property. If the Planning Board approval of any
such definitive subdivision plan, special permit plan, site plan, or Form
H subdivision plan expires or lapses and is not renewed or extended
by the Planning Board, the provisions of this bylaw shall be deemed to
apply to the subject property. Any new work beyond that shown on the
above-referenced plans that is within a resource area regulated by the
Wetlands Bylaw shall be subject to this bylaw.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 240-18 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 240-18
1:142
ARTICLE I
Purpose
§ 255-1. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose of this bylaw is to promote the health, safety, convenience,
amenity and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of South Hadley
through encouraging the most appropriate use of land, as authorized by
Chapter 40A of the General Laws, Sections 1 to 17, inclusive.
In pursuit of this purpose, the objectives of this bylaw include the
following: to lessen congestion in the streets; to conserve health; to
secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land, to avoid undue
concentration of population; to facilitate the adequate provision of
transportation, water supply, drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open
space and other public requirements; to conserve the value of land
and buildings, including the conservation of natural resources and the
prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; to encourage
the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town by considering
the recommendations of the master plan; and to preserve and increase
amenities by the promulgation of regulations to fulfill said objectives.
A.
Said regulations may include but are not limited to restricting,
prohibiting, permitting or regulating:
Uses of land, including wetlands and lands deemed subject to
seasonal or periodic flooding;
(1)
Size, height, bulk, location and use of structures, including
buildings and signs, except that billboards, signs and other
advertising devices are also subject to the provisions of MGL c. 93,
§§ 29 through 33, inclusive, and to the provisions of MGL c. 93D;
(2)
(3) Uses of bodies of water, including watercourses;
(4) Noxious uses;
Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied or
unoccupied by uses and structures, courts, yards and open spaces;
(5)
(6) Density of population and intensity of use;
Accessory facilities and uses, such as vehicle parking and loading,
landscaping and open space; and
(7)
The development of the natural, scenic and aesthetic qualities of
the community.
(8)
B.
§ 255-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-1
1:143

ARTICLE II
Enactment and Applicability
§ 255-2. Basic requirements.
All buildings or structures hereinafter erected, reconstructed, altered,
enlarged, extended or moved, and uses of land and premises in the Town of
South Hadley shall be in conformity with the provisions of this bylaw.
§ 255-3. Effective date.
The effective date of the adoption of this bylaw, and any amendments
thereto, shall be the date on which such adoption or amendment is voted
by a two-thirds majority of Town Meeting members, provided that it is
published and posted as required by MGL c. 40A, § 5.
§ 255-4. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this bylaw be declared by the courts to
be invalid, such decision shall not invalidate any other section or provision
of this bylaw.
§ 255-5. Conflict with other bylaws.
This bylaw shall not repeal, annul, or in any way impair or remove the
necessity of compliance with any other rule, regulation, bylaw, permit or
provision of law. However, where this bylaw imposes a greater restriction
upon the use of land, buildings or structures, the provisions of this bylaw
shall control.
§ 255-6. Amendments.
§ 255-7. Existing uses, buildings and structures; nonconforming
uses.
This bylaw may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition
or repeal by the Town Meeting in the manner provided in MGL c. 40A,
§ 5 as amended, and MGL c. 40, § 32, as amended.
A.
In all cases where warrant articles for zoning amendments or changes
are initiated by petition or request from individuals or groups, said
individuals or groups shall pay the cost of notice of the public hearing,
except that boards and departments of the Town of South Hadley shall
be exempt from such requirement.
B.
Applicability. This bylaw or any amendments thereto shall not apply to
the use of any structure or land lawfully in existence or lawfully begun,
or to a building or special permit issued before the first publication
or notice of the public hearing on such bylaw required by MGL c.
40A, § 6, as amended, but shall apply to any change or substantial
extension of such use, to a building or special permit issued after the
A.
§ 255-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-7
1:145
first notice of said public hearing, to any reconstruction, extension or
structural change of such structure and to any alteration of a structure
begun after the first notice of said public hearing to provide for its
use for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in
a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent,
except where alterations, reconstruction, extension or structural
change to a single- or two-family residential structure does not increase
the nonconforming nature of said structure.
Change, substantial extension or alterations.
Preexisting nonconforming structures or uses may be changed,
extended or altered only upon approval of a special permit for
such purpose by the Planning Board acting as the special permit
granting authority, provided that the Planning Board shall find
that such change, extension or alteration will not be substantially
more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use to the
neighborhood in which it is located. This shall not apply to
billboards, signs, and other advertising devices subject to the
provisions of MGL c. 93, §§ 29 through 33, inclusive, and to MGL c.
93D.
(1)
In any twelve-month period, a nonconforming use or structure may
not be altered, except as ordered by the Building Commissioner to
make it safe, to the extent that the cost of such alterations exceeds
50% of the assessed value of the use or structure at the time of the
change.
(2)
Waiver of special permit requirement. The Planning Board may
waive the requirement for a special permit when the changes/
alterations are minor (such as those of a cosmetic nature, those
necessary for users'/occupants' safety, those necessary to make
the facility handicapped accessible, or any changes/alterations of
a similar nature) and do not increase the capacity or change the
use of the facility. Persons desiring such a waiver must submit
a written request to the Planning Board and detail the changes/
alterations to be made. The Planning Board may act on the request
at a regular posted meeting without holding a public hearing. In
granting such a waiver, the Planning Board must determine that
the proposed changes/alterations will not be more detrimental than
the existing nonconforming use to the neighborhood in which it
is located. Granting of a waiver pursuant to this section of the
Zoning Bylaw requires an affirmative vote by no less than four of
the Planning Board members.
(3)
B.
Restoration. Any nonconforming use or structure in existence at the
time of this bylaw or any amendment thereto may be reconstructed
on the original foundation area if damaged or destroyed by fire or
other accidental or natural cause; provided that not more than 50% of
the use or structure, exclusive of foundations, has been so damaged
C.
§ 255-7 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-7
1:146
or destroyed. Rebuilding or restoration, when permitted, shall be
completed within 12 months after such catastrophe or disaster.
Abandonment. When a nonconforming use is discontinued, as
evidenced by a lack of such use in a structure or vacancy, for a
continuous period of 24 months, or by substitution of a more compatible
use as provided in Subsection B above, such nonconforming use shall
not thereafter be reestablished and all future uses shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this bylaw.
D.
Exception to special permit requirement. The requirement of
Subsection B that preexisting nonconforming structures may be
changed, extended or altered only upon approval of a special permit for
such purpose by the Planning Board shall not apply where the proposed
expansion/alteration of the structure will conform to the Zoning Bylaw
dimensional requirements specified in § 255-21 of the Zoning Bylaw.
This exception shall only apply to change, extension, or alteration of
nonconforming structures and not nonconforming uses. Nothing in this
section shall relieve the requirements for a special permit where a
special permit is required under § 255-19 or Article VII or Article VIII
of the Zoning Bylaw; neither shall anything in this section relieve
the requirements for site plan review of any change, extension, or
alteration where site plan review is required under § 255-19 or Article
XII of the Zoning Bylaw.
E.
§ 255-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-7
1:147

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 255-8. Interpretation.
In construing this bylaw, the following words shall have the meaning herein
given, unless a contrary intention clearly appears.
§ 255-9. Construction of language.
§ 255-10. Terms defined.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY — A structure, building or use which:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Dwelling units restricted to rental or purchase
by households with an annual income no greater than 80% of the median
income for South Hadley, as calculated by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development or any successor agency, adjusted for family size.
Such units must be countable under MGL c. 40B as part of the Town's
subsidized housing inventory.
ALTERATION — Any change or modification in the plan, construction, or
structural support of a building, structure or use.
ALTERNATIVE ENERGY — Includes combined heat and power, electricand
hydrogen-powered vehicles and associated technologies (including
advanced batteries and recharging stations).[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by
Art. 18]
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual; the
present tense includes the future tense, the singular number includes
the plural, and the plural includes the singular; the word "shall" is
mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive; the word "used" or
"occupied" includes the words "intended," "designed," or "arranged
to be used or occupied"; the word "building" includes the word
"residence"; the word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel."
A.
B. Terms not defined shall have the customary dictionary meaning.
Is subordinate in function to and serves a principal building or principal
use;
A.
Is subordinate in area or extent to the principal building or principal
use served;
B.
Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of occupants or
the principal building or use; and
C.
D. Is located on the same lot as the principal building or use.
§ 255-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:149
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit in a multifamily dwelling or in a mixed-use
building.
AQUIFER — A geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that
contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable potable water.
AS-OF-RIGHT/BY-RIGHT SITING — Means that development may proceed
without the need for a special permit, variance, amendment, waiver, or
other discretionary approval. As-of-right development may be subject to
nondiscretionary site plan review to determine conformance with local
zoning bylaws as well as state and federal law. As-of-right development
projects that are consistent with zoning bylaws and with state and federal
law cannot be prohibited.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17; amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 18]
ATTACHED — Connected to or united with.
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling of the top story of a building and
its roof and not used for living, sleeping or eating quarters. The word "attic"
shall exclude footage greater than 1/2 of the cubic footage enclosed in the
story in the same building that is immediately below that area.
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND SERVICE — An establishment for the principal
purpose of sale of motor vehicle fuel and/or related products, service and
repair.
BASE NUMBER OF DWELLING UNITS — In connection with a flexible
development, the number of dwelling units which could reasonably be
permitted in compliance with the dimensional requirements of the
underlying zoning district. See § 255-31.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST HOME — An owner-occupied single-family dwelling
(including accessory structures located on the same parcel as the owneroccupied
dwelling) which may rent rooming units for transient occupancy
(without individual kitchen facilities and with an individual or shared bath/
toilet facility, with at least one toilet, one bath/shower and one wash basin,
separate from those required for the single-family dwelling) which share a
common entrance with the single-family dwelling and transient occupants
are provided at least one daily meal as part of their occupancy. The use
of that portion of the dwelling devoted to transient occupancy shall be
secondary to the use of the dwelling as a single-family residence and
shall not change the character thereof. This term shall be interpreted
as including "lodging houses" subject to the provisions of §§ 255-19 and
255-39.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — An owner-occupied building or grouping of
buildings which may rent rooming units for transient occupancy (without
individual kitchen facilities and with an individual or shared bath/toilet
facility, with at least one toilet, one bath/shower and one wash basin,
separate from those required for the single-family dwelling) which share a
common entrance for the building and transient occupants are provided at
least one daily meal as part of their occupancy. The use of that portion of
the building devoted to transient occupancy shall not change the character
§ 255-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-10
1:150
thereof. This term shall be interpreted as including "lodging houses,"
subject to the provisions of §§ 255-19 and 255-39.
BUILDING — A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed,
having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals or
property. For the purpose of this definition, "roof" shall include an awning
or any similar covering, whether or not permanent in nature. The word
"building" shall be construed, where the context requires, as though
followed by the words "or part or parts thereof." Accordingly, a structure
which does not meet the definition of a building by virtue of not having
a roof but is attached to a building shall be considered to be part of
the building and treated as a building for compliance with dimensional
standards.
BUSINESS — The transacting or carrying on of a trade or commercial
enterprise with a view to profit or for livelihood.
BUSINESS SERVICE — Establishments primarily engaged in rendering
services to business establishments on a fee or contract basis, including but
not limited to the following: advertising and mailing; building maintenance;
employment service; management and consulting services; protective
services; equipment rental and leasing; commercial research, printing and
duplication services, computer repair, etc.
CANNABINOID — Cannabinoid as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts
General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
CANNABINOID PROFILE — Cannabinoid profile as defined in Chapter 94G,
Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
CEMETERY — A place or area of land, set apart for the burial of the dead,
operated, managed and controlled under the provisions of Chapter 114 of
the General Laws, or a burial place under the care and supervision of the
Town or other public authority.
CLOSE ASSOCIATE — Close associate, in regards to recreational
marijuana, as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added
1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
COMMERCIAL — Any use classified under the category "Business Uses" in
the Use Table included as an attachment to this chapter.
COMMERCIAL KENNEL — A commercial establishment in which dogs
three months old or older or other domesticated animals are housed or
boarded overnight, all for a fee or other compensation. The following are
not to be considered as commercial kennels for the purposes of the South
Hadley Zoning Bylaw:
A business which engages primarily in the care or treatment of such
injured or ill animals and incidentally keeps such animals overnight to
meet their care or treatment needs; and
A.
A business which trains domesticated animals, but does not keep any
such animals on the premises overnight; and
B.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:151
COMMISSION — Commission, in regards to recreational marijuana, as
defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018
STM by Art. 5]
COMPATIBLE — Capable of existing together in harmony.
CONDOMINIUM — A system of ownership of real estate, including
commercial, industrial, and attached and detached residential dwelling
units, established pursuant to the Condominium Act of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, Chapter 183A of the Massachusetts General Laws, in
which the apartments or dwelling units are individually owned and the land
and common areas are owned in common. A condominium is not a use or a
building type; rather, it is a form of ownership that can apply to any use or
building type.
CONSERVATION RESTRICTION — A permanent restriction in the title to
land of the type described in MGL c. 184, §§ 31 through 33. As used in this
bylaw "conservation restriction" also includes an agricultural preservation
restriction, a watershed preservation restriction, or a preservation
restriction as defined in MGL c. 184, § 31.
CONSUMER — Consumer, in regards to recreational marijuana, as defined
in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by
Art. 5]
CONTINUING-CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY — A structure or
structures containing independent living units, health-care facilities, and
other related services and amenities provided to three or more elderly
persons by a person unrelated by consanguinity or affinity to the persons
receiving such services.
CONTROLLING PERSON — Controlling person, in regards to recreational
marijuana, as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added
1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
CORNER LOT — A lot bounded on two sides by intersecting streets.
COVERAGE, BUILDING — The ratio of enclosed ground floor area of all
buildings on a lot to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as
a percentage.
COVERAGE, IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — The percentage of the area of a lot
that is impervious to water, including, but not limited to, areas covered by
structures and paving, including paved recreational surfaces.
CRAFT MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR COOPERATIVE — Craft marijuana
cultivator cooperative as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General
Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
CREMATORY — A building containing a furnace designed and intended to
be used for cremating the dead and owned and controlled by a cemetery
corporation or crematory corporation duly organized under the
Massachusetts General Laws.
C. A business which breeds or sells domesticated animals.
§ 255-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-10
1:152
CULTIVATION BATCH — Cultivation batch as defined in Chapter 94G,
Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DISTRICT — A specified portion of the Town, delineated on the Zoning Map,
within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations
thereof apply under the provisions of the bylaw.
DRIVE-IN SERVICE — An establishment that by design, physical facilities
or services or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to
receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their
vehicles.
DWELLING — A building occupied exclusively as a residence for one or
more families.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms designed and equipped
exclusively for use as living quarters for only one family, including
provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. The term shall include
mobile homes but shall not include house trailers or recreational vehicles.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling containing three or more dwelling
units. A single parcel containing detached or attached single-family and/or
two-family dwellings is not a multifamily dwelling. (See § 255-27.)
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached dwelling containing one
dwelling unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A single-family residence on
its own lot that shares one or more walls with an adjoining single-family
residence.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A dwelling containing two dwelling units.
DWELLING, ZERO LOT LINE — See "zero lot line housing."
EXPERIENCED MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT OPERATOR — Experienced
marijuana establishment operator as defined in Chapter 94G,
Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
EXTENSION — The expansion or enlargement of a building, structure, or
use.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a
single housekeeping unit.
A. A family shall not exceed four persons not related by blood or marriage.
Notwithstanding the above, a family shall be deemed to include a group
residence, limited, further defined as a premises licensed, regulated,
or operated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or operated by
a vendor under contract with the commonwealth for the residential
living, care, or supervision in any single dwelling unit of five or more
mentally ill or mentally retarded persons or persons with disabilities.
B.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:153
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials erected or grown to enclose, screen or separate areas.
FIFTY-FIVE-AND-OVER COMMUNITY — A residential development which
is developed and managed to require that at least 80% of the residents are
55 years of age or over.
FINISHED MARIJUANA — Finished marijuana as defined in Chapter 94G,
Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
FLAG LOT — A lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where
access to the existing public way is by a narrow, private access strip.
FLEA MARKET — A building or open area in which stalls or sales areas
are set aside, and rented or otherwise provided, and which are intended
for use by various unrelated individuals to sell articles that may be either
homemade, homegrown, handcrafted, old, obsolete, or antique and may
include selling goods at retail by individuals or businesses who or which
are generally engaged in retail trade. Flea markets may be conventional,
permanent profit-seeking businesses and require all local permits and
licenses.
FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT — A process and type of residential
development, whether or not by subdivision, which is designed to maximize
the preservation of open space and visual assets that are significant to the
community. See § 255-31.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of habitable or commercially usable
space on all floors of a structure, including the interior floor area of all
rooms (including bathrooms and kitchens), closets, pantries, hallways that
are part of a dwelling unit or inside a commercial building, including
habitable finished basements but excluding cellars or unfinished
basements.
FRONTAGE — The length of a front lot line adjacent to a street; provided,
however, that the minimum frontage required by this bylaw shall be
satisfied by a continuous, uninterrupted segment of such frontage.
FRONTAGE, FLAG LOT — The length of the flag lot front lot line parallel
to and a distance back from the existing public way front lot line where the
required minimum continuous uninterrupted segment of such frontage can
be satisfied.
GASOLINE FILLING STATION — Establishment for principal purpose of
sale of motor vehicle fuel and convenience products.
GAS-TO-ENERGY FACILITY — A facility which processes the gas resulting
from decomposition of nearby landfill waste into electricity.
GROUNDWATER — All water found beneath the surface of the ground.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Material including, but not limited to, any
material, in whatever form, which because of its quantity, concentration,
chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive
characteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance
or substances, constitutes a present or potential threat to human health,
§ 255-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-10
1:154
safety, welfare, or to the environment, when improperly stored, treated,
transported, disposed of, used, or otherwise managed. The term shall not
include oil.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A waste which is hazardous to human health or the
environment. Hazardous wastes have been designated by the regulations of
the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act, MGL c. 21C.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance between the highest point of the roof of
a building and the average finished grade of land on which the building
is located. For purposes of this bylaw, the term "height" shall not apply
to chimneys, steeples, flag or radiopoles, antennas, aerators, required
bulkheads, elevator penthouses, or other equipment appurtenances
necessitated by the permitted use to which a building is put. In addition, the
term "height" shall not apply to solar energy collectors and equipment used
for the mounting or operation of such collectors; provided, however, that
such collectors or equipment shall not impair solar access of other building
or other solar installations.
HEMP — Hemp as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General
Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation, trade, or profession, including a
not-for-profit organization, which results in a product or service for
compensation which is: (1) customarily carried on in a dwelling unit; (2)
pursued by a person residing in the dwelling unit; and (3) incidental and
secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. Such
home occupations may include but are not limited to the following: office or
studio of a building contractor, physician or surgeon, dentist, artist, lawyer,
handicraft person, architect, professional engineer, realtor or real estate
broker, insurance agent or broker, psychologist or counselor, notary public,
teacher of scholastic subjects, accountant, hairdresser, beauty parlor
operator, or teacher of piano. There are multiple categories or types of
home occupations, which are shown on the Use Table included as an
attachment to this chapter and described and regulated by § 255-22.
HOSPITAL — An institution where only sick and disabled persons are given
medical, surgical or convalescent care.
HOST COMMUNITY — Host community, in regards to recreational
marijuana, as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added
1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
HOTEL — An establishment providing lodging on a short-term basis, usually
less than one week; dining rooms, function rooms and other support
services may be included. Access to the individual sleeping rooms is usually
through a lobby and interior corridors.
HOUSE TRAILER — A portable structure used for temporary living or
sleeping purposes and which is equipped with wheels or similar devices
used for the purpose of transporting said structure from place to place.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Materials or structures on or above ground
that do not allow precipitation to infiltrate the underlying soil.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:155
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY — Independent testing laboratory,
in regards to recreational marijuana, as defined in Chapter 94G,
Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
INDUSTRIAL — Any use classified under the category "Industrial Uses" in
the Use Table included as an attachment to this chapter.
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING — A building not used either as a principal
accessory use to a commercial, industrial or residential use; generally used
for a municipal, educational or religious purpose.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM
by Art. 17]
JUNK — Articles such as old iron, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base
metals, plastic, cordage, old bags, rags, wastepaper, paper clippings,
scraps, clips, rubber, glass, empty bottles, empty cans and all other articles
discarded and no longer used as a manufactured article, composed of one
or more of the materials mentioned but which may be converted into some
other product by means of some manufacturing process.
LABORATORY AGENT — Laboratory agent, in regards to recreational
marijuana, as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added
1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
LANDSCAPING — The arrangement of landforms and vegetative cover for
aesthetic effect.
LEACHABLE MATERIALS — Materials including but not limited to solid
wastes, sludge and pesticide and fertilizer wastes capable of releasing
water-borne contaminants to the environment.
LICENSEE — Licensee, in regards to recreational marijuana, as defined
in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by
Art. 5]
LOADING SPACE — Off-street space logically and conveniently located for
bulk pickups and deliveries by truck, scaled to delivery vehicles expected
to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking
spaces are filled. Required off-street loading space is not to be included as
off-street parking space in computation of required off-street parking space.
LODGING HOUSE — A residence where lodgings are let to five or more
persons not within the second degree of kinship to the person conducting
the house and which does not contain a public dining room or cooking
facilities in any rented sleeping room.
LOT — A parcel of land which is or may be occupied by a principal building
and its accessory buildings, together with such open yard areas as are
required under the provisions of this bylaw. To be used for building
purposes, such lot must have frontage on a street as defined below,
excepting only a preexisting lot exempted by the provisions of MGL c. 40A,
§ 6. A lot line is a boundary of a lot.
LOT COVERAGE — Same as "building coverage."
§ 255-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-10
1:156
MANUFACTURE — Manufacture, in regards to recreational marijuana, as
defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018
STM by Art. 5]
MANUFACTURING — The fabricating, assembly, conversion, altering,
finishing or other process treatment of materials, substances, parts or
products.
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES — Facilities used primarily for heavy or
light industry or the manufacture or assembly of a product, including
processing, blending, fabrication, assembly, treatment and
packaging.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 18]
MARIJUANA (aka MARIHUANA) — Marijuana (aka marihuana) as defined
in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by
Art. 5]
MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES — Marijuana accessories as defined in Chapter
94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR — Marijuana cultivator as defined in Chapter
94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — Marijuana establishment as defined in
Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by
Art. 5]
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER — Marijuana product
manufacturer as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General
Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS — Marijuana products, as defined in Chapter 94G,
Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
MARIJUANA RETAILER — Marijuana retailer as defined in Chapter 94G,
Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
MARIJUANA TESTING FACILITY — Marijuana testing facility as defined
in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by
Art. 5]
MASTER PLAN — The South Hadley Master Plan adopted by the South
Hadley Planning Board and Town Meeting, as amended.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION AND PROCESSING FACILITY
(MMCPF) — A MMTC which acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes
(including development of related products such as food, tinctures,
aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, or sells marijuana,
products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials
to MMOSD sites. Such facilities do not sell or dispense products on site
to consumers, patients, or personal caregivers, but sell or transfer such
products to one or more MMOSD sites for such selling or dispensing. The
cultivation and processing of medical marijuana in accordance with these
regulations is considered to be a manufacturing use and is not agriculturally
exempt from zoning.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:157
MEDICAL MARIJUANA OFF-SITE DISPENSARY (MMOSD) — A medical
marijuana facility/registered marijuana dispensary that is located off-site
from the cultivation/processing facility and only distributes/dispenses the
processed marijuana, related supplies and educational materials to
registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER (MMTC) — A not-for-profit
entity registered and approved by the MA Department of Public Health in
accordance with 105 CMR 725.000, and pursuant to all other applicable
state laws and regulations, also to be known as a "registered marijuana
dispensary (RMD)," that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes
(including development of related products such as food, tinctures,
aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes,
dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana,
related supplies, or educational materials to registered qualifying patients
or their personal caregivers. The cultivation and processing of medical
marijuana in accordance with these regulations is considered to be a
manufacturing use and is not agriculturally exempt from zoning.
MICROBREWERY — A facility, licensed under the relevant state and federal
statutes, with a capacity of not more than 15,000 barrels (a barrel being
equivalent to 31 gallons a year), for the production and packaging of malt,
wine, or hard cider beverages for retail or wholesale distribution, on or
off the premises, and which may include a tap room where beverages
produced on the premises may be sold and consumed. May include other
accessory uses such as, but not limited to, a restaurant and/or outdoor
dining, entertainment, etc. The term "microbrewery" is to be interpreted
as referring to similar facilities such as, but not limited to, "distillery."
A microbrewery shall be considered to be a "General manufacturing use
which is not commonly considered hazardous or noxious." Retail sales
associated with the operation of a microbrewery and events held in
association with the tap room shall be accessory and incidental to the
operation of the tap room.[Added 5-10-2017 ATM by Art. 24]
MIXED-USE BUILDING — A building containing a combination of
residential and nonresidential uses.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — Any combination of residential,
commercial, and/or industrial uses on the same lot at the time of initial
approval.
MOBILE HOME — A structure designed as a dwelling unit for location
on a permanent foundation, and containing sleeping accommodations and
sanitary and kitchen facilities with plumbing and electrical connections
provided for attachment to outside systems, which is designed to be
transported after fabrication on its own wheels to a site for use.
MOTEL — An establishment providing lodging on a short-term basis, usually
less than one week, where access to the individual sleeping rooms is usually
directly from parking spaces or by an exterior walkway.
MUNICIPAL PROPERTIES — As used in this chapter, "municipal properties"
shall be interpreted to mean any land or property owned in fee by either
§ 255-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-10
1:158
the Town of South Hadley (including semi-autonomous entities such as the
South Hadley Electric Light Department), South Hadley Fire District No. 1,
or South Hadley Fire District No. 2.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17]
MYCOTOXIN — Mycotoxin as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts
General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building, structure or lot in a manner
not in accordance with the use or dimensional regulations of the district in
which it is situated.
OFFICE — A workplace used for the transaction of business or nonprofit
functions, excluding as principal uses manufacturing, retail construction,
and warehousing and including but not limited to professional offices and
offices that support or manage on-site or off-site manufacturing, retailing,
construction, and warehousing, as well as research laboratories and other
facilities in which research activities are conducted. An office that is
operated as part of another primary use on the Use Table shall be
considered accessory to that primary use and not a separate use.19
PARK — A tract of land designated and used by the public for active and
passive recreation and maintained as public property.
PARKING SPACE (OFF-STREET) — Shall consist of an area for parking
an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with
properly related access to a street and sufficient maneuvering room, but
shall be located totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Any building wherein the
primary occupation is the repair, care of, maintenance or customizing of
personal properties that are worn or carried about the person or are a
physical component of the person. Personal service establishments shall
include, but not be limited to: barber shops; beauty shops; pet grooming
establishments; laundering, cleaning and other garment servicing
establishments; tailors; dressmaking shops; shoe cleaning or repair shops;
eyeglass shops; health clubs; and other similar places of business, but not
including offices of physicians, dentists and veterinarians, or any other
recognized professional.
PLAYGROUND — An active recreational area with a variety of facilities,
including equipment for younger children as well as court and field games.
PRIMARY AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — Areas which are underlain by
surficial geological deposits including glaciofluvial or lacustrine stratified
drift deposits or alluvium or swamp deposits, and in which the prevailing
direction of groundwater flow is toward the area of influence of water
supply wells.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which the principal use on the
premises takes place.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary use to which the premises are devoted, and
the main purpose for which the premises exist.
19.Editor's Note: The Use Table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:159
PROCESS — Process, in regards to recreational marijuana, as defined in
Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by
Art. 5]
PROCESSING — Processing, in regards to recreational marijuana, as
defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018
STM by Art. 5]
PRODUCTION BATCH — Production batch, in regards to recreational
marijuana, as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added
1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person employed in a practice of
engineering as defined in MGL c. 112, § 81D.
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE — An establishment primarily engaged in
rendering services by professional persons on a fee or contract basis,
including, but not limited to, the following: accounting, auditing, and
bookkeeping; medical, dental or health; planning, engineering and
architectural; education and science; attorneys and notary publics; finance,
insurance and real estate (FIRE); travel agencies; etc.
PROJECT PROPONENT — The applicant, property owner, installation
developer, operator and management entity, jointly and severally, of a
project. Each of the responsible parties shall be responsible for adhering to
the requirements set forth in this chapter.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art.
17]
PROTECTED OPEN SPACE — Land that is permanently protected from
development by a conservation restriction, dedication as parkland, or an
equivalent form of perpetual legal restriction on development.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of electric
power production of a photovoltaic system in direct current (DC).[Added
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17]
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle or vehicular attachment designed
for temporary sleeping or living quarters, which is not a dwelling and which
may include a pick-up camper, travel trailer, or tent trailer.
RENEWABLE ENERGY — Includes solar-photovoltaic (PV) and thermal,
wind, biomass power conversion or thermal technologies (including R&D
related to, or the manufacture of, wood pellets), ultra-low emissions highefficiency
wood pellet boilers and furnaces, low-impact hydro-electric and
kinetic, ocean thermal/wave/tidal, geothermal, landfill gas, fuels cells that
use renewable energy, advanced biofuels.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art.
18]
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FACILITIES — Facilities are used
primarily for research, development and/or testing of innovative
information, concepts, methods, processes, materials, or products. This
can include the design, development, and testing of biological, chemical,
electrical, magnetic, mechanical, and/or optical components in advance of
product manufacturing. The accessory development, fabrication, and light
manufacturing of prototypes, or specialized machinery and devices integral
§ 255-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-10
1:160
to research or testing may be associated with these uses.[Added 5-9-2018
ATM by Art. 18]
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGNS — Part of a landscape element of
an approved townhouse, multifamily, and/or flexible development which
identifies said townhouse, multifamily, and/or flexible development.[Added
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 19]
RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION — A subdivision as defined in Chapter 41,
Massachusetts General Laws which was approved by the Planning Board
and is used exclusively for residential purposes. Plans endorsed pursuant to
Chapter 41, Section 81P, Massachusetts General Laws are not deemed to be
subdivisions.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17]
RESIDUAL SOLVENT — Residual solvent, in regards to recreational
marijuana, as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts General Laws.[Added
1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment in which the primary activity
consists of the preparation and serving of food for consumption on the
premises or as take-out, including a bar or pub or other establishment that
sells food and alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, excluding
catering businesses and retail uses that sell prepared food.
RESTORATION — The reconstruction or repair of a building or structure to
its original plan, size and use.
RETAIL; RETAIL SALES — An establishment selling goods directly to the
general public for personal and household consumption, including but not
limited to an appliance store, bakery, delicatessen, drugstore, florist, grocer,
hardware store, liquor store, newsstand, shoe store, stationery store,
convenience store, and variety store, excluding a restaurant.
SANITARIUM — An institution for the recuperation or treatment of persons
suffering from physical or mental disorders.
SCENIC VIEWS — Views significant to the cultural and environmental
heritage of South Hadley, including, but not limited to, views of the Mount
Holyoke Range, Mount Tom, and the Connecticut River.
SCHOOL — A building devoted to instruction or education in primary,
secondary, high school, or post-high school grades.
SECONDARY AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA — Areas which are underlain
by surficial geologic deposits, including till or bedrock, and in which the
prevailing direction of surface water flow is toward public water supply
wells or potential sites for such wells.
SECONDHAND — Having been used or owned by some person other than
the dealer offering the same for sale and which may be used without
alteration.
SERVICE — The performance of any act for the benefit of another with a
view to profit or for a livelihood.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:161
SETBACK — The minimum required unoccupied space or distance between
a lot line and any part of a principal or accessory building nearest such lot
line, such unoccupied space or area extending the entire distance across
the lot. Front, side and rear setback lines are identified in accordance with
the diagram below:
SIGN —
Any word, letter, symbol, drawing, picture, design, name, identification,
description, display, illustration, or device, including billboards, or any
combination of one or more of the foregoing, which identifies or calls
attention to the premises, person, activity, or business, but not the trade
A.
§ 255-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-10
1:162
SIGNIFICANT TREE — A tree with a diameter of 18 inches or more as
measured 4.5 feet above the ground.
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION — An active solar energy system
that converts solar energy directly into electricity.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM
by Art. 17]
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION, CANOPY-MOUNTED — A solar
photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on a canopy over a parking
area.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17]
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION, GROUND-MOUNTED — A solar
photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not
roof-mounted.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17]
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION, LARGE-SCALE — A solar
photovoltaic system that has a rated nameplate capacity greater than 250
KW DC.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17]
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION, MEDIUM-SCALE — A solar
photovoltaic system that has a rated nameplate capacity of more than 10
KW DC but not more than 250 KW DC.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17]
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION, ROOF-MOUNTED — A solar
photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the roof of a
building.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17]
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION, SMALL-SCALE — A solar
photovoltaic system that has a rated nameplate capacity of 10 KW DC or
less.[Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 17]
SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ACCOUNT — Application review fees imposed on a
developer to cover the costs incurred by the Planning Board and/or Zoning
Board of Appeals for the employment of outside professional expertise
and/or consultants due to the nature of a proposed project or a project's
potential impact.
STORY — The horizontal portion through a building between floor and
ceiling. The word "story" shall not include the portion of the basement or
cellar of a building above grade, provided that such portion is not more than
1/2 of the floor-to-ceiling height of said basement or cellar. The word "story"
shall not include "attic" as defined herein.
STREET — A way, whether public or private, set aside for the passage of
persons, animals or vehicles, and which is:
name of products unless such products involve over 75% of the total
sales of an establishment.
Any structure or device intended or erected for the above-described
purpose shall be considered a sign for purposes of this bylaw. The
area of a sign shall be determined by measuring the smallest rectangle
which encompasses the outermost components of the sign, exclusive of
any supporting structure.
B.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:163
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a street and a lot, and in case
of a public way, the street line established by the public authority laying out
said way upon which the lot abuts.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
to give support or shelter, such as a building, framework, retaining wall,
tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin, tower, fence, sign, pole, mast, or the
like. The word "structure" shall be construed, where the context allows, as
though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, sites, or divisions of land, in such a manner as to require
provisions for a street for the purpose as provided in Chapter 41 of the
Massachusetts General Laws (Subdivision Control Law). The word
"subdivision" shall include "resubdivision" in relation to the processes of
subdividing or to land already subdivided, when appropriate to the context.
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS — The Rules and Regulations Governing
the Subdivision of Land in the Town of South Hadley, Massachusetts,
promulgated by the South Hadley Planning Board, as amended from time to
time.20
SWIMMING POOL — A facility used for swimming, diving or water sports
which may be either:
TERPENOID — Terpenoid as defined in Chapter 94G, Massachusetts
General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
A public way accepted by the Town or a way which the Town Clerk
certifies is maintained and used as a public way; or
A.
A way shown on a plan approved and endorsed by the Planning Board
in accordance with Chapter 41 of the Massachusetts General Laws
(Subdivision Control Law); or
B.
A way in existence when said Subdivision Control Law became effective
in South Hadley having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient
width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the
needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land
abutting thereon or served thereby, and having sufficient and adequate
municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be
erected thereon.
C.
A below-ground artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or container of a
pool of water located below surrounding grade and having a depth of at
least 24 inches, as measured from the lowest point in the pool a vertical
distance to the ground level; or
A.
An above-ground artificial or semi-artificial receptacle or container of
a pool of water located above surface grade with a diameter of 15 feet
or greater at the outside dimension and a capacity to hold water at a
depth of 24 inches or more.
B.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 255-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-10
1:164
TRUCKING TERMINAL — A business which services or repairs commercial
trucks which are not owned by the business.
UNREASONABLY IMPRACTICABLE — Unreasonably impracticable, in
regards to recreational marijuana, as defined in Chapter 94G,
Massachusetts General Laws.[Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
USE — The purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged,
designed, intended or erected, or for which land or a building or structure
is or may be occupied.
VEHICLE — Includes the following: cars, trucks, vans, recreational vehicles,
and mobile construction equipment.
WATERSHED — Lands lying adjacent to watercourses and surface water
bodies which create the catchment or drainage of such watercourses and
bodies.
WETLAND — A freshwater wetland as defined in the Massachusetts
Wetlands Act, MGL c. 131, § 40.
WHOLESALE SALES AND WAREHOUSING — A business in which
materials, goods, or equipment are stored and/or held and transported for
distribution, including mini-storage and self-storage facilities.
YARD — The area of land on a lot not occupied by a principal or accessory
building.
ZERO LOT LINE HOUSING — A form of development in which each singlefamily
residence is on a separate lot and has no setback from one side lot
line.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The person or persons designated
to enforce these Zoning Bylaws and Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
40A; who shall be the Building Commissioner and any individual employed
as a bylaw enforcement officer for the purpose of enforcing bylaws,
regulations and relevant statutes.
§ 255-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-10
1:165

ARTICLE IV
Districts
§ 255-11. Establishment of districts.
For the purpose of this bylaw, the Town of South Hadley is divided into 12
zoning districts as follows:
Residence A-1 (Low-Density Residential). The purpose of this district is
to allow residential and compatible uses, including new development
that is in character with existing predominantly single-family housing,
while preserving natural open spaces for their scenic quality and for
ecosystem services, protection of water resources, recreation,
agriculture, and forestry.
A.
Residence A-2 (Medium-Density Residential). The purpose of this
district is to allow medium-density residential and compatible uses
within developed areas of the Town and to provide for new development
within proximity of these developed areas that is in character with
existing housing, which is predominantly single-family in nature.
B.
Residence B (Village Residential). The purpose of this district is to
maintain the traditional character, scale, density, design, and mix of
housing types that characterize the residential portions of South
Hadley's historic villages.
C.
Residence C (High-Density Residential). The purpose of this district is
to accommodate relatively dense residential development, especially
multifamily development in a limited number of locations.
D.
Agricultural. The purpose of this district is to promote agriculture,
forestry, recreation, and land conservation, as well as compatible open
space and rural uses, by siting development in a manner that preserves
large contiguous tracts of open space and agricultural land. The
preservation of scenic vistas of open land, forestland, the Mount
Holyoke Range, the Mount Tom Range, and the Connecticut River in
this district is a key aspect of maintaining South Hadley's desired
scenic and rural identity.
E.
Business A-1 (General Business). The purpose of this district is to
create vibrant commercial areas while minimizing impacts on roads and
residential districts.
F.
Business A (Neighborhood Business). The purpose of this district is
to allow a mix of business and residential uses along major corridors
where the surrounding context is predominantly residential.
G.
Business B (Village Center Mixed Use). The purpose of this district is
to maintain the traditional scale, density, design, and mix of uses that
characterize South Hadley's historic village centers and in other areas
intended to develop with a similar village character, including a wide
range of business uses, low-impact manufacturing, and residential use.
H.
§ 255-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-11
1:167
§ 255-12. Zoning Map.21
The boundaries of each district are hereby established as shown on the map
entitled "Zoning Map, Town of South Hadley, Massachusetts," prepared by
the South Hadley Planning Board. This map accompanies, and is hereby
declared to be a part of, this bylaw. Said map is hereinafter referred to as
the "Zoning Map."
§ 255-13. Interpretation of district boundaries.
§ 255-14. Division of lots by district boundaries.
Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot or parcel of land of the
same ownership of record at the time such line is established by adoption or
amendment of this bylaw, the regulations and provisions applicable to each
of the several portions of said lot shall be those pertaining to the district in
which each portion is located.
Business C (Planned Business). This purpose of this district is to provide
development methods that accommodate large-scale businesses, while
mitigating impacts on pedestrians and traffic, as more fully described
in § 255-37A.
I.
Industrial A. The purpose of this district is to allow low-impact
industrial and business uses.
J.
Industrial B. The purpose of this district is to allow industrial and
business uses with a greater impact than those permitted in Industrial
A.
K.
Industrial Garden. The purpose of this district is to allow low-impact
industrial uses, as well as compatible business uses and public-private
recreation in a setting with high-quality design that preserves natural
scenic beauty.
L.
Except when labeled to the contrary, boundary or dimension lines
shown approximately following or terminating at street or utility
easement center or right-of-way lines, lot or parcel boundary lines,
or the channel of a stream shall be construed to be actually at those
lines; when shown approximately parallel, perpendicular, or radial to
such lines shall be construed to be actually parallel, perpendicular, or
radial thereto. When not locatable in any other way, boundaries shall be
determined by scale from the Zoning Map.
A.
Where natural or man-made features existing on the ground are at
variance with those shown on the Zoning Map, or in other
circumstances not covered in this section, the Board of Appeals shall
interpret the district boundaries.
B.
21.Editor's Note: See the Zoning Map included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-11 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-15
1:168
§ 255-15. Overlay districts.
The following Overlay Districts are herein established over one or more of
the districts created in § 255-11:
Water Supply Protection Overlay District.
The purpose of this overlay district is to promote the health, safety
and welfare of the community by protecting and preserving the
surface and groundwater resources of the Town and the region
from any use of land or buildings which may reduce the quality and
quantity of its water resources.
(1)
Requirements for this district are enumerated in § 255-35 of the
Zoning Bylaw and are supplemental to any requirements or
restrictions of the underlying zoning districts.
(2)
A.
Adult Entertainment Use Overlay District.
Purpose. The purpose of this overlay district is to prevent the
deleterious effects that adult entertainment uses have on the
community and adjacent areas; to prevent the secondary effects
associated with such uses; to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the Town; and
to provide for regulation of such uses without suppressing any
speech or expression activities protected by the First Amendment.
Requirements for this district are enumerated in § 255-42 of the
Zoning Bylaw and are supplemental to any requirements or
restrictions of the underlying zoning districts.
(1)
Boundaries. Boundaries of the Adult Use Entertainment Overlay
District are depicted on a map on file in the office of the Planning
Board, Building Commissioner, and Town Clerk. Said overlay
district shall include only the following properties as identified on
the 2004 Assessor's Map:
Map 8, Parcel 73; Street Address: 500 New Ludlow Road
Map 7, Parcel 98; Street Address: 2084 Memorial Drive
(2)
B.
South Hadley Falls Overlay District. The purpose of this overlay district
is to encourage redevelopment of South Hadley Falls in a manner
consistent with its historic urban pattern.
C.
South Hadley Falls Smart Growth District. The purposes of this district
are as stated in § 255-23. [Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
D.
Newton Street Smart Growth District. The purposes of this district are
as stated in § 255-23. [Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 21]
E.
§ 255-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-15
1:169

ARTICLE V
Use Regulations
§ 255-16. Applicability.
No lot or land shall be used, and no building or structure shall be erected
or used except as set forth in the Use Regulations Schedule included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-17. Classification of use.
Where an activity might be classified under more than one of the uses
indicated in the Use Regulations Schedule, the more specific classification
shall determine permissibility; if equally specific, the more restrictive shall
govern. Any use not specifically listed as permitted herein (whether by
right, site plan review, or special permit) or otherwise permitted in a district
shall be deemed as prohibited. Recognizing that uses may be given different
names, the Planning Board shall be the authority for determining whether
a proposed use falls within the meaning of the term listed in the Use
Regulations Schedule or other sections of this bylaw.
§ 255-18. Change of use.
Site plan review by the Planning Board is required when changing the
use of a property from one use classification to another on the Use Table,
unless the new use requires a special permit, in which case a special
permit shall be required. Where a change of use is proposed and site plan
review is required, the Planning Board shall require the correction of any
zoning violations and may require reasonable improvements in landscaping,
access, drainage, lighting, and buffers that are proportionate in scope to
the impact of the change in use. Improvements with a cumulative cost of
no more than 10% of the pre-change assessed value shall be deemed to be
proportionate in scope.
§ 255-19. Use Regulations Schedule.
The Use Regulations Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-19
1:171

ARTICLE VI
Dimensional Regulations
§ 255-20. Applicability.
No building or structure shall be erected or used unless such building
or structure conforms to the requirements set forth in the Dimensional
Regulations Schedule, included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-21. Dimensional Regulations Schedule.
The Dimensional Regulations Schedule for Buildings and Structures is
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-21
1:173

ARTICLE VII
Supplemental District Regulations
§ 255-22. Home occupations.
Purpose and intent. The conduct of small-scale, low-impact business
and professional uses on residential properties shall be permitted
under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section to:
(1) Ensure the compatibility of home occupations with other uses;
Maintain and preserve the rural, residential and historic character
of those portions of the Town that are primarily residential in use;
and
(2)
Allow residents to engage in gainful employment on their
properties, without undue permitting burdens, while avoiding
excessive noise, traffic, nuisance, fire hazard, and other possible
adverse effects of nonresidential uses in residential areas.
(3)
A.
Types/Categories of home occupations. There are two types of home
occupations, as follows:
Home Occupation I (allowed by right as shown in the Use
Regulations Schedule included as an attachment to this chapter).
(1)
Home Occupation II (allowed subject to site plan review as shown
in the Use Regulations Schedule included as an attachment to this
chapter).
(2)
B.
General criteria and standards. All home occupations, regardless of
their type or category, shall conform to the following criteria and
standards:
The home occupation shall be incidental and secondary to the use
of a dwelling unit for residential purposes. It shall be conducted
in a manner which does not infringe on the right of neighboring
residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their dwelling units
and does not alter the character of the neighborhood.
(1)
More than one home occupation may be conducted on a lot,
provided that the combined impact of all home occupations
satisfies the criteria and standards enumerated for the appropriate
level of home occupation.
(2)
The home occupation is conducted only by residents of the dwelling
unit but the business may employ other workers who do not engage
in the work of the business at the site of the home occupation.
(3)
C.
Home Occupation I (allowed by right). A home occupation is allowed by
right if it is carried out in compliance with the following criteria and
standards:
D.
§ 255-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-22
1:175
Conforms to the general criteria and standards applicable to all
home occupations as provided in Subsection C above.
(1)
All client and customer contacts are conducted via the internet or
telephone or regular mail or at a site other than the location of the
home occupation.
(2)
The types of businesses which are so conducted may vary widely
but only utilize machinery and materials which are kept within
the dwelling. Examples of permitted Type/Category I home
occupations include, but are not limited to, artists with a home
studio; web developer who utilizes a computer, telephone, and
similar small equipment; internet sales business; engineers,
surveyors, architects who utilize a small portion of their residence
as a home office; building contractors who utilize a small portion of
their residence as a home office.
(3)
The home occupation shall not involve the repair or maintenance of
client or customer property (including equipment or machinery) on
the premises on which the home occupation is located.
(4)
All work associated with the home occupation is carried out within
the dwelling unit in a space which shall be the lesser of 20% of the
floor area of the dwelling unit or 500 square feet.
(5)
No signs denoting the conduct of the home occupation business
shall be permitted or displayed on the property.
(6)
The home occupation shall not give the outward appearance of a
business. (The incidental appearance of a vehicle allowed under
§ 255-86F of the Zoning Bylaw to be parked in a residential district
with the owner's business name, etc. on said vehicle shall not be
construed as giving the outward appearance of a business.)
(7)
Persons intending to conduct a Type/Category I home occupation
shall submit to the office of the Planning Board a signed
acknowledgement that they are aware of and will comply with the
conditions for such home occupation as specified in this Subsection
D.
(8)
Home Occupation II (allowed subject to site plan review). A home
occupation is allowed subject to site plan review (conducted in
accordance with Article XII of the Zoning Bylaw, including, but not
limited to, the conducting of the public hearing with prior notification
of the certified abutters as provided in § 255-147) if it is carried out in
compliance with the following criteria and standards:
Conforms to the general criteria and standards applicable to all
home occupations as provided in Subsection C above.
(1)
E.
§ 255-22 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-22
1:176
The maximum area that may be occupied by the home occupation
shall be the lesser of 20% of the floor area of the primary dwelling
unit or 500 square feet.
(2)
The home occupation shall not give the outward appearance of a
business. (Signage, conducting of the business in accordance with
these standards and criteria, and the incidental appearance of a
vehicle allowed under § 255-86F of the Zoning Bylaw to be parked
in a residential district with the owner's business name, etc. on said
vehicle shall not be construed as giving the outward appearance of
a business.)
(3)
Signs used in conjunction with a home occupation shall not be
animated or illuminated and shall not exceed one square foot and
must be affixed to the residence and not be freestanding. The
Planning Board may approve a small (up to 0.25 square foot)
nameplate to be affixed to a freestanding mailbox structure as a
condition of the site plan review.
(4)
(5) Parking shall be adequate for customers or clients.
No commercial vehicle other than Class 1 commercial vehicles,
as defined by the Massachusetts Department of Transportation,
at the DOT website (http://www.massdot.state.ma.us/highway/
TrafficTravelResources/VehicleClass TypeClassifications.aspx) may
be parked on a property in connection with a home occupation.
(6)
Automobile and truck traffic generated shall not be greater than
the volume of traffic that would normally be generated by a
residential use. As such, considering the property size, location,
type of business, the Planning Board may establish maximum limits
as to the number of client/customer visits which may be conducted
during a set period of time as a condition of the site plan review.
The applicant must, as part of his/her application, provide
information as to the volume of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
which is expected to be associated with the home occupation at its
peak level and on a routine basis.
(7)
There shall be no exterior storage of materials, equipment,
vehicles, or other supplies used in conjunction with a home
occupation.
(8)
The home occupation shall be conducted in a manner that will
not interfere with the enjoyment of abutting residential dwellings
by reason of noise, vibration, smoke, electrical interference, dust,
odors, or heat. The use of substances in a manner which may
endanger public health or safety or which pollute the air or water
shall be prohibited. As such, the Planning Board may, as a condition
of the site plan review, establish limitations as to the hours of
operation of the home occupation.
(9)
§ 255-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:177
§ 255-23. Smart Growth Zoning Districts. [Amended 1-10-2018 STM
by Art. 2]
General regulations that apply to all Smart Growth Zoning Districts.
Purposes. The purposes of the Smart Growth Zoning Districts are:
To provide an opportunity for residential development and to
especially encourage mixed-use development, including both
new construction and renovation of existing buildings, within
a distinctive, attractive and livable environment that supports
the commercial revitalization of South Hadley.
(a)
To promote continuing development and redevelopment in
South Hadley that is pedestrian-friendly and consistent with
South Hadley history and architecture.
(b)
To ensure high-quality site planning, architecture and
landscape design that enhances the distinct visual character
and identity of South Hadley and provides an environment with
safety, convenience and amenity.
(c)
To provide for a diversified housing stock at a variety of costs
within walking distance of services and public transportation,
including affordable housing and other housing types that
meet the needs of the Town's population.
(d)
To generate positive tax revenue for the Town, and to benefit
from the financial incentives provided by Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 40R, while providing the opportunity for
new business growth and additional local jobs.
(e)
To encourage preservation and rehabilitation of historic
structures and buildings.
(f)
To promote efficient use of land and existing parking supply
and limit the expansion of surface parking within the district
by encouraging shared parking. [Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by
Art. 20]
(g)
To encourage adoption of energy-efficient building practices
and sustainable construction methods.
(h)
To ensure compliance with Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection stormwater management policies
and practices.
(i)
(1)
Definitions. For purposes of this § 255-23, the following definitions
shall apply. All capitalized terms shall be defined in accordance
with the definitions established under the Enabling Laws or Article
III, or as set forth in the PAA Regulations. Where, for readability or
other reasons, the terms defined in Article III, the PAA Regulations
or the Enabling Laws, appear without capitalization, such use shall
(2)
A.
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:178
nevertheless be presumed to have the same meaning as defined in
Article III, the PAA Regulations or the Enabling Laws, as applicable,
unless it is obvious from the context that the common law definition
applies. Common law definitions shall apply to all other terms not
defined in Article III, the PAA Regulations or the Enabling Laws.
To the extent that there is any conflict between the definitions set
forth in Article III or the PAA Regulations and the Enabling Laws,
the terms of the Enabling Laws shall govern. [Amended 5-9-2018
ATM by Art. 20]
ACCESSORY — A structure, building or use which:
ADMINISTERING/MONITORING AGENT — An entity designated
by the South Hadley Board of Selectmen, which may be the South
Hadley Housing Authority or other qualified housing entity, with
the power to monitor and to enforce compliance with the provisions
of this section related to Affordable Units, including but not limited
to computation of rental and sales prices; income eligibility of
households applying for Affordable Units; administration of an
approved housing marketing and resident selection plan; and
recording and enforcement of an Affordable Housing Restriction
for each Affordable Unit in the SGZD. [See Subsection A(8).]
ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS or PAA REGULATIONS —
Administrative rules and provisions relative to Plan Approval that
are adopted by the Planning Board pursuant to MGL c. 40R and in
its capacity as the 40R Plan Approval Authority under Subsection
A(8). Such rules and regulations, Project application form(s), any
other application requirements and any subsequent amendments
thereof must be approved by the Department of Housing and
Community Development.
AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP UNIT — A Dwelling Unit
required to be sold to an Eligible Household per the requirements
of this section.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing that is affordable to and
occupied by Eligible Households.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION — A deed restriction of
an Affordable Unit meeting statutory requirements in MGL c. 184,
§ 31 and the requirements of Subsection A(8) of this section.
Is subordinate in function to and serves a principal building or
principal use;
(a)
Is subordinate in area or extent to the principal building or
principal use served;
(b)
Contributes to the comfort, convenience, or necessity of
occupants or the principal building or use; and
(c)
(d) Is located on the same lot as the principal building or use.
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:179
AFFORDABLE RENTAL UNIT — A Dwelling Unit required to be
rented to an eligible household per the requirements of Subsection
A(8).
AFFORDABLE UNIT — The collective reference to Affordable
Homeownership Units and Affordable Rental Units.
ALLOWED USE — A Principal, Accessory or other permitted Use
listed under § 255-23B; a use that is not prohibited under
§ 255-23B.
ANNUAL UPDATE — A list of all approved and currently proposed
Smart Growth Districts within the Town of South Hadley and other
associated information, to be filed on or before July 31 of each year
with the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community
Development pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
40R and applicable regulations [760 CMR 59.07(1)].
APPLICANT — A landowner or other petitioner who files a plan for
a Development Project subject to the provisions of this section.
AREA-WIDE MEDIAN INCOME — The median income, adjusted for
household size, as reported by the most recent information from,
or calculated from regulations promulgated by, the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
AS-OF-RIGHT or AS-OF-RIGHT DEVELOPMENT — A use or
Development Project allowable under this section without recourse
to a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, or other form
of zoning relief. A Development Project that is subject to the Plan
Review requirement of this section shall be considered an As-Of-
Right Development.
BUILDING — A combination of any materials, whether portable
or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter of
persons, animals or property. For the purpose of this definition,
"roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering, whether or
not permanent in nature. The word "building" shall be construed,
where the context requires, as though followed by the words "or
part or parts thereof."
BUSINESS — The transacting or carrying on of a trade or
commercial enterprise with a view to profit or for livelihood.
COMMERCIAL — Any use classified under the category "Business
Uses" in § 255-23B.
CONDOMINIUM — A system of ownership of real estate, including
commercial, industrial, and attached and detached residential
dwelling units, established pursuant to the Condominium Act of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Chapter 183A of the
Massachusetts General Laws, in which the apartments or dwelling
units are individually owned and the land and common areas are
owned in common. A condominium is not a use or a building type;
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:180
rather, it is a form of ownership that can apply to any use or
building type.
CONSUMER SERVICES — A barber shop, dry-cleaning or laundry
establishment, photographer's shop or studio or similar business
where service is provided directly on the premises.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DEPARTMENT or DHCD — The Massachusetts Department of
Housing and Community Development.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Provisions adopted in accordance with
§ 225-23B that shall be applicable to all Development Projects
within the SGZD.
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT or PROJECT — A residential or mixeduse
development undertaken under this section. A Development
Project shall be identified as such on the Plan which is submitted to
the Planning Board for plan review.
DWELLING — A building occupied exclusively as a residence for
one or more families.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or group of rooms designed and
equipped exclusively for use as living quarters for only one family,
including provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. The
term shall include mobile homes but shall not include house trailers
or recreational vehicles.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling containing four or more
dwelling units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached dwelling containing
one dwelling unit.
DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY — A dwelling containing three
dwelling units.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A dwelling containing two dwelling
units.
ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD — An individual or household whose
annual income is below 80% of the areawide median income as
determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), adjusted for household size, with income
computed using HUD's rules for attribution of income to assets.
ENABLING LAWS — MGL Chapter 40R and 760 CMR 59.00.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and
living as a single housekeeping unit. For purposes of this § 255-23:
A family shall not exceed four persons not related by blood or
marriage;
(a)
Notwithstanding the above, a family shall be deemed to include
a group residence, limited, further defined as a premises
(b)
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:181
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the areas of habitable or commercially
usable space on all floors of a structure, including the interior
floor area of all rooms (including bathrooms and kitchens), closets,
pantries, hallways that are part of a dwelling unit or inside a
commercial building, including habitable finished basements but
excluding cellars or unfinished basements.
FRONTAGE — The length of a front lot line adjacent to a street;
provided, however, that the minimum frontage required by this
bylaw shall be satisfied by a continuous, uninterrupted segment of
such frontage.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance between the highest point of the
roof of a building and the average finished grade of land on which
the building is located. For purposes of this § 255-23, the term
"height" shall not apply to chimneys, steeples, flag- or radiopoles,
antennas, aerators, required bulkheads, elevator penthouses, or
other equipment appurtenances necessitated by the permitted use
to which a building is put. In addition, the term "height" shall
not apply to solar energy collectors and equipment used for the
mounting or operation of such collectors; provided, however, that
such collectors or equipment shall not impair solar access of other
building or other solar installations.
INSTITUTIONAL USE — A nonprofit or quasi-public use or
institution, such as a church, library, public or private school,
municipally owned or operated building, structure or land, used for
public purpose.
LOADING SPACE — Off-street space logically and conveniently
located for bulk pickups and deliveries by truck, scaled to delivery
vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when
required off-street parking spaces are filled. Required off-street
loading space is not to be included as off-street parking space in
computation of required off-street parking space.
LOT — A parcel of land which is or may be occupied by a principal
building and its accessory buildings, together with such open yard
areas as are required under the provisions of this § 255-23. To be
used for building purposes, such lot must have frontage on a street
as defined below, excepting only a preexisting lot exempted by the
provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 6. A lot line is a boundary of a lot.
MASTER PLAN — The South Hadley Master Plan adopted by the
South Hadley Planning Board, as amended.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A Development Project
containing a mix of residential uses and nonresidential uses as
licensed, regulated, or operated by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or operated by a vendor under contract with
the commonwealth for the residential living, care, or
supervision in any single dwelling unit of five or more mentally
ill or mentally retarded persons or persons with disabilities.
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:182
specified in § 255-23A(5) and subject to all provisions of this
§ 255-23.
NONRESIDENTIAL USE — Office, Retail, Restaurant, Service or
Institutional Use, inclusive, or some combination of the same.
OFFICE — A workplace used for the transaction of business or
nonprofit functions, excluding as principal uses manufacturing,
retail construction, and warehousing and including but not limited
to professional offices and offices that support or manage on-site or
off-site manufacturing, retailing, construction, and warehousing, as
well as research laboratories and other facilities in which research
activities are conducted. An office that is operated as part of
another primary use on the Use Table shall be considered
accessory to that primary use and not a separate use.22
PARKING (OFF-STREET) — For purposes of this § 255-23A(6), an
off-street parking space shall consist of an area for parking an
automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together
with properly related access to a street and sufficient maneuvering
room, but shall be located totally outside of any street or alley
right-of-way.
PLAN — A plan depicting a proposed Development Project for all
or a portion of the SGZD and which is submitted to the Planning
Board for its review and approval in accordance with the provisions
of this § 255-23.
PLAN APPROVAL — The Planning Board's authorization, acting as
the Plan Approval Authority (PAA) per the Enabling Laws, for a
proposed Development Project based on a finding of compliance
with this section and Design Standards after the conduct of a Plan
Review.
PLAN APPROVAL AUTHORITY (PAA) — The South Hadley Planning
Board authorized under Article XI to conduct the Plan Approval
process for purposes of reviewing Project applications and issuing
Plan Approval decisions within the SGZD.
PLAN REVIEW — The review procedure established by this article
and administered by the Town of South Hadley Planning Board
acting as PAA.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — One or more buildings/structures serving
the primary use to which the premises are devoted, and the main
purpose for which the premises exist.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary use to which the premises are
devoted, and the main purpose for which the premises exist.
RESIDENTIAL PROJECT — A Project that consists solely of
residential, parking and accessory uses as defined in § 255-23B.
22.Editor's Note: The Use Table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:183
RESIDENTIAL USE — A building or part of a building containing
Dwelling Units as defined hereinabove and parking that is
accessory to the Dwelling Units.
RESTAURANT — A commercial establishment in which the primary
activity consists of the preparation and serving of food for
consumption on the premises or as take-out, including a bar or pub
or other establishment that sells food and alcoholic beverages for
on-premises consumption, excluding catering businesses and retail
uses that sell prepared food.
RETAIL; RETAIL SALES — An establishment selling goods directly
to the general public for personal and household consumption,
including but not limited to an appliance store, bakery,
delicatessen, drugstore, florist, grocer, hardware store, liquor
store, newsstand, shoe store, stationery store, convenience store,
and variety store, excluding a restaurant.
SCHOOL — A building devoted to instruction or education in
primary, secondary, high school, or post-high school grades.
SERVICE — The performance of any act for the benefit of another
with a view to profit or for a livelihood.
SETBACK — The minimum required unoccupied space or distance
between a lot line and any part of a principal or accessory building
nearest such lot line, such unoccupied space or area extending the
entire distance across the lot. Front, side and rear setback lines are
identified in accordance with the diagram below:
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:184
SMART GROWTH DISTRICT — An Overlay Zoning District adopted
pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40R, in
accordance with the procedures for zoning adoption and
amendment as set forth in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
40A and approved by the Department of Housing and Community
Development pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
40R and applicable regulations.
STREET — A way, whether public or private, set aside for the
passage of persons, animals or vehicles, and which is:
A public way accepted by the Town or a way which the Town
Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way; or
(a)
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:185
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed
location to give support or shelter, such as a building, framework,
retaining wall, tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin, tower, fence,
sign, pole, mast, or the like. The word "structure" shall be
construed, where the context allows, as though followed by the
words "or part or parts thereof."
UNDERLYING ZONING — The zoning requirements adopted
pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A that are
otherwise applicable to the geographic area in which the SHFSGD
is located, as said requirements may be amended from time to time.
UNRESTRICTED UNIT — A Dwelling Unit that is not restricted as
to rent, price or eligibility of occupants.
USE — The purpose for which land or a building or structure is
arranged, designed, intended or erected, or for which land or a
building or structure is or may be occupied.
A way shown on a plan approved and endorsed by the Planning
Board in accordance with Chapter 41 of the Massachusetts
General Laws (Subdivision Control Law); or
(b)
A way in existence when said Subdivision Control Law became
effective in South Hadley having, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate
construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in
relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or
served thereby, and having sufficient and adequate municipal
services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be
erected thereon.
(c)
Scope and authority. The Smart Growth Zoning District is
established pursuant to the Enabling Laws, and shall be deemed
to overlay the parcels as shown on the Zoning Map of the Town
of South Hadley, as amended. The Underlying Zoning shall remain
in effect, and the Applicant shall have the option of applying for
Plan Approval pursuant to the zoning controls set forth in this
§ 255-23 or complying with all applicable zoning controls set forth
in the Zoning Bylaw of the Town of South Hadley for the underlying
district(s) or for other overlay zoning that may be therein defined.
Development Projects proceeding under this § 255-23 shall be
governed solely by the provisions of this § 255-23 and shall be
deemed exempt from the standards and/or procedures of the
Underlying Zoning and other overlay provisions, including
limitations upon the issuance of building permits for residential
uses related to a rate of development or phased growth limitation
or to a local moratorium on the issuance of such permits, or to
other building permit or dwelling unit limitations. [Amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(3)
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:186
Performance standards. All permitted uses must comply with the
following:
Does not regularly emit noxious odors, or dust particles, or
smoke, or pose danger, such as manufacture of acids, gases,
fertilizers and glue, petroleum refining, reduction of animal
matter, and manufacture of cement, gypsum, or explosives.
(a)
Does not present a danger to persons within or outside the
SGZD by reason of emission of odor, fumes, gases, particulate
matter, smoke, noise, vibration, glare, radiation, electrical
interference, threat of fire or explosion, or any other reason.
[Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(b)
Complies with the Town Stormwater Management Bylaw23 as
provided to DHCD on September 8, 2015, regardless of the
amount of area being disturbed. Until such time that the Town
of South Hadley has qualified for one or more density bonus
payments under 760 CMR 59.06(2) corresponding to a number
of Bonus Units that is equal to or greater than the minimum
number of Incentive Units associated with any Zoning
Incentive Payment received for a given SGZD established
under this § 255-23, any subsequent amendments to the
Stormwater Management Bylaw shall not apply to
Development Projects in such the SGZD until DHCD has
received written notice of such amendment(s) and determined
that such amendment(s) does not unduly restrict development
within the such SGZD as per 760 CMR 59.02. [Amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(c)
(4)
Mixed-Use Development. Development Projects may include a
portion not to exceed 50% of the total gross floor area to be
used for nonresidential uses, including Office, Retail, Restaurant,
Service or Institutional Uses. Residential units must generally be
located above the first floor but may be permitted in first-floor
portions of the building. Where that portion of the building fronts
on a public way, the Planning Board must determine that it is
principally a residential street or that such first-floor residential
use would be in keeping with the character of the adjoining land
uses. [Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(5)
Off-Street Parking and Loading.
Off-Street Parking. Retail stores, offices and Consumer Service
establishments located within 300 feet of a public off-street
parking facility shall be exempt from off-street parking
requirements. In all other cases, off-street parking shall be
provided to meet the following minimum requirements:
[Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(a)
(6)
23.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Stormwater Management.
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:187
Use
Number of Parking
Spaces
Retail or Restaurant 0
Office and Institutional 2 per 1,000 square feet
Residential Units 1.25 per unit
Other Nonresidential, less than
2,000 square feet
0
Other Nonresidential, 2,000 square
feet or more leasable space in
excess of 2,000 square feet
1 per 2,000 square feet.
As indicated above, off-street parking is not required for Other
Nonresidential uses in the district unless such use exceeds
2,000 square feet of net floor area.
Off-Street Loading and Delivery. Off-street loading spaces shall
be provided to meet or exceed the following minimum
requirements:
Use
Number of Parking
Spaces
Restaurant - leasable space in
excess of 2,000 square feet
1 space per 2,000
square feet
Other allowed secondary use -
leasable space in excess of 2,000
square feet
1 space per 5,000
square feet
The Planning Board may waive the loading space requirement
if the Applicant provides a plan proving that the loading space
is not needed or can be shared.
(b)
Location of Parking. Any surface parking lot shall, to the
maximum extent feasible, be located at the side or rear of a
building, relative to any public right-of-way, public open space,
or pedestrian way. In no case shall surface parking for new
construction be permitted within any applicable restricted
Front Setback area. [Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(c)
Waiver of parking requirements. The Planning Board may
grant a Plan Approval providing such relief from the standards
or prescribe safeguards and conditions as it shall warrant
appropriate, provided that it finds that it is impractical to meet
the standards and that such modifications are appropriate by
reason of the proposed use and will not result in or worsen
parking or traffic problems in the SGZD. The Planning Board
may impose conditions of use or occupancy appropriate to such
modifications, provided that the particular use and occupancy
were voluntarily proposed by the applicant and any such
(d)
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:188
conditions are expressly approved in writing by DHCD and
would not impair the development of housing within the
District which is appropriate for diverse populations, including
households with children, other households, individuals,
households including individuals with disabilities, and the
elderly. [Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
Shared use of required parking.
Shared use may be made of required parking spaces by
intermittent-use establishments, for example, churches,
assembly halls or theaters, whose peak parking demand
is only at night or on specific days of the week; by other
uses whose peak demand is only during the day; or in
public parking lots. At the time of application, a formal
agreement shall be made in writing by the owners of the
uses involved concerning the number of spaces involved,
substantiation of the fact that such shared use is not
overlapping or in conflict, and the duration of the
agreement.
[1]
The applicant shall demonstrate that shared spaces will
meet parking demands by using accepted methodologies
(e.g., the Urban Land Institute Shared Parking Report, ITE
Shared Parking Guidelines, or other industry established
studies on shared parking).
[2]
(e)
Cooperative Establishment and Operation of Parking Areas.
Required spaces for any number of uses may be provided in
a combined lot or lots (public or private), provided that the
number of spaces in the combined facility shall not be less
than the sum of those required of the individual uses, with
allowances made, upon formal designation, for night use or
for separate and distinct working shifts, and provided also
that such lot or lots shall be within 600 feet of the principal
buildings served.
(f)
Parking design. Parking shall be designed and constructed to
comply with all applicable state or federal disability access
requirements, including but not limited to the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) and 521 CMR. [Amended 5-9-2018
ATM by Art. 20]
(g)
Open Spaces and Recreational Areas. The site design for
Development Projects may include common open space and
facilities. Where proposed, the plans and any necessary supporting
documents submitted with an application for Plan Approval within
the SGZD shall show the general location, size, character, and
general area within which common open space or facilities will be
located. The plans and documentation submitted to the Planning
Board shall include a description of proposed ownership and
(7)
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:189
maintenance provisions of all common open space and facilities
and, if requested by the Planning Board, any necessary restrictions
or easements designed to preserve the open space and recreational
areas from future development. Upon consideration of the above
information, the Planning Board may approve a waiver as provided
for in § 255-23A(10) for a front setback to allow for common open
space or facilities.
Affordable housing.
Affordable Units shall comply with the following requirements:
The monthly rent payment for an Affordable Rental Unit,
including applicable utility allowances, shall not exceed
30% of the maximum monthly income permissible for an
Eligible Household, assuming a household size equal to
the number of bedrooms in the unit plus one, unless
another methodology for determining the target household
size has been approved by DHCD. [Amended 5-9-2018
ATM by Art. 20]
[1]
For an Affordable Homeownership Unit, the monthly
housing payment, including mortgage principal and
interest, private mortgage insurance, property taxes,
condominium and/or homeowners' association fees,
insurance, and parking, shall not exceed 30% of the
maximum monthly income permissible for an Eligible
Household, assuming a household size equal to the
number of bedrooms in the unit plus one. [Amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
[2]
Affordable Units required to be offered for rent or sale
shall be rented or sold to and occupied only by Eligible
Households.
[3]
(a)
Number of Affordable Units. Twenty percent of all Dwelling
Units and 25% of all rental Dwelling Units constructed in
a Development Project shall be Affordable Units; provided,
however, for Development Projects in which all of the Dwelling
Units are limited to occupancy by elderly persons and/or by
persons with disabilities, 25% of the Dwelling Units shall be
Affordable Units, whether the dwelling units are rental units or
ownership units.
(b)
Fractional Units. When the application of the percentages
specified in § 255-23A(8)(a) results in a number that includes
a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole
number.
(c)
Design and Construction. Affordable Units must be dispersed
equitably and proportionately throughout a Development
Project, including, where applicable, across all buildings, floors
(d)
(8)
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:190
and unit types. Affordable Units must be comparable in initial
construction quality and exterior design to the Unrestricted
Units. However, nothing in this section is intended to limit
a homebuyer's rights to renovate a Dwelling Unit under
applicable law. The Affordable Units must have access to all
on-site amenities. Affordable Units shall be finished housing
units. All Affordable Units must be constructed and occupied
not later than concurrently with construction and occupancy
of Unrestricted Units. In Development Projects that are
constructed in phases, Affordable Units must be constructed
and occupied in proportion to the number of units in each
phase of the Development Project.
Unit mix. The total number of bedrooms in the Affordable Units
shall be at least proportionate to the total number of bedrooms
in all units of the Project of which the Affordable Units are a
part. [Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(e)
Affordable Housing Restriction. Each Affordable Unit shall be
subject to an Affordable Housing Restriction approved by
DHCD, pursuant to MGL c. 40R, and recorded with the County
Registry of Deeds or Land Court Registry District of the county.
All Affordable Housing Restrictions must include, at minimum,
the following:
A description of the Affordable Homeownership Unit, if
any, by address and number of bedrooms; and a
description of the overall quantity, initial unit designations,
and number of bedrooms and number of bedroom types
of Affordable Rental Units in a Development or portion
of a Development which are rental. Such restriction shall
apply individually to the specifically identified Affordable
Homeownership Unit and shall apply to a percentage of
rental units of a rental Development Project or the rental
portion of a Development Project with the designated
Affordable Rental Units initially identified in the
corresponding Affirmative Fair Housing Marketing Plan
(AFHMP) and able to float on a limited basis, as necessary,
subject to specific approval by DHCD in accordance with
the AFHMP and DHCD's AFHMP guidelines. [Amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
[1]
The term of the Affordable Housing Restriction which shall
be in perpetuity or for the longest period customarily
allowed by law, as further specified in the PAA's Plan
Approval decision, but shall be no less than 30 years.
[Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
[2]
The name and address of the Monitoring Agent, with a
designation of its power to monitor and enforce the
Affordable Housing Restriction.
[3]
(f)
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:191
Reference to a housing marketing and resident selection
plan, to which the Affordable Unit is subject, and which
includes an affirmative fair housing marketing program,
including public notice and a fair resident selection
process. If approved by DHCD, pursuant to MGL c. 40R for
the corresponding Project or phase(s) therein, the housing
marketing and selection plan may provide for local
preferences in resident selection. The plan shall designate
the household size appropriate for a unit with respect to
bedroom size and provide that preference for such unit
shall be given to a household of the appropriate size.
[Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
[4]
A requirement that buyers or tenants will be selected at
the initial sale or initial rental and upon all subsequent
sales and rentals from a list of Eligible Households
compiled in accordance with the housing marketing and
selection plan.
[5]
Reference to the formula pursuant to which rent of a rental
unit or the maximum resale price of a homeownership unit
will be set.
[6]
A requirement that only an Eligible Household may reside
in an Affordable Unit and that notice of any lease or
sublease of any Affordable Unit shall be given to the
Monitoring Agent.
[7]
Provision for effective monitoring and enforcement of the
terms and provisions of the Affordable Housing Restriction
by the Monitoring Agent.
[8]
Provision that the restriction on an Affordable
Homeownership Unit shall run in favor of the Monitoring
Agent and the Town of South Hadley, in a form approved
by municipal counsel and DHCD pursuant to the Enabling
Laws, and shall limit initial sale and resale to and
occupancy by an Eligible Household.
[9]
Provision that the owner(s) or manager(s) of an Affordable
Rental Unit(s) shall file an annual report to the Monitoring
Agent, in a form specified by that agent, certifying
compliance with the provisions of this § 225-23J and
containing such other information as may be reasonably
requested in order to ensure compliance with the
Affordable Housing Restriction and AFHMP. [Amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
[10]
Provision that the restriction on Affordable Rental Units
in a rental Project or rental portion of a Project shall run
with the rental Project or rental portion of a Project and
[11]
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:192
shall run in favor of the Monitoring Agent and the Town
of South Hadley, in a form approved by municipal counsel
and DHCD pursuant to the Enabling Laws, and shall limit
rental and occupancy to an Eligible Household.
A requirement that residents in Affordable Units provide
such information as the Monitoring Agent may reasonably
request in order to ensure compliance with the Affordable
Housing Restriction and AFHMP. [Amended 5-9-2018
ATM by Art. 20]
[12]
Designation of the priority of the Affordable Housing
Restriction over other mortgages and restrictions.
[13]
Administration. The Monitoring Agent shall ensure the
following [See § 255-23A(2)]:
Prices of Affordable Homeownership Units are properly
computed; rental amounts of Affordable Rental Units are
properly computed.
[1]
Income eligibility of households applying for Affordable
Units is properly and reliably determined.
[2]
The housing marketing and resident selection plan has
been approved by DHCD pursuant to the Enabling Laws,
conforms to all requirements and is properly administered.
[3]
Sales and rentals are made to Eligible Households chosen
in accordance with the housing marketing and resident
selection plan with appropriate unit size for each
household being properly determined and proper
preference being given.
[4]
Affordable Housing Restrictions meeting the requirements
of this section are recorded with the Hampshire County
Registry of Deeds or Land Court. In the case where the
Monitoring Agent cannot adequately carry out its
administrative duties, upon certification of this fact by
the Planning Board or by the Department of Housing and
Community Development, the administrative duties shall
devolve to and thereafter be administered by a qualified
housing entity designated by the South Hadley Board of
Selectmen.
[5]
(g)
Costs of housing marketing and selection plan.
The housing marketing and selection plan may make
provision for payment by the owner of reasonable costs to
the Monitoring Agent and the owner shall pay reasonable
costs to the Monitoring Agent to develop, advertise, and
maintain the list of Eligible Households and to monitor
[1]
(h)
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:193
and enforce compliance with affordability requirements
under this § 255-23 and the Enabling Laws. [Amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
In combination, the various documentation required under
§ 255-23A(8), to be submitted with an application for Plan
Approval, shall include details about construction related
to the provision, within the development, of units that
are accessible to the disabled and appropriate for diverse
populations, including households with children, other
households, individuals, households including individuals
with disabilities, and the elderly.
[2]
Plan approval procedures. The Planning Board shall adopt and
file with the Town Clerk Administrative Regulations relative to the
application requirements and contents for Plan Review, subject
to approval by the Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development. Plan approval procedures shall be as
follows:
Pre-application requirements.
Prior to the submittal of a Plan for Plan Approval, a
"Concept Plan" may be submitted to help guide the
development of the definitive submission for project buildout.
Such Concept Plan shall reflect the following:
[a] Overall building envelope areas.
[b] Open space and natural resource areas.
General site improvements, drainage plans, groupings
of buildings and proposed land uses.
[c]
[d] Anticipated parking spaces and locations.
[e] Site vehicular access.
[1]
The Concept Plan is intended to be used as a tool for both
the Applicant and the Planning Board to ensure that the
proposed Project design will be consistent with the Design
Standards and other requirements of the SGZD.
[2]
(a)
Application procedures. All Projects are subject to Plan
Approval.
Submittal.
An application for Plan Approval shall be submitted in
accordance with the requirements herein and further
specified in the SGZD Administrative Regulations, on
the form provided by the PAA, along with the
application fees set forth in the Administrative
[a]
[1]
(b)
(9)
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:194
Regulations. The application shall be accompanied by
such plans and other documents as required by the
Administrative Regulations required to verify
compliance with any of the provisions of this section
in a manner that, as defined in 760 CMR 59.02, does
not Unduly Restrict development within the SGZD.
In addition to the submission requirements of
Administrative Regulations, an application for Plan
Approval shall also include all of the following:
Development narrative including all uses,
breakdown of square footage for each use,
number of housing units and zoning summary.
[i]
Photos of adjacent properties and other
properties impacted by the development project.
[ii]
All plans shall be prepared by certified architects or
engineers as required by the Massachusetts Building
Code and shall include all of the following:
[i] Building plans. All levels, including roof.
Building elevations. All sides, including
courtyards and interior lot elevations.
[ii]
Massing perspective sketches or renderings
illustrating the key elements of the proposed
development Project within its context.
[Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
[iii]
Proposed exterior lighting plan with photometric
information.
[iv]
Proposed stormwater management plan with
rainwater calculations in accordance with the
Town's Stormwater Management Bylaw24
regardless of the size of the land area being
disturbed. However, this is not required if the
Planning Board, as the Stormwater Management
Permitting Authority, determines that the area of
disturbance is so de minimis as to render
calculations insignificant.
[v]
The documents shall clearly differentiate between
existing and proposed work by use of screened
lines or color. Changes and revisions to
subsequent submittals shall be prominently
noted.
[vi]
[b]
24.Editor's Note: See Ch. 200, Stormwater Management.
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:195
An application for Plan Approval shall be filed by the
Applicant with the Town Clerk. A copy of the
application, including the date of filing certified by
the Town Clerk, as well as the required number of
copies of the application, shall be filed forthwith by
the Applicant with the Planning Board. Application
submissions must include a hard copy as well as an
electronic copy in PDF and CAD format. Said filing
shall include any required forms provided by the
Planning Board. As part of any application for Plan
Approval for a Development Project, the Applicant
must submit the following documents to the Planning
Board and the Monitoring Agent:
Evidence that the Development Project complies
with the cost and eligibility requirements of
§ 255-23A(8);
[i]
Development Project plans that demonstrate
compliance with the design and construction
standards of § 255-23A(8)(d); and
[ii]
A form of Affordable Housing Restriction that
satisfies the requirements of § 255-23A(8)(f).
[iii]
Review fees. The Applicant shall be required to
pay for reasonable consulting fees to provide peer
review of the application for the benefit of the
Planning Board, pursuant to MGL c. 40R, § 11(a).
Such fees shall be held by the Town of South
Hadley in an interest-bearing escrow account,
and shall be used only for expenses associated
with the use of outside consultants employed by
the Planning Board in reviewing the Plan
application. Any surplus funds remaining after the
completion of such review, including any interest
accrued, shall be returned to the Applicant
forthwith.
[iv]
[c]
In accordance with the Administrative Regulations, the
Planning Board shall provide a copy of the application
materials to all relevant municipal Boards, Departments,
Commissions and Officials as determined by the Planning
Board and to the Monitoring Agent. Subject to the
requirements under Subsection A(9)(b)[3][b] below, these
entities shall provide any written comments within 60 days
of the filing plan and application with the Town Clerk.
[Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
[2]
[3] Public hearing and time limits.
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:196
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing and
review all applications according to the procedure
specified in MGL c. 40A, § 11.
[a]
The decision of the Planning Board shall require a
majority vote of the Board's members and be made,
and written notice of the decision filed with the Town
Clerk within 120 days of receipt of the Application
by the Town Clerk. This time may be extended by
mutual agreement between the Planning Board and
the Applicant by written agreement filed with the
Town Clerk. Failure of the Planning Board to take
action within said 120 days or the extended time shall
be deemed an approval of the Plan Approval
application.
[b]
Criteria for plan approval. The Planning Board shall
approve the Development Project upon the following
findings:
The Applicant has submitted the required fees and
information as set forth in the SGZD Administrative
Regulations; and
[a]
The proposed Development Project as described in
the application meets all of the requirements and
standards set forth in this § 255-23, applicable Design
Standards and the SGZD Administrative Regulations,
or a waiver has been granted therefrom and shall also
include written confirmation by the Monitoring Agent
that all Affordable Housing requirements have been
satisfied. [Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
[b]
Any extraordinary adverse potential impacts of the
Project on nearby properties have been adequately
mitigated.25
[c]
[4]
Criteria for plan denial. A Plan Approval application may
be disapproved only where the Planning Board finds that:
The applicant has not submitted the required fees and
information as set forth in the SGZD Administrative
Regulations; or
[a]
The Project as described in the application does not
meet all the requirements and standards set forth in
this § 255-23, applicable Design Standards and the
SGZD Administrative Regulations, or that a required
[b]
[5]
25.Editor’s Note: The unnumbered paragraph which immediately followed this subsection
and which required written confirmation by the Monitoring Agent that all requirements
were satisfied, was repealed 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20. See now Subsection A(9)(b)[4][b]
above.
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:197
waiver therefrom has not been granted; or [Amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
It is not possible to adequately mitigate significant
project impacts on nearby properties by means of
suitable conditions.
[c]
Waivers. Upon request of the Applicant, the Planning Board may
waive dimensional and other requirements, including design
standards, with conditions, in the interests of design flexibility and
overall project quality, and upon a finding of consistency of such
variation with the overall purpose and objectives of the SGZD and
the South Hadley Master Plan, and if it finds that such waiver
will allow the project to achieve the density, affordability, mix of
uses and/or physical character allowed under this section.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this § 255-23 or the
Zoning Bylaw of South Hadley, the Affordable Housing provisions
that comprise § 255-23A(8) shall not be waived. The Planning
Board will also take into consideration the following items when
considering a waiver: [Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
High-performance energy-efficient buildings and construction
methods.
(a)
(b) Projects with publicly accessible open space.
Projects that include retail and restaurants located on street
level.
(c)
A demonstrated shared parking initiative that makes efficient
use of land and existing parking supply.
(d)
The preservation or rehabilitation of historic properties or
other buildings considered significant to the Town.
(e)
(10)
Plan changes after approval by Planning Board.
Minor plan changes. After Plan Approval, an Applicant may
apply to make minor changes in a Development Project that
do not affect the overall build-out or building envelope of the
site, or provision of open space, number of housing units,
or housing need or Affordable Housing features. Such minor
changes must be submitted to the Planning Board on red-lined
prints of the approved plan, reflecting the proposed change,
and on application forms provided by the Planning Board. The
Planning Board may authorize such changes at any regularly
scheduled meeting, without the need to hold a public hearing.
The Planning Board shall set forth any decision to approve or
deny such minor change by motion and written decision, and
provide a copy to the Applicant for filing with the Town Clerk.
[Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(a)
(11)
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:198
Major plan changes. Those changes deemed by the Planning
Board to constitute a major change in a Development Project
because of the nature of the change in relation to the prior
approved plan, or because such change cannot be
appropriately characterized as a minor change as described
above, shall be processed by the Planning Board as a new
application for Plan Approval pursuant to this section.
(b)
Fair housing requirement. All Development Projects within the
SGZD shall comply with applicable federal, state and local fair
housing laws.
(12)
Project phasing. The Planning Board may allow a Project to be
phased at the request of the applicant or to mitigate any
extraordinary adverse impacts on nearby properties and provided
that the submission shows the full build-out of the Project and
all associated impacts as of the completion of the final phase and
subject to approval of the Planning Board. For projects that are
approved and developed in phases, the proportion of Affordable
Units shall be no less than the minimum percentage required for
the Project as a whole under § 255-23A(8)(b). [Amended 5-9-2018
ATM by Art. 20]
(13)
Decisions.
The Planning Board shall issue to the applicant a copy of
its decision containing the name and address of the owner,
identifying the land affected and the plans that were the
subject of the decision and certifying that a copy of the
decision has been filed with the Town Clerk. If 20 days have
elapsed after the decision has been filed with the Town Clerk
without an appeal having been filed, or if such appeal, having
been filed, is dismissed or denied, or if a plan is approved by
reason of the failure of the Planning Board to timely act, the
Town Clerk shall so certify on a copy of the decision. A copy of
said decision shall be filed with the Registry of Deeds.
(a)
A Plan Approval shall remain valid and run with the land
indefinitely, provided that construction has commenced within
two years after the decision is issued, which time shall be
extended by the time required to adjudicate an appeal and
which time shall be extended if the project proponent is
actively pursuing other required permits or there is other good
cause for failure to commence.
(b)
The Planning Board may require the posting of a performance
bond to secure and/or screen a Development Project site in
the event that demolition is undertaken but subsequent work
lapses, for any reason within or outside the applicant's control,
for a period longer than one year.
(c)
(14)
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:199
Date of effect. The effective date of this SGZD Bylaw (§ 255-23) as
amended May 8, 2018, shall be the date on which such adoption
is voted upon by Town Meeting pursuant to the requirements of
MGL c. 40A, § 5 and Chapter 40R of the General Laws; provided,
however, that an Applicant may not proceed with construction
pursuant to this Bylaw (§ 255-23) prior to the receipt of final
approval of this Bylaw (§ 255-23) and accompanying Zoning Map
by both the Department of Housing and Community Development
and the Office of the Massachusetts Attorney General. [Amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(15)
Severability. If any provision of this section is found to be invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this section
shall not be affected but remain in full force. The invalidity of
any provision of this section shall not affect the validity of the
remainder of the Town's Zoning Bylaw.
(16)
Design standards.
The Planning Board may adopt and amend, by simple majority
vote, Design Standards which shall be applicable to all
Projects. Such Design Standards must be objective and not
subjective and may only address the scale and proportions
of buildings, the alignment, width, and grade of streets and
sidewalks, the type and location of infrastructure, the location
of building and garage entrances, off-street parking, the
protection of significant natural site features, the location and
design of on-site open spaces, exterior signs, and buffering in
relation to adjacent properties. DHCD may, at its discretion,
require Design Standards to contain graphics illustrating a
particular standard or definition in order to make such
standard or definition clear and understandable. [Amended
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
(a)
Before adopting any Design Standard, the Planning Board shall
submit the proposed Design Standard to DHCD for approval.
Any amendment to the Design Standards shall not take effect
until approved by DHCD and filed with the Town Clerk.
(b)
An application for Plan Approval that has been submitted to
the Town Clerk pursuant to this section shall not be subject to
any Design Standard that has not been approved by DHCD
(c)
(17)
Establishment and delineation of the Smart Growth Zoning Districts.
South Hadley Falls Smart Growth Zoning District (SHFSGZD).
Establishment and delineation of the SHFSGD. The South
Hadley Falls Smart Growth District is an overlay district that is
superimposed over the Underlying District. The boundaries are
delineated as the "South Hadley Falls Smart Growth District"
on the Official Zoning Map of the Town of South Hadley on file
(a)
(1)
B.
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:200
in the office of the Town Clerk, said map hereby made a part of
the South Hadley Zoning Bylaw.
Allowed and prohibited uses. Any use not listed herein as an
Allowed Use is deemed prohibited.
Allowed uses. The following uses shall be permitted As-Of-
Right in the SHFSGD upon Plan Approval pursuant to the
provisions of this § 255-23: [Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by
Art. 20]
[a] Multifamily Dwelling.
Single-Family, Two-Family and Three-Family
Dwelling*.
[b]
[c] Office*.
[d] Retail*.
[e] Restaurant (excludes drive-through windows)*.
[f] Institutional*.
Consumer Service*.
* Only as part of a Mixed-Use Development; see
§ 255-23A(5).
[g]
[1]
In addition to the Allowed Uses listed above, the following
uses are permitted As-Of-Right for Development Projects
within the SHFSGD subject to the requirements of this
section:
Parking accessory to any of the above permitted uses,
including surface, garage-under, and structured
parking.
[a]
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the
above permitted principal uses.
[b]
[2]
(b)
Dimensional and other requirements. Applications for Plan
Approval shall be governed by this section and the Design
Standards for the South Hadley Falls Smart Growth District.
Dimensional Requirement
Maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) (gross
floor area/lot size)
3
Maximum Building Height 45 feet
Minimum Lot Frontage 50 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage N/A***
Minimum Lot Area N/A***
(c)
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:201
Dimensional Requirement
Number of Buildings per lot N/A***
Maximum Building Frontage 300 feet
Minimum Front Setback* 0 feet
Maximum Front Setback* 10 feet
Minimum Side/Rear Setback** abutting a
Residential Zone
15 feet
Minimum Side/Rear Setback** in
SHFSGD or abutting Business-B
0 feet
Interior Setback (between buildings on
same lot)
15 feet
* See 7.1.1 of the Design Standards for front facade
setback requirements.
** See 7.1.2 of the Design Standards for building stepback
requirements.
*** No requirement or limitation applies.
Residential Density Allowances. The minimum Multifamily
Residential density shall be 20 units per acre and the
maximum Multifamily Residential Density shall be 24 units
per acre for all lots and all buildings. The Single-Family
Residential Density shall be a maximum of up to eight
units/acre and Two-Family and Three-Family Residential
Density shall be a maximum of up to 12 units/acre.
The Planning Board may provide a waiver, including
permitting a density of less than 20 units per acre for
Multifamily, as specified in § 255-23A(10) to promote
the renovation or adaptive reuse of existing buildings.
[a]
[1]
Contiguous lots. In the SHFSGD, where two or more lots
are contiguous or are separated by a right-of-way, such lots
may be considered as one lot for the purpose of calculating
maximum lot coverage; parking requirements; minimum
usable open space; and Dwelling Units per acre.
[2]
Age-Restricted Housing Units. An Applicant may propose
a Residential or Mixed-Use Development Project in which
all Dwelling Units are designed for or are accessible to
the elderly or the handicapped under all applicable laws
and regulations, provided that not less than 25% of the
housing units in any such Development Project shall be
Affordable Units. All such Development Projects shall be
governed by the requirements of this § 255-23 and the
Design Standards. [Amended 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 20]
[3]
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:202
Newton Street Smart Growth Zoning District (NSSGZD). [Added
5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 21]
Establishment and Delineation of the NSSGZD. The NSSGZD is an
overlay district that is superimposed over the Underlying District.
The boundaries are delineated as the "Newton Street Smart
Growth Zoning District" on the Official Zoning Map of the Town
of South Hadley on file in the office of the Town Clerk, said map
hereby made a part of the South Hadley Zoning Bylaw.
(1)
Allowed and prohibited uses. Any use not listed herein as an
Allowed Use is deemed prohibited.
Allowed Uses. The following uses shall be permitted As-Of-
Right in the NSSGZD upon Plan Approval pursuant to the
provisions of this § 255-23:
[1] Multifamily dwelling.
Mixed-Use Development Project:
[a] Multifamily dwelling.
[b] Single-family, two-family and three-family dwelling.*
[c] Office.*
[d] Retail.*
[e] Restaurant (excludes drive-through windows).*
[f] Institutional.*
Consumer Service.*
*Only as part of a Mixed-Use Development; see
§ 255-23A(5).
[g]
[2]
(a)
In addition to the Allowed Uses listed above, the following uses
are permitted As-Of-Right for Development Projects within the
NSSGZD subject to the requirements of this § 255-23:
Parking accessory to any of the above permitted uses,
including surface, garage-under, and structured parking.
[1]
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted principal uses.
[2]
(b)
(2)
Dimensional and other requirements. Applications for Plan
Approval shall be governed by this section and the Design
Standards for the NSSGZD.
(3)
C.
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-23
1:203
Dimensional Requirement
Maximum Building Height 4 stories or 55 feet, whichever
is less except within 150 feet of
Newton or Lyman Street and
then shall be 3 stories or 50
feet, whichever is less
Minimum Lot Frontage N/A*
Maximum Lot Coverage N/A*
Minimum Lot Area N/A*
Number of Buildings per Lot N/A*
Maximum Building Frontage 300 feet
Minimum Front Setback N/A*
Minimum Side/Rear Setback
abutting a Residential Zone
20 feet
Minimum Side/Rear Setback
when abutting a parcel with an
existing single-family dwelling
20 feet for that portion of a
Structure not exceeding 2
stories
50 feet for that portion of a
Structure exceeding 2 stories
Minimum Side/Rear Setback in
NSSGZD or abutting Business-A
20 feet
* No requirement or limitation applies.
Residential Density Allowances. The minimum Multifamily
Residential density shall be 20 units per acre and the maximum
Multifamily Residential Density shall be 24 units per acre for
all lots and all buildings. The Single-Family Residential Density
shall be a maximum of up to eight units/acre and Two-Family
and Three-Family Residential Density shall be a maximum of
up to 12 units/acre.
The Planning Board may provide a waiver, including
permitting a density of less than 20 units per acre for
Multifamily, as specified in Subsection A(10) to promote
the renovation or adaptive reuse of existing buildings.
[1]
(a)
Contiguous lots. In the NSSGZD, where two or more lots are
contiguous or are separated by a right-of-way, such lots may be
considered as one lot for the purpose of calculating maximum
lot coverage; parking requirements; minimum usable open
space; and Dwelling Units per acre.
(b)
Age-Restricted Housing Units. An Applicant may propose a
Residential or Mixed-Use Development Project in which all
Dwelling Units are designed for or are accessible to the elderly
(c)
§ 255-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-23
1:204
§ 255-24. Accessory uses and buildings.
§ 255-25. Agricultural, horticultural and floricultural uses.
Agricultural, horticultural and floricultural uses shall include produce
farms, truck gardens, dairies, nurseries, wood lots, greenhouses, harvesting
of natural ice, and similar pursuits yielding food, fiber or decorative plants.
or the handicapped under all applicable laws and regulations,
provided that not less than 25% of the housing units in any
such Development Project shall be Affordable Units. All such
Development Projects shall be governed by the requirements
of this § 255-23 and the Design Standards.
An accessory use of land or structure is a use for a purpose customarily
incidental to the main or principal use permitted in the district. An
accessory building or structure is unattached to, subordinate in size to,
and used for a purpose incidental to a principal use or building.
A.
Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to any use
permitted in the Use Regulations Schedule26 (Article V) are permitted
in the corresponding districts, provided that such accessory use or
building shall not be offensive or dangerous to life by reason of fire,
and provided, further, that such accessory use or building shall not
include any activity conducted for gain or for the provision of a service
to nonoccupants of a residence at that location.
B.
No private way or walk shall give access across or upon a lot in any
district to a business or industry, except to an agricultural, horticultural
or floricultural use on an adjoining lot as permitted in the Use
Regulations Schedule.
C.
In industrial districts, accessory uses or activities necessary in
connection with scientific research or scientific development or related
production, not necessarily on the same parcel as said primary uses
or activities, are permitted by special permit from the Planning Board
acting as the special permit granting authority, provided that the
Planning Board finds that the proposed accessory use does not
substantially derogate from the public good.
D.
On parcels of less than five acres, in all districts except Agricultural,
and Industrial A, the following restrictions apply: The keeping and
raising of pigs, rabbits, livestock, pigeons, whether raised for table or
other purposes, or other like objectionable uses are prohibited.
A.
The keeping of poultry is restricted to a small flock for the use of the
resident occupant only. The flock shall be confined in an enclosure not
less than 10 feet from any lot line and not less than 25 feet from any
building used for human habitation. For the purpose of this bylaw, a
B.
26.Editor's Note: The Use Regulations Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-25
1:205
§ 255-26. Stables and riding academies.
"small flock" shall mean and shall not exceed one unit of poultry to each
500 square feet of lot area but in no case more than 12 such units on
any lot. The building and enclosure for the keeping of poultry permitted
herein shall not exceed 1/20 of the area of the lot on which it is located,
and any building so used shall be limited to one story in height. The
use of such enclosure or building for the keeping of poultry shall be
accessory to a dwelling existing on the same lot or on an abutting lot.
Any greenhouse on such a parcel shall not be conducted as a business,
and any greenhouse heating plant shall be located at least 20 feet from
any lot line.
On parcels of less than five acres in Residence A-1 Districts, the keeping
and raising of roosters, as well as pigs, rabbits, livestock, pigeons and
other like objectionable uses, is prohibited. Any greenhouse on such
a parcel shall not be conducted as a business, and any greenhouse
heating plant shall be located at least 20 feet from any lot line.
C.
On parcels of less than five acres in Agricultural Districts, the abovedescribed
restrictions shall not apply.
D.
Agricultural, horticultural and floricultural uses are prohibited entirely
on parcels of less than five acres in Industrial A Districts.
E.
Accessory to residential use. The keeping of horses and/or ponies and
a private stable, for personal use, are permitted as accessories to
residential uses in accordance with the following conditions:
The minimum acreage required for not more than one horse, pony
or stable shall be 32,500 square feet. One additional horse or pony
shall be permitted for each 15,000 square feet over the minimum
of 32,500 square feet of usable land area, not including the square
footage for principal and accessory buildings. Foals under six
months are not counted.
(1)
The location of the stable shall be not less than 100 feet from any
street line, and not less than 30 feet from any side lot line, and not
less than 25 feet from a rear lot line, and not less than 40 feet from
any dwelling.
(2)
The area to be used for the keeping of horses and/or ponies shall
have adequate fencing to contain the animal(s) within the property
boundaries.
(3)
Stables, corrals and yards shall be properly drained and reasonably
free from excessive odor, dust and mud, so as not to create a
nuisance or health hazard, to the community or to surrounding
property owners, from an air or drainage pollution standpoint.
(4)
A.
§ 255-25 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-26
1:206
§ 255-27. Conversion of single-family dwelling to two-family
dwelling.
§ 255-28. Noxious industrial uses.
The following noxious or dangerous uses are permitted in the Industrial B
District, subject to approval of a special permit by the Planning Board acting
as the special permit granting authority:
Acetylene gas, cyanide compound or oxygen manufacture
Asphalt manufacture or refining
Maintenance of the stable and property used in the keeping of
horses and/or ponies shall conform to all regulations of the local
Board of Health and state health authorities.
(5)
Riding academies. The term "riding academies" shall be interpreted to
include private club riding stables, rental and hacking stables, livery
and boarding stables. Where permitted in conformance with the Use
Regulations Schedule27 (Article V), such uses shall meet the following
conditions:
The minimum acreage required shall be a parcel or tract of land of
at least 10 acres.
(1)
Barns, stables, riding rings, corrals and accessory facilities shall be
located at least 175 feet from any side or rear lot line.
(2)
Sufficient off-street parking facilities shall be provided to
accommodate all users and visitors to the property.
(3)
The conditions described in Subsection A(3), (4) and (5) (above),
relating to fencing, nuisances and health regulations, shall also
apply to riding academies.
(4)
B.
In conformance with the provisions of Article IX, and subject to the
additional requirements described herein, the special permit granting
authority may approve a special permit allowing for a single-family
dwelling or other suitable structure to be altered and improved and
facilities added for a second housekeeping unit on a lot, in such districts
where permitted under the Use Regulations Schedule included as an
attachment to this chapter.
A.
The power to approve such permit for conversion to a two-family
dwelling shall be within the sole discretion of the special permit
granting authority, and no such permit shall be approved unless it shall
be clear that the use requested is for the best interests of the vicinity
and in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the bylaw. Each
case shall be considered on its own merits and no case shall raise a
presumption in favor of any other case.
B.
27.Editor's Note: The Use Regulations Schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-28
1:207
Chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture
Creosote manufacture
Distillation of coal or wood
Drop forge shop
Explosives, fireworks or ammunition manufacture
Fertilizer manufacture
Fumigation plants
Glue or size manufacture from fish or animal offal
Gypsum, cement, plaster or plaster of paris manufacture
Incineration or reduction of or dumping of offal, garbage or refuse on a
commercial basis (except where controlled by the Town)
Junkyard, junk storage, scrapping of autos and parts and the salvage
thereof
Linoleum manufacture
Match manufacture
Paint and lacquer manufacture
Petroleum refining and the bulk storage of petroleum products
Pyroxylin plastic manufacture
Rubber, natural or synthetic, or gutta-percha manufactured from crude or
scrap material
Sewage disposal plant (except where controlled by the Town)
Soap, tallow, grease or lard manufacture
Slaughterhouse
Sulphurous, sulphuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture
Tannery
Tar or asphalt roofing manufacture
Tar products manufacture
Tire recapping or retreading
All other enterprises or uses commonly regarded as hazardous or offensive
§ 255-29. Industrial Garden Districts.
In addition to all other applicable provisions of this bylaw, and any to the
contrary notwithstanding, the following requirements shall be controlling
within the Industrial Garden District:
Ways and intersections with public ways. All ways upon any lot in
an Industrial Garden District shall conform to the following design
standards:
A.
§ 255-28 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-29
1:208
Entrances and exits to the Town's public ways shall be approved by
the Planning Board based on recommendations from the Director
of Public Works as to locations and construction and shall be
designed to minimize potential traffic hazards.
(1)
Ways shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. In no case shall street intersections be less than 60°.
(2)
Street lines at all intersections shall be rounded with a curve at
each corner which has a radius of not less than 30 feet. When the
intersection of two streets varies more than 10° from a right angle,
the radius of the curve at the obtuse angle may be less, and at the
acute angle shall be greater than 30 feet.
(3)
On any way where the grade exceeds 3% on the approach to the
intersection, a leveling area with a slope of less than 1% shall be
provided for a distance of not less than 50 feet measured from the
nearest exterior line of the intersecting street.
(4)
Ways shall have a minimum width of traveled way of 30 feet. No
grade shall be greater than 6% nor less than 1/2 of 0.5%.
(5)
Granite curb inlets shall be furnished at all catch basins located
within the way. Bituminous concrete berms, granite or concrete
curbing shall be required along street edges where grades exceed
4%, where catch basins are located, at street intersection returns
and where special conditions require. Bituminous concrete berms
shall be constructed with a berm machine, providing a base from
eight inches to 10 inches and a height of eight inches. The height
of the berm above finished gutter grade shall be a minimum of five
inches.
(6)
Exterior construction. The exterior facing of the front elevation and
side walls of any building in the Industrial Garden District shall be
finished with brick, natural or manufactured stone, terra cotta, glass,
aluminum or other structural exterior material of equal durability and
architectural effect.
B.
Landscaping. No less than 2/3 of the front setback and side yard areas
of any building shall be provided with grass lawns, shrubbery or other
appropriate landscaping.
C.
Rubbish and trash. All rubbish, trash, scrap or other waste material
incident to the uses of the building occupation shall be stored within a
structure compatible with the requirements of Subsection B above or in
a manner which shall be sheltered from public view, provided that such
material is not placed closer to the side lot lines than the sides of the
principal building; and further provided that such material shall not be
stored within 50 feet of the rear lot line.
D.
Flammable materials. All flammable materials stored in quantities in
excess of one-hundred-gallon containers and which are required to be
E.
§ 255-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-29
1:209
§ 255-30. Location of automobile services.
Public garages, automobile repair shops, greasing stations, storage battery
service stations, gasoline filling stations, or any of their appurtenances or
accessory uses shall hereafter be erected or placed at least 25 feet from
any Residence or Agricultural District unless the spaces so used are entirely
enclosed in masonry or concrete walls and have roofs without openings,
except skylights having metal frames and fixed metal sash, glazed with wire
glass. Such buildings shall have no entrances or exits for motor vehicles
within a radius of 100 feet of any school, library, church, playground, or
institution for the sick, blind or feeble, or for children under 16 years of age.
§ 255-31. Flexible development.
licensed under MGL c. 148, § 9, as amended, shall be stored below
ground and below the mean grade level of the lot on which the storage
is required, or otherwise suitably enclosed.
General provisions. In addition to restrictions appearing elsewhere in
this bylaw, no use of land in the Industrial Garden District is permitted
which is unreasonably objectionable because of excessive noise,
vibration, offensive odor, smoke or any other reason which may render
the use or occupancy of the land and buildings a nuisance.
F.
Subdivisions. Subdivisions within the Industrial Garden District shall
conform to the Subdivision Control Law as adopted by the Town of
South Hadley, and shall further conform to the subdivision rules and
regulations of the Planning Board.28
G.
Purposes. Flexible development provisions are designed to encourage:
Development of diverse and affordable housing types while
preserving natural open space.
(1)
Preservation of natural open space for its scenic qualities and for
its agricultural, environmental, forestry, and recreational uses.
(2)
(3) Protection and enhancement of property values.
Housing located sensitive to a site's environmental assets and
constraints.
(4)
Housing developments which minimize the construction of public
infrastructure.
(5)
Maintenance of existing visual corridors and views of natural
community assets (such as views of Mount Holyoke, Mount Tom,
the Connecticut River, and agricultural activities).
(6)
(7) Interaction of preserved open space with residents.
A.
28.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 255-29 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-31
1:210
Applicability. The Planning Board may permit creation of a flexible
development from any parcel or set of contiguous parcels held in
common ownership and located entirely with the Town of South Hadley
in accordance with the provisions of this section of the Zoning Bylaw.
Creation of a flexible development requires approval of a special permit
and definitive subdivision plan as specified herein.
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meanings and intent respectively ascribed to them by
this subsection. If any word or phrase conflicts with definitions
specified elsewhere in the South Hadley Zoning Bylaw, the meaning and
intent ascribed below shall govern:
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED HOUSING — A form of development in
which each single-family residence is on a separate lot but shares
one or more exterior walls common with an adjoining single-family
residence.
USABLE OPEN SPACE — Areas suitable for use as facilities and sites
for play, tot lots, gardens, hiking/jogging trails, or similar facilities.
C.
Design process.
Flexible development is a unique approach in that it permits wide
flexibility in defining the dimensional standards and density
allowed for the residential development with a focus on open space
and cultural space preservation. The design process outlined below
is essential to achieving the purposes of the flexible development
provisions of the Zoning Bylaw. Accordingly, each development
plan shall be based on following the multistep design process
outlined below.
Inventory and assessment of the site. As an initial step, the
applicant is to inventory the existing site features giving
special attention to the site's natural, scenic, and cultural
resources and the interrelationships of the important features
to each other.
(a)
Evaluation of site context. The next step involves an evaluation
of the site in its larger context by identifying environmental,
transportation, utility, drainage, and cultural elements and
relationships to surrounding land uses and activities. This
evaluation must include an assessment of the types and
densities of adjoining developments.
(b)
Designation of preservation areas. The third step is to identify
the common open space and cultural areas of the site to be
preserved or enhanced. These areas should include the most
important and unique resources and scenic view elements.
To the extent appropriate, areas that serve to extend
neighborhood and community open space networks should be
included in these areas.
(c)
(1)
D.
§ 255-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-31
1:211
Delineation of development features. The fourth step is to
delineate the locations/areas to be used for the development
features, including, but not limited to, building sites, streets,
parking areas, paths, utility infrastructure corridors, and
drainage basins. This process should reflect an integrated
community which is compatible with surrounding and
historical development patterns.
(d)
Lot lines. If the development involves division of the property
into building lots, the next step is delineation of the lot lines.
(e)
Definitive plan. The final step in the design process is
preparation of the definitive plan required by the South Hadley
Subdivision Regulations.29 This plan is encouraged to be
submitted as part of the special permit application but, as
provided in Subsection E(2), must be submitted and approved
in accordance with the South Hadley Subdivision Regulations.
(f)
As part of the public hearing process on the special permit
application, applicants are to demonstrate to the Planning Board
that the applicant, at a minimum, incorporated this design process
in developing the proposed development plan.
(2)
Procedures. Flexible development is a unique use which requires a
special permit from the Planning Board. In addition to the provisions of
Article IX of the Zoning Bylaw, the following provisions also apply to the
flexible development application:
Concept review. While not required, applicants are encouraged to
submit a concept plan for informal review by the Planning Board.
Materials for this informal review shall be submitted at least 15
calendar days prior to the date of the Planning Board meeting at
which the review is to be undertaken. The materials to be provided
for this concept review should be sufficient to demonstrate the
applicant has, on at least a preliminary basis, completed the design
process detailed herein.
(1)
Subdivision plan. All flexible development projects will involve
submittal and approval of a subdivision plan pursuant to the Town
of South Hadley Subdivision Regulations.30 Accordingly, the
applicant must submit and obtain approval of the definitive plan
either at the time of submittal of an application for the special
permit or at a later date, but in accordance with the South Hadley
Subdivision Regulations.
Applicants are encouraged to submit an application for
definitive subdivision approval with the application for a
special permit.
(a)
(2)
E.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Subdivision Regulations.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 255-31 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-31
1:212
If an applicant submits an application for definitive subdivision
approval with his/her application for a special permit, the
applicant must also provide written authorization to extend the
deadline for definitive plan approval to a date at least 30 days
after the special permit decision is filed with the Town Clerk.
(b)
Supplemental contents. In addition to the requirements specified in
Article IX and Appendix E31 of the Zoning Bylaw, applications for a
flexible development must include the following information:
Boundaries of areas subject to regulation by the South Hadley
Conservation Commission.
(a)
Topographic contours (existing and proposed) at intervals of
10 feet or less.
(b)
Cultural and historic features on the property to include, but
not limited to, stone walls, archeological and historic sites and
structures, and significant trees.
(c)
Scenic views (as defined in § 255-10) as determined by on-site
observations from public roads and vantage points within the
development site.
(d)
Historic sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places
or Sites.
(e)
(f) Description of proposed dimensional standards.
Description of how the proposed development reflects
compliance with the design process and design standards.
(g)
(3)
Housing types permitted. To further the purposes of this section of the
Zoning Bylaw, the Planning Board may permit the following types of
residential uses:
(1) Single-family detached.
(2) Single-family attached.
(3) Multiple-family (includes condominium developments).
(4) Two-family.
(5) Three-family.
(6) Four-family.
(7) Fifty-five-and-over communities.
(8) Zero-lot line housing.
(9) Customary accessory structures and uses.
F.
31.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-31
1:213
Dimensional standards.
Minimum tract size. The minimum size of tract that may be
considered for a flexible development is five acres.
(1)
Internal dimensional standards. Lots and buildings without direct
access to preexisting public roadways may be developed with
dimensional requirements other than those of the underlying
zoning district. Therefore, for lots and buildings within a flexible
development without direct access to preexisting public roadways,
the applicant shall propose dimensional standards including the
minimum lot area, minimum lot frontage, maximum lot coverage,
and minimum yard setback requirements to create building sites
which differ from those specified for the underlying zoning district.
These internal dimensional standards are subject to Planning
Board approval. The applicant shall have the burden of
demonstrating, to the Planning Board's satisfaction, that the
proposed dimensional standards are appropriate for the site's
natural and cultural attributes and in keeping with the purposes of
this section of the Zoning Bylaw.
(2)
Perimeter dimensional standards.
For lots and buildings within a flexible development, but which
abut lots or roadways adjoining the proposed development,
the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district as
specified in § 255-21 of the Zoning Bylaw shall be applicable.32
(a)
Waiver. The Planning Board may permit a vegetated buffer and/
or screening fence to be provided to sufficiently screen the
proposed residences from the existing developments in lieu of
compliance with the underlying zoning district's dimensional
standards. Where such a buffer is permitted as provided in this
waiver provision, the following conditions shall apply:
The Planning Board may require the buffer area to extend
around the perimeter of the subject tract.
[1]
The Planning Board may require the buffer area to be
equal to or greater than double the required rear yard
setback of the underlying zoning district.
[2]
Any required buffer area shall be left undisturbed and the
applicant shall provide for its maintenance in perpetuity.
[3]
If the existing vegetation is inadequate to provide a visual
buffer, the Planning Board may require the applicant to
add vegetation sufficient to provide a buffer.
[4]
(b)
(3)
G.
32.Editor's Note: See the Dimensional Regulations Schedule included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 255-31 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-31
1:214
Density standards. The base number of dwelling units which may be
allowed or permitted in a flexible development shall not exceed the
number of lots which could reasonably be permitted in the underlying
zoning district in accordance with the dimensional standards specified
in § 255-21 of the Zoning Bylaw.33
Multiple zoning districts. If the subject property is located within
multiple zoning districts, the base number of dwelling units shall
be based on the acreage situated in the respective zoning districts.
However, the location of the approved number of dwelling units is
not subject to the boundaries of the underlying zoning district.
(1)
Planning Board restrictions. Where the natural conditions
(significant wetlands, floodplain, and/or steep slopes) of the subject
site suggest that the base number of dwelling units as determined
by the method specified in Subsection H(1) and (3) is excessive,
the Planning Board may require the applicant to deduct all or a
portion of the areas subject to those natural conditions from the
gross acreage of the site.
(2)
Determining base number of dwelling units. The base number of
dwelling units shall generally be determined by either of the
following methods:
Preliminary plan. The applicant may submit a preliminary plan
which demonstrates the number of dwellings which could
reasonably be situated on the site subject to the underlying
zoning district's dimensional requirements.
(a)
Preset method.
Multiply the gross acreage of the subject site by the
following maximum density standard for the subject
zoning district:
Zoning District Number of Units per Acre
Agricultural 0.75 or 0.90*
Residence A-1 1.20
Residence A-2 2.00
Residence B 3.25
[1]
(b)
(3)
H.
33.Editor's Note: See the Dimensional Regulations Schedule included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 255-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-31
1:215
* If the property is located within the Water Supply
Protection District and lacks public water and sewer
services, the lower density figure will apply. However,
if the subject property is provided with public water
service and either public sewer service or an
alternative sewage disposal system pursuant to
Subsection J(4)(b) below, the higher number of 0.90
units per acre may be used.
Planning Board verification. However, the Planning Board
may require submittal of a preliminary plan to substantiate
the number of lots proposed to be used as the base number
if a substantial portion of the subject property is occupied
by natural features and/or easements and dimensions
which restrict the number of lots which might be
developed on the property.
[2]
Density bonuses. The Planning Board may permit density bonuses to
increase the number of dwelling units beyond the base number of
dwelling units as provided in Subsection H. The Planning Board shall
utilize the following conditions as the bases for granting density
bonuses:
Additional open space. For each additional 10% of the site (over
and above the required 30%) set aside as common open space, a
density bonus of one additional unit may be awarded; provided that
this density bonus shall not exceed 50% of the base number of
dwelling units. Vegetated areas required as buffer areas between
the subject development and adjoining properties or roadways
shall not qualify for this additional open space density bonus.
(1)
Affordable housing units. For developments that provide that at
least 25% of the dwelling units are permanently affordable for
persons with an income of no more than 80% of the median family
income for the area, the Planning Board may permit a density
bonus of 25% of the base number of dwelling units.
(2)
Fifty-five-and-over community. Flexible developments restricted as
fifty-five-and-over communities may qualify for a bonus of 25% of
the base number of dwelling units.
(3)
Limits on bonuses. Density bonuses shall be cumulative and shall
not cumulatively exceed 50% of the base number of dwelling units.
(4)
I.
Site design standards.
Building and lot orientations.
Structures shall be oriented toward the street serving the
premises and not the required parking areas.
(a)
(1)
J.
§ 255-31 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-31
1:216
Lots shall be laid out and designed, to the greatest extent
feasible, to preserve and protect historic and archeological
sites, farmland, wooded stream corridors, forested areas and
large trees, scenic views particularly as seen from public
roads, ridgelines and hilltops.
(b)
Roadways.
Conformity to standards. The principal roadway(s) serving the
site shall be designed to conform with the standards set forth
in the Town of South Hadley Subdivision Regulations.34
(a)
Waiver(s). The applicant may request waiver of roadway and
related standards as provided for in the Town of South Hadley
Subdivision Regulations. However, the Planning Board may
restrict such waivers to proposed private roadways.
(b)
(2)
Parking.
Each dwelling unit shall be served by off-street parking spaces
as provided in § 255-86 of the Zoning Bylaw.
(a)
Waiver. The Planning Board may grant waiver(s) of the
requirements of § 255-86 of the Zoning Bylaw subject to
conditions the Board determines to be appropriate.
(b)
(3)
Water Supply Protection District. The Planning Board may grant a
special permit to allow a flexible development in the Water Supply
Protection District where the following conditions are satisfied:
Protection of water supply. The Planning Board determines
that the density and design of the development will provide
adequate protection for the water supply. To this end, the
number of dwelling units shall be determined by the
preliminary plan method stated in Subsection H(3)(a). The
maximum density bonuses which may be permitted in the
Water Supply Protection District pursuant to Subsection I
above shall not exceed 1/2 the amount permitted outside the
Water Supply Protection District.
(a)
Sewage disposal. The Board of Health grants approval for
a common septic disposal system where public sewer is not
available. The Planning Board may, but is not required to,
permit the area occupied by such system to be included in
the common open space if the Planning Board determines
that inclusion of such an area in the common open space is
consistent with the purposes of this section and the purposes
of the common open space.
(b)
(4)
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 255-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-31
1:217
Modification of Zoning Bylaw restrictions. The Planning Board may
grant waivers of the fence and parking restrictions/requirements
where the Board deems it necessary to further the purposes of this
section of the Zoning Bylaw.
(5)
Common open space. Each flexible development shall provide for
usable common open space.
Minimum required. A minimum of 30% of the parcel shown on the
development plan shall be in usable open space.
(1)
Multiple parcels. The required common open space may be in
multiple parcels, provided that no individual parcel shall be less
than 25% of the required common open space and all of the parcels
are connected via walkways, pathways, roadways, or other means
of access. The portion of the connecting accessway located outside
of the limits of roadway or roadway right-of-way may be included in
the calculation of the area of the common open space.
(2)
Uses of common usable open space. The required common usable
open space shall be used for agriculture, natural education,
recreation, conservation, historic, park purposes, or a combination
of such uses. Public easement purposes may also be permitted
to traverse portions of the common usable open space. Only
structures commonly associated with and incidental to the
permitted uses shall be permitted in the common usable open
space areas.
(3)
Composition of common usable open space.
While the Planning Board will make the final determination
of the composition of the common usable open space, the
common usable open space may include wetlands, floodplain
land, and steep slopes. However, the required open space shall
not be comprised exclusively of lands with such restrictions.
As a general guide, no more than 50% of the required open
space shall be composed of wetlands. The applicant has the
burden of demonstrating that the composition of the proposed
open space and its location and access further the purposes of
the flexible development provisions and are appropriate for the
proposed development.
(a)
The Planning Board may deny use of any surface drainage
systems (such as retention and detention ponds, swales, etc.)
as qualifying for the required open space.
(b)
(4)
Access from dwelling units.
A maximum number of the subject development's dwelling
units compatible with good design shall abut the open space.
All dwelling units shall have ready access to the common open
(a)
(5)
K.
§ 255-31 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-31
1:218
space either physically or through internal pedestrian paths or
sidewalks.
Exception. The Planning Board may grant an exception to
the access requirement upon a recommendation from the
Conservation Commission that the resource area is vulnerable
to trampling or other disturbance and physical access should
not be provided.
(b)
Accessory buildings. Structures or buildings accessory to
recreation, conservation, or agriculture use may be erected but
shall not exceed 5% of the area protected as common open space.
Accordingly, the applicant may make provision for erection of such
structures by subsequent owners of the residences; however, the
aggregate size of all such structures shall not exceed the 5% rule.
Further, the applicant shall make provisions for maintenance of
any accessory structures or buildings (such provisions may include
assignment of responsibility to a homeowners' association).
(6)
Ownership of common open space.
Conveyance. The required common open space shall, at the
Planning Board's election, be conveyed to:
The Town or its Conservation Commission and be accepted by
the Town for park or open space use.
(a)
A nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the
conservation of open space.
(b)
A corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of
the lots or residential units within the development. If such a
corporation or trust is utilized, as indicated herein, ownership
thereof shall pass with conveyance of the lots or residential
units.
(c)
(1)
Restriction. Regardless of the ownership of the open space, any
conveyance shall be subject to the conditions of the Planning Board
approval of the flexible development and subject to a recorded
restriction enforceable by the Town, provided that such land shall
be:
(a) Perpetually kept in an open state; and
Preserved for exclusively agricultural, horticultural,
educational, or recreational purposes [except for those lands
permitted to also be used for a common septic disposal system
pursuant to Subsection J(4)]; and
(b)
Maintained in a manner which will ensure its suitability for its
intended purposes; and
(c)
(d) Prohibited from being further subdivided.
(2)
L.
§ 255-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-31
1:219
§ 255-32. Fences or walls in residential districts.
§ 255-33. Mobile homes.
Not subject to variance. No provision of this section, nor any project
for which a special permit was granted under this section, shall be
subject of a dimensional variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals. If
deviations from the approved dimensional standards become necessary,
the Planning Board may amend the special permit to accommodate
such conditions.
M.
Fences or walls in residential districts which are more than four feet
high and more than 1/4 solid, except retaining walls, shall be erected
not less than three feet from any lot line.
A.
Fences, including hedges, may not be higher than three feet for a
distance extending 20 feet off the street right-of-way line.
B.
Fences, except living fences, higher than six feet shall require a special
permit from the Planning Board.
C.
Fences shall be of a safe, nonhazardous construction, not likely to
endanger the health or safety of the public.
D.
Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of these regulations to allow for the
provision of housing at a lower cost than is possible through
conventional means of construction by permitting the use of mobile
homes, as defined and limited herein, in the Residence A-1,
Residence A-2 and Residence B Districts.
(1)
Such use shall be subject to the requirements set forth herein
in order to assure that such mobile home shall be the functional
equivalent of a home built by conventional construction methods,
and to assure acceptable similarity in exterior appearance between
such mobile home and dwellings that have been or might be
constructed under these and other lawful regulations on adjacent
lots in the same districts.
(2)
A.
Standards.
Mobile homes shall be permitted in the Residence A-1 and A-2
Districts (including cluster subdivisions) and Residence B Districts
only if determined by the Building Commissioner to be functionally
equivalent to a home built by conventional construction methods
and acceptably similar in exterior appearance to conventional
housing construction. The Building Commissioner shall make such
determination for a mobile home only if such home conforms to all
of the following standards:
(1)
B.
§ 255-31 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-33
1:220
§ 255-34. Professional business uses.
The structure shall be affixed to a permanent foundation; the
exterior walls of the structure shall rest upon said foundation.
(a)
The structure shall meet the Mobile Home Construction and
Safety Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, and shall be so certified by the manufacturer.
(b)
The minimum width of the main body of the mobile home as
assembled on the site shall not be less than 24 feet (20 feet
in a cluster subdivision), as measured across the narrowest
portion.
(c)
The pitch of the main roof shall be not less than one foot of rise
for each four feet of horizontal run. Minimum distance from
eaves to ridge shall be 12 feet (10 feet in a cluster subdivision).
(d)
Any materials that are generally acceptable for housing built
on the site may be used for exterior finish or roofing on a
mobile home; provided, however, that reflection from such
exterior shall not be greater than from siding coated with
white gloss exterior enamel paint.
(e)
No mobile home shall have fenestration or any other features,
or use colors or color combinations, that would be
incompatible with other structures in a residential
neighborhood in which most residences are site-built.
(f)
Said determination by the Building Commissioner shall be made
prior to, and shall be required as a necessary precondition for,
approval of a special permit for a mobile home by the Planning
Board.
(2)
The purpose of this section is to provide, through the specific provisions
of the special permit process, a method of applying for the use of a
structure to house professional occupants who provide useful labor, but
shall not manufacture tangible goods or provide motor vehicle services.
A.
B. The applicant must be the proprietor of the professional business.
Under these regulations, except as herein otherwise provided, an
existing structure may be used or a structure constructed or altered
to be used for an occupation(s) which may include, but not be limited
to, the following: professional offices for a physician, funeral director,
surgeon, dentist, lawyer, chiropractor, chiropodist (podiatrist),
accountant, architect, psychologist or engineer, practicing individually
or in a group, insurance offices, consultants, financial services,
administrative offices and real estate offices.
C.
All applicants wishing to operate a qualifying professional business
must apply for a special permit. In conformance with the special permit
D.
§ 255-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-34
1:221
provisions of Article IX of this bylaw and subject to the additional
requirements and standards described herein, the Planning Board,
acting as the special permit granting authority (SPGA), may approve
a special permit allowing for a professional business in such districts
where permitted under the Use Regulations Schedule and according to
the Dimensional Regulations Schedule, both included as attachments to
this chapter
The power to approve such permit for a professional business shall be
within the sole discretion of the Planning Board acting as SPGA and
an affirmative vote of four of its five members is required for approval.
Each case shall be considered on its own merit and no case shall raise
a presumption in favor of any case.
E.
The following additional conditions and restrictions shall apply to each
parcel on which one or more professional business special permits are
approved under these provisions:
A single sign may be permitted on each parcel. The sign may
be approved for placement either flat on the building in which
the professional business is located or freestanding on the parcel.
Sign illumination by means of continuous indirect lighting may be
permitted. The cumulative size of the sign structure permitted shall
be within the discretion of the SPGA but in no case shall it exceed
16 square feet; provided, however, the SPGA may permit the area
of the sign to be calculated by the area within the border of the
sign and not as provided in the definition of "mobile home" in
§ 255-10 of the Zoning Bylaw. The Planning Board may also permit
one additional sign per business (not to exceed one square foot in
area) to be located on the exterior of the building.
(1)
Buildings in which the professional business is located shall, as
far as practicable, resemble residential buildings in style, materials
and landscaping.
(2)
The development of new structures shall be in harmony with the
historic, scenic and/or agriculture/residential nature of the Town.
(3)
Adequate off-street parking as determined by the SPGA shall be
provided to the patrons and the occupiers of the professional
business.
(4)
Any approved special permit shall expire when the professional
relinquishes the use for which the special permit was granted for a
period of one year.
(5)
F.
In granting a special permit for a professional business, the Planning
Board may permit the sale or rental of goods, subject to the following
conditions:
Accessory use or function. The sale or rental of goods must be part
of, and subordinate to, the professional business. Accordingly, the
(1)
G.
§ 255-34 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-34
1:222
§ 255-35. Water Supply Protection District.
sale or rental of goods must be carried out as a subordinate or
accessory use or function of the professional business.
Not a separate business entity. The sale or rental of goods may not
be carried out by a business entity separate from the professional
business.
(2)
Limitation on space. No more than 35% of the gross floor area,
excluding storage space, shall be used for the sale or rental of
goods.
(3)
Supplemental application requirement. As part of the application,
the applicant shall provide a floor plan which delineates the portion
of the building to be used for the sale or rental of goods.
(4)
Multiple professional businesses. In buildings involving multiple
professional businesses, the above-listed restrictions [Subsection
G(1) through (4) of this section] shall be applicable to each of the
individual professional businesses.
(5)
Purposes. The purpose of the Water Supply Protection District is to
promote the health, safety and welfare of the community by protecting
and preserving the surface and groundwater resources of the Town and
the region from any use of land or buildings which may reduce the
quality and quantity of its water resources.
A.
Scope of authority. The Water Supply Protection District is an overlay
district and shall be superimposed on the other districts established by
this bylaw. All regulations of the Town of South Hadley Zoning Bylaw
applicable to such underlying districts shall remain in effect, except
that where the Water Supply Protection District imposes additional
regulations, such regulations shall prevail.
B.
District delineation.35
The Water Supply Protection District is herein established to
include all lands within the Town of South Hadley lying within the
primary and secondary recharge areas of groundwater aquifers
and watershed areas of reservoirs which now or may in the future
provide public water supply. The map entitled "South Hadley Water
Protection Area" on file with the Town Clerk, delineates the
boundaries of the district.
(1)
Where the bounds delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the burden
of proof shall be upon the owner(s) of the land in question to show
where they should properly be located.
(2)
C.
35.Editor's Note: See the Water Supply Protection Overlay District Map included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-35
1:223
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted within the Water
Supply Protection District, provided that they comply with all
applicable restrictions in this bylaw, including but not limited to
Subsections E through H:
Single-family residences, provided that where not serviced by
public sewer, lot size shall be 10,000 square feet of lot area per
bedroom or 40,000 square feet, whichever is greater. For cluster
development, minimum lot size may be calculated on a net density
for an entire development, which includes individual lots and
common open space of varying size. Where serviced by public
sewerage, minimum residential lot size shall comply with the
residential requirement of the underlying district.
(1)
Residential accessory uses, including garages, driveways, private
roads, utility rights-of-way, and on-site wastewater disposal
systems.
(2)
(3) Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing and horticulture.
(4) Forestry and nursery uses.
Outdoor recreational uses, including fishing, boating and play
areas.
(5)
(6) Conservation of water, plants and wildlife.
(7) Wildlife management areas.
Excavation for earth removal, provided that the requirements of
Subsection F of this section and § 255-84 are met, and an earth
removal permit is granted by the Building Commissioner.
(8)
Wireless communications facilities when approved pursuant to
§§ 255-19 and 255-40, subject to the conditions of the Planning
Board as set forth in the special permit decision.
(9)
D.
Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within the Water
Supply Protection District:
Business and industrial uses, not agricultural, including but not
limited to metal plating, chemical manufacturing, wood preserving,
furniture stripping, dry cleaning and auto body repair, which
generate, use, treat, process, store or dispose of hazardous wastes,
except for the following:
Very small quantity generators of hazardous waste, as defined
by 310 CMR 30.00, which generate less than 20 kilograms or
six gallons of hazardous waste per month may be allowed by
special permit in accordance with Article IX of this bylaw;
(a)
Household hazardous waste collection centers or events
operated pursuant to 310 CMR 30.390;
(b)
(1)
E.
§ 255-35 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-35
1:224
(c) Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A; and
Treatment works approved by the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection and designed in accordance with
314 CMR 5.00 for the treatment of contaminated ground and
surface waters.
(d)
Business or industrial uses, not agricultural, which dispose of
process wastewaters on-site.
(2)
Trucking terminals, bus terminals, car washes, motor vehicle
gasoline sales, automotive service and repair shops, commercial
fuel oil storage and sales.
(3)
Solid waste landfills, dumps, auto recycling, auto graveyards, junk
and salvage yards, landfilling or storage of sludge and septage,
with the exception of the disposal of brush or stumps.
(4)
Storage of liquid petroleum products of any kind, except for the
following:
Storage which is incidental to: 1] normal household use and
outdoor maintenance or the heating of a structure; 2] waste oil
retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A; 3] emergency
generators required by statute, rule or regulation; or 4]
treatment works approved by the Massachusetts Department
of Environmental Protection designed in accordance with 314
CMR 5.00 for the treatment of contaminated ground or surface
waters; provided that such storage shall be in a freestanding
aboveground container within a structure or within the
basement of a structure, within a diked, impermeable area
sufficient to contain the volume of the tank plus 10% to prevent
spills or leaks from reaching groundwater, and provided that
the storage tank and piping must comply with all applicable
provisions of 527 CMR 1.00, the Massachusetts Board of Fire
Prevention regulations.
(a)
Replacement of storage tanks or systems for the keeping,
dispensing or storing of gasoline, which existed at the time of
adoption of this bylaw, provided that:
All such replacement storage tanks or systems shall be
located underground as required by Massachusetts Board
of Fire Prevention regulations 527 CMR 14;
[1]
All such storage systems be protected by one of the
secondary containment systems specified in
Massachusetts Board of Fire Prevention regulations 527
CMR 9.08(3);
[2]
The head of the respective Fire Department may deny an
application for tank replacement, or approve it subject to
[3]
(b)
(5)
§ 255-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-35
1:225
conditions, if he or she determines that it constitutes a
danger to public or private water supplies in accordance
with 527 CMR 9.26(4)(d). Replacement of all other storage
tanks for liquid petroleum products other than gasoline
must be above ground in accordance with Subsection
E(5)(a).
(6) Outdoor storage of salt, deicing materials, pesticides or herbicides.
Dumping or disposal on the ground, in water bodies, or in
residential septic systems of any toxic chemical, including but not
limited to septic system cleaners which contain toxic chemicals
such as methylene chloride and 1-1-1 trichlorethane, or other
household hazardous wastes. (See the list of prohibited chemicals
at the Board of Health or Town Clerk's office.)
(7)
Stockpiling and disposal of snow or ice removed from highways
and streets located outside of the Water Supply Protection District
that contains sodium chloride, calcium chloride, chemically treated
abrasives or other chemicals used for snow and ice removal.
(8)
Wastewater treatment works subject to 314 CMR 5.00 (those
treatment works which discharge over 15,000 gallons per day to
the ground), except the following:
The replacement or repair of an existing system(s) that will not
result in a design capacity greater than the design capacity of
the existing system(s);
(a)
The replacement of an existing subsurface sewage disposal
system(s) with wastewater treatment works that will not result
in a design capacity greater than the design capacity of the
existing system(s);
(b)
Treatment works designed for the treatment of contaminated
ground or surface waters subject to 314 CMR 5.00.
(c)
(9)
Restricted uses. The following uses are restricted within the Water
Supply Protection District:
Excavation for removal of earth, loam, sand, gravel and other soils
or mineral substances shall not extend closer than five feet above
the historical high groundwater table (as determined from onsite
monitoring wells and historical water table fluctuation data
compiled by the United States Geological Survey, whichever is
higher). A monitoring well shall be installed by the property owner
to verify groundwater elevations. This subsection shall not apply to
excavations incidental to permitted uses, including but not limited
to providing for the installation or maintenance of structural
foundations, freshwater ponds, utility conduits or on-site sewage
disposal.
(1)
F.
§ 255-35 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-35
1:226
The access road(s) to extractive operation sites shall include a
gate or other secure mechanism to restrict public access to the
site.
(a)
Upon completion of earth removal operations, all altered areas
shall be restored with topsoil and vegetative plantings. All
fine materials, such as clays and silts, removed as part of
the earth removal operation and leftover as by-products shall
be disposed of off-site to prevent damage to aquifer recharge
characteristics.
(b)
Sodium chloride for ice control shall be used at the minimum saltto-
sand ratio which is consistent with the public highway safety
requirements, and its use shall be eliminated on roads which may
be closed to the public in winter.
(2)
The storage of sodium chloride, calcium chloride, chemically
treated abrasives or other chemicals used for the removal of ice
and snow on roads shall be covered and located on a paved surface,
with berms, within a structure designed to prevent the generation
and escape of contaminated run-off leachate.
(3)
Fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, lawn care chemicals or other
leachable materials for agricultural and/or commercial applicator
use shall be used in conformance with the Massachusetts Pesticide
Control Act, MGL c. 132B, regulations promulgated by the
Massachusetts Pesticide Bureau (333 CMR 1 through 14), and the
manufacturer's label instructions. All other reasonable precautions
to minimize adverse impacts on surface and groundwater should be
used.
(4)
Fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, lawn care chemicals and other
leachable materials for non-agricultural and non-commercial
applicator use shall be used in accordance with the Lawn Care
Regulations of the Massachusetts Pesticide Board 333 CMR 10.03
as amended, according to the manufacturer's label instructions and
all other necessary precautions to minimize adverse impacts on
surface and groundwater.
(5)
On-site sewage disposal systems shall not be installed without
additional measures imposed by the Board of Health. (See Board of
Health regulations.36)
(6)
The storage of commercial fertilizers and soil conditioners shall
be within structures that prevent the generation and escape of
contaminated run-off or leachate.
(7)
To the extent feasible, all new permanent animal manure storage
areas shall be covered and/or contained to prevent the generation
and escape of contaminated run-off or leachate.
(8)
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Board of Health.
§ 255-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-35
1:227
All liquid hazardous materials, as defined in MGL c. 21E, must be
stored either in a freestanding container within a building or in a
freestanding container above ground with protection to contain a
spill the size of the container's total storage capacity.
(9)
Drainage.
For commercial and industrial uses, to the extent feasible, run-off
from the impervious surfaces shall be recharged on the site by
being diverted toward areas covered with vegetation for surface
infiltration. Such run-off shall not be discharged directly to rivers,
streams or other surface water bodies. Dry wells shall be used only
where other methods are infeasible, and shall be preceded by oil,
grease and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contamination.
(1)
All recharge areas shall be permanently maintained in full working
order by the owner(s).
(2)
G.
Special permit uses.
Uses allowed by special permit. The following uses may be allowed
by special permit obtained from the Planning Board:
Commercial, industrial, governmental or educational uses
which are allowed in the underlying district, and which are not
prohibited in Subsection E.
(a)
Any enlargement, intensification, change of use or alteration of
an existing commercial or industrial use.
(b)
The rendering impervious of more than 15% or 2,500 square
feet of any lot, provided that a system for artificial recharge
of precipitation to groundwater is developed, which shall not
result in degradation of groundwater. (See Subsection G
above.)
(c)
(1)
Requirements for special permit in the Water Supply Protection
District.
The applicant shall file six copies of a plan prepared by a
qualified professional with the special permit granting
authority. In addition to those rules and regulations contained
in the special permit application (Form SP37), the plan shall
include:
Drainage recharge features and provisions to prevent loss
of recharge.
[1]
Provisions to control soil erosion and sedimentation, soil
compaction, and to prevent seepage from sewer pipes.
[2]
(a)
(2)
H.
37.Editor's Note: A copy of Form SP is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-35 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-35
1:228
In addition, the applicant shall provide, at a minimum, the
following information where pertinent:
A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, fuels and other
potentially hazardous materials to be used or stored on the
premises in quantities greater than those associated with
normal household use.
[1]
Those businesses using or storing such hazardous
materials shall file a hazardous materials management
plan with the Planning Board, Fire Chief and Board of
Health, which shall include:
Provisions to protect against the discharge of
hazardous materials or wastes to the environment due
to spillage.
[a]
Accidental damage, corrosion, leakage or vandalism,
including spill containment and clean-up procedures.
[b]
Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous
materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces.
[c]
Evidence of compliance with the regulations of the
Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act,
310 CMR 30, including obtaining an EPA identification
number from the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection.
[d]
[2]
(b)
Additional procedures for special permits in the Water Supply
Protection District:
The special permit granting authority shall follow all special
permit procedures contained in Article IX of this bylaw. In
addition, the special permit granting authority shall distribute
copies of all application materials to the Board of Health, the
Conservation Commission and the Water Commissioners, each
of which shall review the application and, following a vote,
shall submit recommendations and comments to the special
permit granting authority. Failure of boards to make
recommendations within 35 days of distribution of the
applications shall be deemed to be lack of opposition.
(a)
The special permit granting authority may grant the required
special permit only upon finding that the proposed use meets
the following standards and those specified in Article IX of this
bylaw. The proposed use must:
In no way, during construction or thereafter, adversely
affect the existing or potential quality or quantity of water
that is available in the Water Supply Protection District;
and
[1]
(b)
(3)
§ 255-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-35
1:229
§ 255-36. Flag lots.
The Planning Board may issue a special permit allowing for the reduction
of the frontage requirement for lots in Residence A-1, Residence A-2 and
Agricultural Districts when such lot having less than the required frontage
can substitute increase square footage and is to be used for a single
dwelling unit only, provided said lot has:
Be designed to avoid substantial disturbance of the soils,
topography, drainage, vegetation and other water-related
natural characteristics of the site to be developed.
[2]
The special permit granting authority shall not grant a special
permit under this section unless the petitioner's application
materials include, in the Board's opinion, sufficiently detailed,
definite and credible information to support positive findings in
relation to the standards given in this section.
(c)
Nonconforming use. Nonconforming uses which were lawfully existing,
begun or in receipt of a building or special permit prior to the first
publication of notice of public hearing for this bylaw may be continued.
Such nonconforming uses may be extended or altered, as specified
in MGL c. 40A, § 6, provided that there is a finding by the Planning
Board that such change does not increase the danger of surface or
groundwater pollution from such use.
I.
A. Access strip frontage on an existing public way of at least 50 feet;
Access strip width from the front lot line to the principal structure of at
least 50 feet;
B.
At least double the minimum lot area normally required for that district,
exclusive of the access strip;
C.
An access strip that is accessible having a maximum length not
exceeding 400 feet;
D.
A minimum distance between two flag lot rights-of-way that is equal to
or greater than the minimum lot frontage in that zoning district;
E.
An appropriate easement delineated on the plot plan and on the deeds
to the lots, including a clear provision for the responsibility for the
maintenance of the access strip, utilities (if any) and snow removal,
running with the land. Said easements shall:
(1) Become part of the deeds; and
Be recorded at the Hampshire County Registry of Deeds (proof of
the latter to be submitted to the Building Commissioner prior to the
issuance of any building permits);
(2)
F.
In the opinion of the Planning Board, acceptable design grade, length
and location of the access drive shall be of suitable construction for the
G.
§ 255-35 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-36
1:230
§ 255-37. Business C District development methods.
The Business C District is established to provide a comprehensive set of
development methods to be applied in the commercial district, and to
recognize the specific characteristics of the associated highway corridor.
A performance guarantee may be required as a condition of approval for
access and, where applicable, the turnaround for vehicles, including
moving vans, ambulances, fire and police;
An access driveway within the privately owned access strip that is so
drained as to prevent damage or hazard to abutting properties or public
trees and shall be paved with bituminous asphalt, concrete, compacted
gravel or similar paving material;
H.
Been created from one lot which was in existence at the time of the
adoption of this flag lot bylaw amendment, which conforms to all of
the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw, and which does not have sufficient
frontage to create an additional lot with the normal frontage
requirements;
I.
An access drive that is located, constructed and maintained a distance
of no closer than 10 feet to any abutting property line;
J.
K. No parking areas or aboveground structures within the access strip;
A conifer buffer zone between any flag lot and abutting lots sufficient
to provide privacy between the two lots when required by the Planning
Board;
L.
Plans submitted to the Board that have been prepared by a registered
land surveyor or engineer and may be subject to Chapter 360, Article
V, Subdivision Regulations submission standards. The plans shall also
contain the statement: "Lot [fill in lot number] is a flag lot; building is
permitted only in accordance with the special Permit flag lot provisions
of the South Hadley Zoning Bylaw";
M.
The flag lot frontage (see Appendix A38) that is a minimum of 150 feet
in the Agricultural District and 125 feet in both the Residence A-1
and A-2 Districts, measured parallel to the existing street line from
which access is derived. The flag lot building front setback line is to be
measured from the point where the flag lot frontage has been satisfied.
The side and rear setbacks are as listed in the Table of Dimensional
Regulations39 for the district the flag lot is permitted in; and
N.
An access strip that begins at the existing street line and ends where
the flag lot frontage width has been satisfied. Acceptable examples are
shown as Illustrations Type 1-2 in Appendix A.
O.
38.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
39.Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Regulations is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 255-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-37
1:231
either special permit or site plan review projects. A special municipal
account may be required as determined by the Planning Board.
Purposes. The Business C District is established to achieve the
following objectives of the Town of South Hadley:
To direct large-lot businesses and auto-oriented uses to the
appropriate location. No single user may occupy greater than
65,000 square feet of building space and high-traffic generators
such as drive-through restaurants, drive-up ATM machines, gas
stations, etc. shall not be permitted in this district.
(1)
(2) To provide safe, efficient traffic flow in the Business C District.
(3) To maintain a high level of design and landscaping quality.
To provide safe pedestrian access to businesses and uses in the
Business C District.
(4)
(5) To protect property values through quality control.
A.
Uses permitted with site plan approval or by special permit. Uses
permitted with site plan review or by special permit in the Business
C District are listed in the Table of Use Regulations included as an
attachment to this chapter.
B.
Density and dimensional requirements. All developments and uses
within the Business District must conform to the density and
dimensional requirements in Article VI.40
C.
Commercial development performance standards. In order to receive
site plan approval or a special permit, all projects must demonstrate
compliance with the commercial development performance standards
herein.
Parking standards. Proposed uses must comply with parking and
off-street loading regulations in § 255-86 and the following:
No parking shall be permitted within the required front yard
setback of a structure.
(a)
To the extent feasible, parking areas shall be shared with the
adjacent businesses.
(b)
(1)
Appearance; architectural design standards.
Architectural design shall be compatible with the character
and scale of buildings in the Town through the use of
appropriate building materials, screening, breaks in roof and
wall lines and other architectural techniques. Variation in
detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest
(a)
(2)
D.
40.Editor's Note: The Table of Dimensional Standards is included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 255-37 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-37
1:232
and avoid monotony. Proposed buildings shall relate
harmoniously to each other with adequate light, air, circulation
and separation between buildings. The Planning Board may
take into consideration whether exterior building facades and
materials are consistent with South Hadley's character. The
Planning Board may consider whether the roofline is peaked,
or is otherwise consistent with the Town's character. Large
work area doors or loading docks shall not open toward or face
roadways.
The Planning Board may adopt such regulations as may be
necessary to further specify design standards.
(b)
Lighting standards.
Any outdoor lighting fixture newly installed or replaced shall
be shielded so that it does not produce a strong, direct light
beyond the property boundaries.
(a)
(b) No light standard shall be taller than 30 feet.
(3)
Access standards. Applicants for projects or uses within the
Business C District must demonstrate that the project or use will
minimize traffic and safety impacts on highways.
The number of curb cuts on state and local roads shall be
minimized. To the extent feasible, access to businesses shall be
provided via the following:
Access via a common driveway serving adjacent lots or
premises.
[1]
[2] Access via an existing side street.
Access via a cul-de-sac or loop road shared by adjacent lots
or premises.
[3]
(a)
Only one curb cut per lot shall be allowed. Additional curb cuts
may be permitted by the Planning Board as part of the site plan
review process.
(b)
Curb cuts shall be limited to the minimum width for safe
entering and exiting and will not normally exceed 24 feet in
width per lane.
(c)
All driveways shall be designed to afford motorists exiting to
highways with safe sight distance.
(d)
Adequate pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided as
follows: Sidewalks shall be provided to enable pedestrian
access to adjacent properties between individual businesses
within a development. The appropriate authority may waive
this requirement in a case where such action is in the public
(e)
(4)
§ 255-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-37
1:233
interest and not inconsistent with the purposes stated in
Articles IX and XII.
Landscaping and screening standards.
Large parking areas shall be subdivided with landscaped
islands so that no paved parking surface shall extend more
than 80 feet in width. One tree (minimum two-inch caliper) per
30 parking spaces shall be provided within the area.
(a)
Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck loading
areas, utility buildings and structures and other unsightly uses
shall be screened from view from neighboring properties and
streets using dense, hardy evergreen plantings, or earthen
berms, or all or fencing complemented by evergreen plantings.
Evergreen plants must be at least two feet tall at planting
with the capacity to grow to full screening of the unsightly
use. Plantings must be four feet at planting when abutting a
residential zone.
(b)
All landscaped areas shall be properly maintained. Shrubs or
trees which die shall be replaced within one growing season.
(c)
Completion of the landscaping requirements may be postponed
for a period not to exceed six months from the time of project
completion due to winter weather conditions.
(d)
A landscaped buffer strip at least 15 feet wide, continuous
except for approved driveways, shall be established adjacent
to any public road to visually separate parking and other uses
from the road. The buffer strip shall be planted with grass,
medium-height shrubs, and shade trees (minimum two-inch
caliper, planted at least every 50 feet along the road frontage).
At all street or driveway intersections, trees or shrubs shall be
set back a sufficient distance from such intersections so that
they do not present a traffic visibility hazard. The sidewalk
shall be incorporated into the buffer strip.
(e)
(5)
Pedestrian standards. Sidewalks shall be provided to provide
access to adjacent properties and between individual businesses
within a development.
(6)
Traffic impact statement.
A traffic impact statement shall be prepared, which shall
contain:
Traffic flow patterns at the site, including entrances and
egresses, loading and unloading areas, and curb cuts on
site and within 100 feet of the site.
[1]
A detailed assessment of the traffic safety impacts of the
proposed project or use on the carrying capacity of any
[2]
(a)
(7)
§ 255-37 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-37
1:234
§ 255-38. Public-private recreation.
adjacent highway or road, including the projected number
of motor vehicle trips to enter or depart from the site
estimated for daily hour and peak hour traffic levels, road
capacities and impacts on intersections.
An additional traffic impact statement shall be prepared for
individual structures that are greater than 10,000 square feet.
It shall contain:
A plan to minimize traffic and safety impacts through such
means as physical design and layout concepts, staggered
employee work schedules, promoting use of public transit
or carpooling, or other appropriate means.
[1]
An interior traffic and pedestrian circulation plan designed
to minimize conflicts and safety problems.
[2]
(b)
Public transportation. The Planning Board and the applicant shall
request the Pioneer Valley Transit Authority (PVTA) to locate a bus
stop on the premises or within 1/4 mile of the development.
(8)
The purpose of the public-private recreation use within the Industrial
Garden District is to permit land uses for the development of
recreationally related facilities designed to serve the general public
preserve and enhance areas of natural scenic beauty, including
mountain views, ridges, exceptional vistas, and related natural
resources.
A.
Public-private recreation use is a use in the Industrial Garden District
that may be permitted, subject to compliance with the mandatory
standards, conditions and requirements for a special permit and site
plan review as well as the conditions set forth in this section. Such
recreational use may include, but not be limited to, the following uses
and any approved combination thereof:
Outdoor athletic activities, including facilities for skating, skiing,
sledding, swimming, and tennis and related activities.
(1)
A golf course as a principal recreational use and putting greens and
driving ranges accessory uses to the principal recreational use.
(2)
(3) Equestrian trails.
Outdoor picnic facilities, including appropriate sheds and outdoor
fireplaces.
(4)
Social and recreational facilities for dining and dancing, including
banquets, meetings, receptions, assemblies and entertainment,
provided that such activities are accessory to and a part of a
principal recreational use.
(5)
B.
§ 255-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-38
1:235
§ 255-39. Bed-and-breakfast facilities.
There are two categories of bed-and-breakfast facilities which may be
permitted in South Hadley: bed-and-breakfast homes and bed-and-breakfast
inns. Both categories of facilities require a special permit as noted in the
Use Regulations Schedule included as an attachment to this chapter.
Retail shops accessory or incidental to the principal recreational
use.
(6)
Other publicly owned facilities or other facilities designed for the
benefit of the general public.
(7)
Design and operating criteria governing the location and construction
of improvements, buildings and facilities shall include the following:
A landscaped buffer strip shall separate the recreational activities
from any abutting property.
(1)
All parking shall be regulated as prescribed in § 255-86, and golf
courses shall have an additional minimum of 10 parking spaces
per hole of golf or parking facilities equal to 60% of the serving
facilities, whichever is greater.
(2)
The volume of sound from music and public address systems and
recreational motor vehicles shall be so controlled as to prevent
objectionable noise off the premises.
(3)
Banquets, meetings, stage presentations and dancing shall be held
inside a structure, but this shall not prevent presentation outside
a structure of athletic exhibitions or contests or theatrical
performance.
(4)
Artificial lighting of a golf course or golf practice area is specifically
prohibited.
(5)
The procedure for submission of an application for regional
recreational use shall be consistent with the submittal requirement
of Article IX, Special Permits, and Article XII, Site Plan Review, and
subject to the additional requirements set forth in this subsection.
(6)
C.
Bed-and-breakfast homes.
The Planning Board may issue a special permit for a bed-andbreakfast
home that is an existing owner-occupied single-family
dwelling (including existing accessory structures located on the
property) in which the resident or residents of the dwelling provide
overnight lodging to paying guests in a maximum of three guest
bedrooms located within the dwelling. No person may occupy said
room or rooms more than 14 days in any thirty-day period. The
home shall function as a private home with house guests.
(1)
A.
§ 255-38 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-39
1:236
In addition to the special permit requirements in Article IX of this
bylaw, the following bed-and-breakfast requirements must be met
as a condition of approval:
(a) No cooking facilities are permitted in any guest room; and
There shall be no substantial change to the exterior of the
building; and
(b)
One parking space shall be provided for each room to be
occupied by bed-and-breakfast lodgers in addition to the
parking required under § 255-86; and
(c)
If such facility is to be served by an existing on-site septic
system, the owner shall obtain a letter from the Board of
Health that the sewage disposal system is adequate for the
proposed use; and
(d)
Signage shall be limited to an announcement sign as permitted
under this § 255-39.
(e)
Breakfast shall be the only meal prepared for and served
rooming guests in the bed-and-breakfast home; but the bedand-
breakfast home may also provide a "box lunch" for the
rooming guests. Rooming guest occupants are provided at
least one daily meal as part of their occupancy. No meals are
to be provided for a fee to persons not residing in the bed-andbreakfast
home.
(f)
Bed-and-breakfast homes or bed-and-breakfast inns may only
be permitted for those structures existing as of May 10, 2014.
(g)
(2)
Plan requirements. Plans for a bed-and-breakfast home shall be
prepared by a registered architect, registered landscape architect
or engineer and shall show the following, together with appropriate
dimensions:
(a) Proposed name of the bed-and-breakfast home;
(b) Location by legal description;
(c) Name and address of applicant and designer of the plan;
(d) Scale of the plan, one inch equals 40 feet or larger;
(e) Date, North arrow, contours at two-foot intervals;
Boundary line of property indicated by a solid line, and the
total acreage encompassed thereby;
(f)
Bed-and-breakfast homes using private water wells shall
provide a certificate of good water quality from the Board of
Health.
(g)
(3)
§ 255-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-39
1:237
Owner-occupancy requirement.
In the event the property is owned by multiple persons, related
or unrelated, only one of the persons having an ownership
interest in the property must reside in the residence to satisfy
the requirement that the property be owner-occupied.
(a)
In the event the property is owned by a business entity, the
Planning Board must require the entity to designate a person
to reside in the residence on a permanent or ongoing basis
to carry out the functions as if they were the owner of the
property relative to this section of the Zoning Bylaw.
(b)
(4)
Bed-and-breakfast inn.
The Planning Board may issue a special permit for a bed-andbreakfast
inn that is an existing structure in which the resident
or residents of the dwelling provide overnight lodging to paying
guests in a maximum of 10 guest bedrooms located within the
building. No person may occupy said room or rooms more than 14
days in any thirty-day period. The inn shall function as a private
home with house guests.
(1)
Except as provided in the subsections below, the provisions of
Subsection A(2), (3) and (4) of this section shall also apply to a bedand-
breakfast inn:
References to "bed-and-breakfast home" are to be read as
"bed-and-breakfast inn."
(a)
Bed-and-breakfast inns may be permitted for up to 10 guest
rooms. Up to 10 rooms may be permitted at a bed-andbreakfast
inn only in the South Hadley Falls Overlay District
and up to five rooms may be permitted along Routes 116 and
202.
(b)
Bed-and-breakfast inns shall be connected to the Town's
sanitary sewer system.
(c)
Parking requirements may be waived if the bed-and-breakfast
inn is located within the Falls Overlay District and alternative
parking arrangements are satisfactorily provided, including
available on-street parking
(d)
If the Planning Board waives any of the off-street parking
requirements, the Planning Board must determine that the
number of guest rooms and the parking arrangements will not
be detrimental to the neighborhood in which it is located.
(e)
(2)
Bed-and-breakfast inns may only be permitted for properties
abutting Route 116 or Route 202 and properties within the South
Hadley Falls Overlay District.
(3)
B.
§ 255-39 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-40
1:238
§ 255-40. Wireless communications regulations.
Purposes. The purposes of the wireless communications regulations are
to:
Provide reasonable, nondiscriminatory standards and procedures
under which adequate and necessary wireless communications
facilities may be permitted, developed and maintained; and
(1)
Ensure that permitting wireless communications facilities will be in
harmony with the Zoning Bylaw and the character and appearance
of the surrounding community; and
(2)
Protect the community's scenic, historic, and environmental
resources; and
(3)
Locate wireless communications facilities such that their location
does not have negative impacts (such as, but not limited to, visual
blight, attractive nuisance, noise and falling objects) on the general
safety, welfare and quality of life of the community; and
(4)
Encourage co-location of wireless communications facilities to the
maximum extent possible; and
(5)
Provide for the development of freestanding wireless
communications towers to the extent necessary to enable the
providers of wireless communications services to provide adequate
coverage throughout the community, yet limit the number of such
towers to the minimum amount needed for such services.
(6)
A.
Consistency with federal and state laws. The wireless communications
regulations are intended to be consistent with the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 and applicable state laws in that:
The regulations do not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the
provision of wireless communications services; and
(1)
The regulations are not intended to be used to unreasonably
discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless
communications services; and
(2)
The regulations do not regulate wireless communications services
on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency
emissions to the extent that the regulated services and facilities
comply with the FCC's regulations concerning such emissions.
(3)
B.
Definitions. As used in the wireless communications regulations, the
following words and phrases shall have the meanings and intent
respectively ascribed to them by this section. If any word or phrase
conflicts with definitions specified elsewhere in the South Hadley
Zoning Bylaw, the meaning and intent ascribed below shall govern:
ALTERNATE TOWER STRUCTURE — A building or structure which was
not primarily erected or used for wireless communications services but,
C.
§ 255-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-40
1:239
with minor modifications, including addition of antennas, may be usable
for wireless communications services in addition to the structure's
primary use. Examples of alternate tower structures include, but are
not limited to, municipal buildings, water tanks, silos, church steeples,
etc.
ANTENNA(S) — A device or surface area which is attached to or part
of a tower or alternate tower structure for the purpose of transmitting
and/or receiving electromagnetic signals for wireless communications.
Also referred to as "wireless communications antenna."
ANTENNA, WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — See "antenna."
CARRIER — See "provider."
CO-LOCATION — Use of a single tower by more than one carrier.
ELEVATION — The measurement of a point in reference to feet above
mean sea level.
EQUIPMENT SHELTER — A structure located at a wireless
communications tower or alternate tower structure to house equipment
used in connection with wireless communications transmissions to and
from antennas located on the tower.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FACILITY SITE — The parcel of land used by one or more carriers
and upon which one or more wireless communications facility(-ies) and
related equipment, equipment shelter, and landscaping are located.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
FIRE DISTRICT — South Hadley Fire District 1 and/or South Hadley
Fire District 2, inclusive of the Water Departments associated with the
Fire Districts.
HEIGHT OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — The vertical
distance between the highest point of the wireless communications
facility (inclusive of the wireless communications tower and any
antennas, poles, and any other equipment which may extend above
the wireless communications tower) and the lowest point of the grade
of the ground at the facility site. The grade of the ground is to be
determined at a distance within 10 feet of the wireless communications
tower's perimeter unless the Planning Board determines a different
basis for said measurement is more appropriate. Thus, the "height" of
wireless communications facilities will not fall within the definition of
"height" as provided in Article III of the Zoning Bylaw.
MUNICIPAL ENTITY — Includes the Town of South Hadley, South
Hadley Fire District Number 1, and South Hadley Fire District Number
2 and any department under the jurisdiction and authority of any of
these three entities.
PROVIDER — An entity that provides wireless communications
services. Also referred to as "carrier."
§ 255-40 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-40
1:240
TOWER — A structure erected for the purpose of wireless
communications services and on which antennas or other wireless
communications devices and associated equipment are placed for the
purpose of wireless communications services. Also referred to as
"wireless communications tower."
TOWER, GUYED — A tower that is tied to the ground or other surface
by cables which are typically in a diagonal alignment.
TOWER, LATTICE — A tower that is self-supporting with multiple legs
and cross bracing of structural steel.
TOWER, MONOPOLE — A tower that is self-supporting with a single
shaft of wood, steel, or concrete and a platform (or racks) for antennas
arrayed at the top and/or intermediate positions along the length of the
tower.
TOWER, WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS — See "tower."
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY — All equipment with which
a carrier transmits and receives the radiofrequency waves which carry
its services and all locations of said equipment or any part thereof
(including, but not necessarily limited to, a wireless communications
tower, alternate tower structure, wireless communications antennas,
and related equipment and structures).
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY, PREEXISTING — A wireless
communications facility in existence prior to the adoption of the
wireless communications regulations as part of the Zoning Bylaw by the
Town Meeting.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Commercial mobile
services, unlicensed wireless services, and common-carrier wireless
exchange access services. These services include cellular services,
personal communications services (PCS), enhanced mobile radio
services, paging services (PS), and similar such services.
Exempted uses. The following wireless communications facilities are
specifically exempted from the provisions of the wireless
communications regulations:
Police, fire, ambulance, antennas and associated towers and
equipment for the internal use of either the Town's DPW or either
Fire District and other similar emergency dispatch; and
(1)
(2) Citizens band radio; and
Amateur radio equipment and towers used in accordance with
the terms of amateur radio service licenses issued by the FCC,
provided that:
The tower is not used or licensed for any commercial purpose;
and
(a)
(3)
D.
§ 255-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-40
1:241
The tower shall be removed upon loss or termination of said
FCC license; and
(b)
Satellite dishes and antennas for noncommercial residential use
and/or for noncommercial educational use.
(4)
Location criteria.
Existing towers and alternate tower structures. To the extent
feasible, antennas are to be located on existing towers and existing
alternate tower structures.
(1)
Spacing. No wireless communications tower shall be located closer
than one mile to any other such tower, except as provided below.
The spacing distance shall be measured as the shortest distance
between two points as if on a flat topography.
(2)
Historic and residential properties. No wireless communications
tower shall be located closer than 300 feet to any property (1) listed
on either the State or National Register of Historic Places or (2)
developed as part of a residential subdivision for which a definitive
plan was approved by the South Hadley Planning Board, except as
may be waived by the Planning Board as provided below.
(3)
Elevation. No portion of any wireless communications facility may
exceed the elevation level of 400 feet above mean sea level, except
as may be waived by the Planning Board as provided below.
(4)
Holyoke range area. No wireless communications tower or related
equipment may be located within the area bounded as follows: the
Towns of Hadley and Amherst to the north; the Town of Hadley and
Route 47 to the west; Route 47 and Pearl Street to the south; and
Route 116 (north of Pearl Street) and the Town of Granby to the
east.
(5)
Waiver for wireless communications antennas on alternative tower
structures. In unique circumstances where the Planning Board
makes findings as to technical necessity, topographic conditions,
community benefit, and/or special conditions which protect the
surrounding properties and community assets, and that a waiver
is consistent with the purposes of this section, the Planning Board
may grant a waiver of one or more of the location criteria specified
within this subsection for location of wireless communications
antennas on alternate tower structures.
(6)
Waiver for wireless communications towers. In unique
circumstances where the Planning Board makes findings as to
technical necessity, unique topographic conditions, community
benefit, and/or special conditions which protect the surrounding
properties and special community aesthetic assets (such as, but not
limited to, views of the Holyoke Range), and finds that a waiver
is consistent with the purposes of this section, the Planning Board
(7)
E.
§ 255-40 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-40
1:242
may grant a waiver of the selected location criteria listed below as
they relate to location of wireless communications towers, subject
to the limitations stated herein:
Spacing between wireless communications facilities as stated
in Subsection E(2) of this subsection; provided, however, the
spacing shall not be reduced to less than one-half mile.
(a)
Distance from an historic or residential property as stated
in Subsection E(3) of this subsection; provided, however, the
distance shall not be reduced by more than 200 feet.
(b)
Elevation as stated in Subsection E(4) of this subsection;
provided the maximum elevation will not be permitted to
exceed 450 feet.
(c)
Design and siting requirements, general. All wireless communications
facilities must be designed, developed, and operated in accordance with
the following requirements:
Co-location. Towers must be designed, developed, and equipped,
and leases for use of such structures must provide authority, to
allow for co-location of as many carriers as technically feasible.
(1)
Equipment shelter.
An equipment shelter not exceeding 400 square feet in area
per carrier located on the tower and not exceeding 14 feet
in height may be provided at each tower or alternate tower
structure. However, the Planning Board may impose special
conditions to reduce the maximum size of the equipment
shelter at a particular facility site if it determines such
conditions are necessary to fulfill the aesthetic purposes of the
Zoning Bylaw or these wireless communications regulations.
(a)
To the extent practicable, the related equipment shelter shall
be contained within or adjacent to the existing wireless
communications tower or alternate tower structure or within
an addition to such wireless communications tower or
alternate tower structure, the facade of which is compatible
with the existing wireless communications tower or alternate
tower structure.
(b)
(2)
Security. All wireless communications facilities shall be protected,
by fencing and/or other appropriate means, against unauthorized
access.
(3)
Parking.
There shall be a minimum of one parking space at each
wireless communications facility. Parking at such facility shall
be used solely in connection with the maintenance of the
(a)
(4)
F.
§ 255-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-40
1:243
wireless communications facility and is not to be used for the
permanent storage of vehicles or other equipment.
Exception. The Planning Board may grant an exception to
the parking requirement when the wireless communications
facility involves use of an alternate tower structure and the
Planning Board determines that other parking at the facility
site satisfactorily meets the parking need for the wireless
communications facility.
(b)
Signage.
The only signs associated with the wireless communications
facility which may be permitted are the following:
Identification sign: one identification sign identifying the
wireless communications facility and detailing the owner,
operator, and an emergency telephone number where the
owner or its emergency representative can be reached on
a twenty-four-hour basis.
[1]
[2] "No trespassing" signs. Such signs are required.
FCC registration: a sign displaying the FCC registration
number.
[3]
[4] Warning sign. Signs are required to warn of danger.
(a)
No sign should be larger than four square feet in area unless
state or federal regulations require larger signs.
(b)
(5)
Screening.
A landscape buffer of evergreen shrubs or trees shall be
provided in a manner to screen views of any equipment shelter
and fencing from adjoining property. The shrub or tree
plantings shall mature to a height equal to the level of the
equipment shelter height or fence (whichever is greater). At
planting, the shrubs or trees shall be at least six feet in height
and spaced such that the plantings reasonably screen the
equipment shelter while providing opportunity for the
vegetation to mature and be maintained. All landscape
plantings must be continually maintained.
(a)
Exceptions. The Planning Board may grant exceptions to the
screening specifications outlined herein where:
The topography and site conditions warrant that
alternative standards can achieve the purpose of the
screening; and/or
[1]
The proposed plantings and screening warrant alternative
spacing standards.
[2]
(b)
(6)
§ 255-40 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-40
1:244
Radiofrequency effect. All wireless communications facilities shall
be operated only at FCC-designated frequencies, power levels, and
standards. Upon request by the Planning Board, providers and
applicants shall provide certification that the maximum allowable
frequencies, power levels, and standards will not be exceeded.
(7)
Design and siting requirements for wireless communications towers.
Wireless communications facilities involving erection of new wireless
communications towers must be designed, developed, and operated in
accordance with the following requirements:
General: the requirements detailed in Subsection F, Design and
siting requirements, general.
(1)
Height. All wireless communications towers shall be constructed
to the minimum height necessary to accommodate the anticipated
usage. Towers designed for one provider shall be limited to the
lesser height of 200% of the maximum height allowed in the zoning
district in which it is to be located or a height of 130 feet. If no
maximum height is specified for the zoning district, the maximum
height shall not exceed 130 feet. When calculating the height, the
measured distance shall be inclusive of all planned antennas and
other attached features.
Exceptions. The Planning Board may grant an exception to the
height limit for wireless communications towers designed for
co-located facilities. In such situations, the Board may allow
the tower height to be increased by an additional 20 feet for
each additional provider up to a total tower height not to
exceed a maximum of 220 feet. Further, the Planning Board
may grant exceptions to the height restriction in unique
circumstances only upon making findings:
[1] As to technical necessity;
[2] As to unique topographic conditions;
[3] As to community benefit;
As to special conditions which protect the surrounding
properties and special community aesthetic assets (such
as, but not limited to, views of the Holyoke Range); and
[4]
That an exception is consistent with the purposes of this
section and the Zoning Bylaw.
[5]
(a)
Exemption. These height limits shall not apply to towers for
government or emergency telecommunications to the extent
such height is essential to serve the government or emergency
telecommunications use.
(b)
Justification required. The height limits stated within this
Subsection G(2) do not convey an entitlement to any specific
(c)
(2)
G.
§ 255-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-40
1:245
height. Rather, as provided in Subsection K, all applications
for wireless communications towers must include technical
evidence to justify the need for the proposed height, including
any height exceptions being requested. The Planning Board,
when acting on a special permit, shall specify the maximum
allowable height, inclusive of all planned wireless
communications antennas, to be allowed for the proposed
facility up to the limits outlined above.
Setbacks.
The setbacks for wireless communications towers shall be
measured from the nearest property line and the outer edge
of the base of the tower. The required setback shall be the
greatest of the following:
Three hundred feet if the adjoining property:
[a] Is zoned Residential A-1, A-2, B, or C; or
Is developed as part of a subdivision for which a
definitive plan has been approved by the Planning
Board; or
[b]
Is included on a National or State Register of Historic
Places.
[c]
[1]
[2] One foot for each foot of height of the structure.
(a)
Waivers.
The setback requirement from property zoned Residential
A-1, A-2, B, or C may be waived if the Planning Board
grants a waiver of the setback provision specified in
Subsection E(3) pursuant to Subsection E(7)(b). In such
instance, the extent of the waiver so granted shall govern
as the required setback.
[1]
Waiver of setback from nonresidential properties. The
Planning Board may grant a waiver of the setback
requirement specified in Subsection G(3)(a)[2] as the
setback applies to adjoining properties not zoned
Residential A-1, A-2, B, or C or used for residential
purposes.
[2]
Limitations on setback waivers. No setback waiver shall
permit any wireless communications tower to be located
nearer than 0.5 foot for each foot of height of the
structure.
[3]
(b)
(3)
Pre-engineered fault. All wireless communications towers shall be
pre-engineered to "fold at a predetermined height" in the event
of catastrophic failure. The height of this predetermined point of
(4)
§ 255-40 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-40
1:246
fold shall be specified as part of the special permit application.
The purpose of this "pre-engineered fault" is to ensure that, in
the event of a catastrophic failure, the wireless communications
tower shall remain on the parcel on which the tower was permitted.
Recognizing that technology changes over time, the Planning
Board may permit the applicant to utilize an alternative means of
achieving the purpose of the "pre-engineered fault," provided the
Board determines that this alternative means is at least as equally
effective for achieving this purpose.
Style of towers. Lattice towers and any guyed towers shall not be
permitted unless the applicant shall demonstrate to the Planning
Board's satisfaction that such tower shall be no more visually
blighting or intrusive than a monopole structure at the same
location. Accordingly, applicants proposing to construct a tower
other than a monopole shall submit appropriate plan documents
as part of the special permit application sufficient to allow the
Planning Board to make a decision as to whether to grant a special
permit allowing a tower other than a monopole-style tower. To
grant a special permit for a tower other than a monopole-style,
the Planning Board shall make a finding that the style of tower
proposed is appropriate for the site and is no more detrimental to
the visual character of the area than a monopole.
(5)
View. Wireless communications towers shall not be permitted in
such locations as to adversely impact the community. Accordingly,
Such towers shall be sited in such a manner that the view
of the tower (inclusive of all antennas and related attached
features) from adjacent properties, residential neighbors,
adjacent roadways, and other areas of Town shall be as limited
as possible; and
(a)
Such towers shall be painted, colored, and/or constructed of
materials that minimize the visual impact of the tower on
adjacent abutters, residential neighbors, and other areas of
Town; and
(b)
The Planning Board may impose such conditions as it deems
reasonable on the special permit so as to achieve the
aforestated standards and objective. Such conditions may
include, but need not be limited to, painting and lighting
standards, reduction in height, increased setbacks, and/or
increased screening.
(c)
(6)
Preservation of vegetation. Existing on-site vegetation shall be
preserved to the maximum extent practicable.
(7)
Lighting. Except as required by the FAA, wireless communications
towers shall not be artificially lighted.
(8)
§ 255-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-40
1:247
Design and siting requirements for wireless communications antennas.
Wireless communications antennas attached to towers and/or alternate
tower structures must conform to the following requirements:
General. The requirements detailed in Subsection F, Design and
siting requirements, general.
(1)
Height. The wireless communications antennas may only extend to
the minimum height above the existing tower or alternate tower
structure as necessary to accommodate the technical
requirements. No antennas shall extend more than 10 feet above
the height of the existing tower or alternate tower structure.
(2)
Extension. Wireless communications antennas shall not extend
more than technically necessary for the operation of the wireless
communications services, but in no case shall they extend more
than 13 feet beyond the side or outer perimeter of the tower or
alternate tower structure.
(3)
Integral part of structure. All building-mounted components of the
facilities shall be designed and located, to the extent practicable,
so as to appear as an integral part of the architecture of the
existing alternate tower structure. In no case shall such facilities be
approved where their inclusion is detrimental to the architectural
quality of the alternate tower structure on which they are to be
affixed or structures on abutting properties.
(4)
H.
Bond required. Prior to obtaining a building permit to erect a wireless
communications tower or to install a wireless communications tower or
to install antennas on a tower or on an alternate tower structure, the
wireless communications facility owner shall post and submit a bond or
other financial surety acceptable to the Town. However, the Planning
Board may waive such a bond or other financial surety when the project
involves an alternate tower structure if the Board deems such a waiver
to be appropriate and consistent with the purposes of the wireless
communications regulations.
Amount of surety. The amount of the bond or surety shall be
sufficient to reasonably restore the site to the condition which
existed prior to installation of the wireless communications tower
and/or wireless communications antennas (including related
equipment and fixtures). Said amount shall be certified by a
qualified engineer, architect, or other professional registered to
practice in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The bond or
surety shall provide for increases in coverage as the cost of removal
of the facility escalates.
(1)
Use of bond or financial surety. The posted bond or financial surety
shall be used by the Town for its intended purpose upon the
occurrence of either of the following events:
(2)
I.
§ 255-40 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-40
1:248
Cessation of use. If the wireless communications facility,
according to the Building Commissioner, has ceased to be used
for its intended wireless communications purpose for a period
of not less than 12 calendar months; or
(a)
Condemnation. The Building Commissioner condemns the
wireless communications facility as an unsafe structure.
(b)
Deficient amount; recourse. In the event the amount of the posted
bond or surety does not cover the cost of demolition and/or removal
of the wireless communications facility, the Town may pursue all
recourses available to it for recovery of the additional sum,
including but not limited to:
(a) Lien: placing a lien upon the property.
Assessment: assessing all carriers who had antennas on the
facility at such time as the wireless communications tower
or alternate tower structure ceased to be used for wireless
communications purposes.
(b)
New permits: withholding permits for new wireless
communications facilities by the responsible party(-ies).
(c)
(3)
Duration of bond or surety. The bond or surety is to be for a
duration of no less than the time period for which the wireless
communications facility is to be operating. Accordingly, the
Planning Board, as a condition of the special permit or site plan
review, whichever is applicable, shall specify the minimum duration
for the bond or surety. The Planning Board may provide the bond
to be for a specified period of time with provisions for automatic
renewals or substitution of new bonds or sureties.
(4)
Cessation of use/abandonment, maintenance, and removal.
Cessation of use/abandonment. If the wireless communications
facility ceases to be used for a period of 12 consecutive months,
the facility will be deemed to have been abandoned. At any point
after that time, the wireless communications facility may only be
used upon prior approval of a new application in accordance with
the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw in effect at that time.
(1)
Maintenance. The owner of and carriers utilizing the wireless
communications facility are solely responsible for maintaining the
wireless communications facility in good order. Failure to do so
may, at the Town's discretion, result in termination of the right to
use the facility and/or removal of the facility.
(2)
Removal. Owners of wireless communications facilities shall be
solely responsible and liable for dismantling and removing facilities
within a time frame set forth by the Building Commissioner. If the
demolition/removal is to be undertaken by the Town, the Building
(3)
J.
§ 255-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-40
1:249
Commissioner shall send to the wireless communications facility
owner and the associated carriers (if any) written notice by
registered mail at least 45 calendar days prior to commencing
demolition/removal.
Submission requirements.
Site plan review required. For wireless communications facilities
for which only site plan review is required, applicants must submit
the following:
Plans and materials required by Article XII of the Zoning
Bylaw; and
(a)
Evidence of their authority to install and maintain the wireless
communications facilities on the existing tower or alternate
tower structure; and
(b)
Plans and documents demonstrating conformity with the
provisions of these wireless communications regulations; and
(c)
Estimated cost to remove the facilities as certified by a
qualified professional engineer registered to work in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(d)
(1)
Special permit required. For wireless communications facilities
for which a special permit is required, applicants are required to
submit the following:
Article XII requirements: plans and materials required by
Article XII of the Zoning Bylaw; and
(a)
Article IX requirements: plans and materials required by
Article IX of the Zoning Bylaw; and
(b)
Authority: evidence of their authority to develop, erect, and
maintain the proposed wireless communications facilities on
the subject property; and
(c)
Conformity: plans and documentation demonstrating
conformity with the provisions of the wireless communications
regulations; and
(d)
Need: demonstration of the need for the wireless
communications facility as proposed, including, but not limited
to:
That all existing wireless communications towers and
alternate tower structures have been evaluated and why
they are not sufficient to meet the needs to be served
by the proposed wireless communications tower, including
demonstration that the applicant cannot co-locate on an
[1]
(e)
(2)
K.
§ 255-40 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-40
1:250
existing wireless communications tower or alternate tower
facility and fulfill its coverage needs; and
That the height proposed for the wireless communications
facility is the minimum height necessary to provide the
service coverage and co-location opportunities necessary.
[2]
Removal cost: estimated cost to remove the wireless
communications facilities and restore the site to its predevelopment
condition as certified by a professional engineer
registered to work in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts;
and
(f)
Schedules: proposed inspection and maintenance schedule;
and
(g)
Color photograph or rendition: a color photograph or rendition
of the proposed wireless communications facilities, including,
but not limited to, the proposed wireless communications
tower with the proposed associated wireless communications
antennas; and
(h)
View lines: four view lines in a one- to three-mile radius of
the proposed wireless communications facility site beginning
at true north and continuing at ninety-degree intervals; and
(i)
Balloon test: on a weekend day prior to (but within 10 calendar
days of the date of the advertised public hearing) and on the
day of the public hearing to be held by the Planning Board,
the applicant shall cause a balloon to be flown at the maximum
proposed height of the proposed wireless communications
facility. The balloon shall be flown for at least three consecutive
hours between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. The balloon shall be at
least three feet in diameter and either orange or red in color.
(j)
Registration and new plans. By July 1 of each year, all owners of
wireless communications towers and alternate tower structures in use
or permitted by the Planning Board must register with the Planning
Board.
Owners of wireless communications towers are to:
Identify each site within the limits of, and within one mile of,
South Hadley they are presently using by Tax Map and parcel
number and the specific longitude and latitude coordinates of
the wireless communications tower facility; and
(a)
Identify existing co-location capacity of the wireless
communications tower facilities identified in Subsection
L(1)(a); and
(b)
(1)
L.
§ 255-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-40
1:251
§ 255-41. Outdoor recreation facilities.
Provide inspection reports and evidence of maintenance
activities for the wireless communications facilities identified
in Subsection L(1)(a) for the past year.
(c)
Owners of alternate tower structures are to:
Identify each site within the limits of, and within one mile
of, the Town of South Hadley (which they are presently using
for wireless communications services) by Tax Map and parcel
number; and
(a)
Provide a list of the carriers presently utilizing the alternate
tower structure.
(b)
(2)
Jurisdiction of Planning Board. The conditions of a special permit issued
by the Planning Board pursuant to the provisions of this § 255-40 may
not be subject to a subsequent modification by means of a dimensional
variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals without concurrent or prior
amendment to such special permit by the Planning Board.
M.
Purpose. The overall purpose of the outdoor recreation facilities use
within the Agricultural Zoning District is to preserve agricultural lands
through enhancing the economic viability of active farmland
operations.
A.
Facilities allowed.
Outdoor recreation facilities may be permitted, subject to
compliance with the mandatory standards, conditions and
requirements for a special permit and site plan review as well as
the conditions set forth in this section. Only miniature golf facilities
(up to 36 holes) and batting cages may be permitted as outdoor
recreation facilities.
(1)
Nothing herein is to be interpreted as precluding the use of any
land for passive recreational activities such as, but not limited to,
hunting, hiking, skiing, fishing, etc.
(2)
B.
Minimum area of parcel. The outdoor recreation facility use may only
be permitted on a single parcel of no less than 50 acres or contiguous
parcels in common ownership of an aggregate area of no less than 50
acres.
C.
Minimum frontage. The parcel to be permitted must have at least 250
feet of continuous frontage on a public way.
D.
Parcel coverage. Outdoor recreation facilities shall not occupy more
than 2.5% of the total land area of the parcel on which the facilities are
located. This area limitation includes the portion of the tract occupied
by required parking facilities and any associated structures and does
E.
§ 255-40 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-41
1:252
§ 255-42. Adult entertainment uses.
not apply to buildings and structures used for agricultural purposes
(including accessory uses).
Minimum setbacks. The outdoor recreation facilities use areas and
buildings (not to include related parking areas and trails for
pedestrians or nonmotorized vehicles) shall be no closer than 40 feet
to a public road right-of-way line and shall have the following side and
rear yard setbacks:
Setback
Agricultural
(feet)
Side yard 20
Rear yard 25
F.
Maximum height. Buildings and structures used as part of the outdoor
recreation facility use shall be no higher than 35 feet and include no
more than two stories.
G.
Maintenance of agricultural uses. Outdoor recreation facility uses are
to be incidental to the active farmland of the parcel on which they
are located. Accordingly, the parcel must be maintained largely in an
active agricultural usage. The applicant for the special permit (and
owner of the property, if the applicant is not the owner) must provide
demonstration that the property will be preserved in such use. If a
substantial portion of the property ceases to be maintained as active
farmland, the special permit for outdoor recreation facility use will be
subject to termination by the Planning Board.
H.
Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the Town's authority
under the Home Rule amendment to the Massachusetts Constitution
and the authority and provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
A.
Findings and purposes. Preventing land uses from having deleterious
impacts is a fundamental purpose of zoning. Concentration of adult
entertainment uses (as defined herein) and encroachment of such uses
on residential areas have deleterious effects on the community and
the adjacent areas. Among the deleterious secondary effects of such
uses are increased crime levels and general blight. Late-night noise
and traffic associated with the hours of operation of such uses also
cause adverse secondary impacts of such uses. Accordingly, regulation
of adult entertainment uses pursuant to this section has the following
purposes:
Preventing the deleterious effects that such uses have on the
community and adjacent areas.
(1)
(2) Preventing the secondary effects associated with such uses.
B.
§ 255-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-42
1:253
Protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the present
and future inhabitants of the Town.
(3)
Providing for regulation of such uses without suppressing any
speech or expression activities protected by the First Amendment.
Accordingly, the provisions of this § 255-42 and the Zoning Bylaw in
general have neither the intent nor effect of imposing a limitation
or restriction on the content of any communicative matter or
materials, including sexually oriented matter or materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent or office of this § 255-42 to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented matter or materials
protected by the Constitution of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, nor restrict or deny rights that
distributors or exhibitors of such matter or materials may have
to sell, distribute or exhibit such matter or materials; nor is it
the intent or effect of this § 255-42 to legalize the distribution of
obscene matter or materials.
(4)
Applicability. This section applies to all adult entertainment uses as
defined herein.
C.
Definitions. As used in this section of the Zoning Bylaw, the following
words and phrases shall have the meanings and intent respectively
ascribed to them by this section. If any word or phrase conflicts with
definitions specified elsewhere in the South Hadley Zoning Bylaw, the
meaning and intent ascribed below shall govern:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — As defined in MGL c. 40A, § 9A, an
establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stockin-
trade books, magazines, and other matter which is distinguished
or characterized by its emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to
sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE — An establishment which is engaged
in any one or more of the following uses as defined herein:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — As defined in MGL c. 40A, § 9A,
an enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct
or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE — As defined in MGL c. 40A, § 9A, an
establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock
devices, objects, tools, or toys which are distinguished or characterized
(1) Adult bookstore.
(2) Adult motion-picture theater.
(3) Adult paraphernalia store.
(4) Adult video store.
(5) Establishment which displays live nudity for its patrons.
D.
§ 255-42 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-42
1:254
by their association with sexual activity, including sexual conduct or
sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT VIDEO STORE — As defined in MGL c. 40A, § 9A, an
establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stockin-
trade videos, movies, or other film material which is distinguished
or characterized by its emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to
sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ESTABLISHMENT WHICH DISPLAYS LIVE NUDITY FOR ITS PATRONS
— As defined in MGL c. 40A, § 9A, any establishment which provides
live entertainment for its patrons, which includes the display of nudity,
as that term is defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
INDIVIDUAL RESIDENTIAL USE — Any single-family or two-family
residence located on a parcel located within the Agricultural Zoning
District as depicted on the South Hadley Zoning Map.
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICT — Any and all property located
within any of the following zoning districts as depicted on the South
Hadley Zoning Map: Residence A-1, Residence A-2, Residence B, and
Residence C.
Special permit required. No adult entertainment use shall be
established or operated without a special permit having been issued by
the Planning Board pursuant to this section and Article IX of the Zoning
Bylaw.
E.
Location restrictions. A special permit for any adult entertainment use
may only be granted if the following location restrictions are met:
Overlay district: the subject property is located within the Adult
Entertainment Use Overlay District established in Article IV of the
Zoning Bylaw; and
(1)
Business District: the subject property is entirely zoned either
Business A-1 or Business B.
(2)
F.
Spacing from uses and districts. No special permit for any adult
entertainment use may be granted unless the subject property is no
less than 500 feet from the following uses or districts located within the
Town of South Hadley:
(1) Residential zoning district.
(2) Individual residential use.
(3) Public or private school.
(4) Church.
(5) Public or private library.
Facilities licensed under MGL c. 138, § 12 (except for such facility
which is proposed to be used as adult entertainment use).
(6)
G.
§ 255-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-42
1:255
(7) Any other adult entertainment uses.
Measurement of spacing requirements. The five-hundred-foot distance
specified in Subsection G shall be measured as a straight line from
the nearest point on the exterior property lines of the proposed adult
entertainment use and the nearest point on the exterior property line
aforementioned uses or districts.
H.
Development standards. No special permit for an adult entertainment
use shall be granted unless the site on which the use is proposed to be
undertaken conforms to the following standards or provision is made
for conformity with these standards prior to the adult entertainment
use being operated:
Buffer. A six-foot-high vegetative buffer shall be provided along
the rear and side lot lines of any parcel on which is located an
adult entertainment business. The purposes of this buffer are to
provide visual screening of the adult entertainment use from the
adjoining property. For purposes of this section, this buffer shall
be a continuous landscaped buffer strip and shall be no less than
six feet in height and 10 feet in width. The Planning Board may
authorize installation of a solid wood, stockade fence in lieu of the
vegetation.
(1)
Screening. All building openings, entries, and windows shall be
screened in such a manner as to prevent visual access to the
interior of the building by the public.
(2)
Multitenant buildings. No adult entertainment use shall be located
in a building or on a property with more than one business located
thereon.
(3)
Dimensional requirements. All adult entertainment uses shall
comply with the dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning
district.
(4)
Display restrictions. No graphics, pictures, publications,
videotapes, movies, covers, or other implements, items, or
advertising, that fall within the definition of, or associated with, an
adult entertainment use shall be displayed in the windows of, or on
the building of, any adult entertainment use, or be visible to the
public from the pedestrian sidewalks or walkways or from other
areas, public or semipublic, outside such establishments.
(5)
Signs. All signs shall comply with the provisions of § 255-85 of the
Zoning Bylaw. No sign that falls within the definition of an adult
entertainment use shall be displayed in the windows of, or on the
building of, any adult entertainment use, or be visible to the public
from the pedestrian sidewalks or walkways or from other areas,
public or semipublic, outside such establishments.
(6)
I.
§ 255-42 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-42
1:256
Illumination of parking areas. All parking areas associated with the
adult use shall be illuminated. Said illumination shall be designed,
installed, and operated so as to conform to the requirements of
Chapter 171, Lighting, Outdoor, of the General Bylaws. The
Planning Board may, as a condition of the special permit, restrict
the hours of illumination beyond the restrictions set forth in
Chapter 171.
(7)
Special permit conditions. Acting as the special permit granting
authority, the Planning Board may attach special conditions to the
special permit where the Planning Board determines such conditions
are necessary and appropriate to fulfill the purposes of the Zoning
Bylaw.
J.
Applicant restrictions. No special permit to operate an adult
entertainment use shall be issued to any person convicted of violating
the provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63 or MGL c. 272, § 28. This restriction
shall apply to owners, officers, directors, and general partners of the
business entity.
K.
Management restriction. No person convicted of violating the
provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63 or MGL c. 272, § 28 shall be employed to
manage or operate an adult entertainment use.
L.
Special requirements for applications. In addition to the requirements
specified in Article IX of the Zoning Bylaw, any application for a special
permit for an adult entertainment use shall also include the following
materials/items:
Description: a written description of the proposed project,
including:
(a) Nature of proposed use; and
(b) Improvements to be made to the property; and
(c) Number of employees; and
(d) Proposed hours and days of operation.
(1)
Spacing requirements:
A locus map highlighting the subject property, displaying the
boundary lines of the following:
[1] The subject property; and
All zoning districts within 500 feet of the subject property;
and
[2]
Lots used for single- or two-family residential purposes
within 500 feet of the subject property; and
[3]
[4] All uses specified in Subsection G.
(a)
(2)
M.
§ 255-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-42
1:257
This map shall be a minimum of 24 inches by 36 inches and
a scale of one inch equals 100 feet. The Planning Board may
require a different scale where the Board determines that an
alternative scale is deemed appropriate and necessary.
(b)
Site plan requirements: a site plan in accordance with Article
XII of this Zoning Bylaw. If the proposed adult entertainment use
involves use of an existing building and no new construction or
exterior modification is proposed, the Board may waive appropriate
requirements of the site plan, but shall require a plan that details
the existing site conditions, proposed landscaping, proposed
signage, proposed site and building ingress and egress, and
proposed parking.
(3)
Interior layout: an interior layout of the building as proposed by
the applicant. This layout shall identify all areas which are to be
accessible by the establishment's customers.
(4)
Security provisions: proposed provisions for securing the safety
of the public inside and outside of the adult entertainment use
establishment.
(5)
Applicant/Management restrictions: a sworn statement that
neither the applicant (inclusive of the owners, officers, directors,
and general partners) nor the manager in the adult entertainment
use business has been convicted of violating the provisions of MGL
c. 119, § 63 or MGL c. 272, § 28.
(6)
Authorization: written authorization from the owner of the property
acknowledging the application and authorizing the applicant to
submit the application.
(7)
Duration of special permit. A special permit for an adult entertainment
use shall expire 12 months from its date of issuance and shall be
renewable upon submittal of a written request for such renewal.
The Planning Board shall consider the request and grant the
renewal upon findings that:
The use has been operated in accordance with the conditions
of the special permit and the Zoning Bylaw;
(a)
The use has not had a deleterious effect on the surrounding
neighborhood; and
(b)
There have not been changes in the ownership or management
of the adult entertainment use.
(c)
(1)
Provision for three-year renewal. The Planning Board may grant
a three-year renewal period for any adult entertainment use upon
a determination that the use has been operated for the previous
36 consecutive months without an adverse impact on the
neighborhood or change in ownership or management.
(2)
N.
§ 255-42 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-42
1:258
§ 255-43. Commercial kennels.
§ 255-44. Gas-to-energy facilities.
As provided for in Article V, a gas-to-energy facility may only be permitted
by special permit if it meets the following conditions:
Preexisting adult entertainment use. Pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 9A, all
existing adult entertainment uses shall apply for a special permit within
90 days following adoption of this bylaw amendment.
O.
In acting on a request for a special permit for a commercial kennel,
in addition to the general standards listed in Article IX of the Zoning
Bylaw, the Planning Board shall particularly consider the facility's
proximity to residential properties and the potential for noise and odors
from the facility to disrupt the nearby residents.
A.
In addition to complying with any conditions attached to the special
permit granted by the SPGA, commercial kennels shall also:
Comply with all applicable laws and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(1)
Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a health or
safety hazard to the animals being kept in the facility, community,
or neighboring properties and residents.
(2)
Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a nuisance to the
neighboring properties and residents.
(3)
B.
Source of the gas. The gas-to-energy facility may only process gas
generated by the decomposition of waste material deposited at a
licensed landfill in which the boundaries of the parcel of land on which
the licensed landfill is situated are in close proximity of the property
on which the gas-to-energy facility is located. This distance is measured
from the property lines of the respective parcels.
A.
Proximity to residences. The gas-to-energy facility must be located no
less than 500 feet from residential dwellings in existence at the time
the special permit was granted. This distance is measured from the
perimeter of the gas-to-energy facility to the perimeter of the structure
in which the dwelling is located and not from the limits of either
property boundary.
B.
Compliance with applicable regulations. The gas-to-energy facility must
be operated, continuously, in accordance with applicable local, state,
and federal regulations.
C.
Location in Agricultural District. The gas-to-energy facility may only be
located in the Agricultural Zoning District if the facility is located on
the same parcel on which the licensed landfill is situated.
D.
§ 255-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-45
1:259
§ 255-45. South Hadley Falls Overlay District.
Purpose. The purpose of this overlay district is to encourage the
redevelopment of South Hadley Falls in a manner that is consistent
with its historic urban pattern by allowing greater flexibility of uses
and relaxing certain other requirements that have been obstacles to
redevelopment within this district.
A.
Boundaries. Boundaries of the South Hadley Falls Overlay District are
depicted on a map on file in the office of the Planning Board, Building
Commissioner, and Town Clerk.
B.
Applicability. The South Hadley Falls Overlay District provisions are
supplemental to any requirements or restrictions of the underlying
zoning districts and override provisions of the underlying zoning.
C.
Uses in the Industrial A and Industrial B Districts. Within the South
Hadley Falls Overlay District, wherever the underlying zoning is
Industrial A or Industrial B, all uses permitted in the Business B District
shall also be permitted as shown on the Use Table for Business B
(i.e., SPR or SP), except that new single-family residences shall not be
permitted. All uses permitted in the Industrial A or Industrial B District
shall also be permitted as provided in the underlying district.41
D.
Dimensional regulations.
Residential uses in the Business B District shall not be required to
comply with the requirements for residential uses in the Residence
B District.
(1)
Residential uses in the Industrial A District shall comply with the
dimensional standards for the Residence B District, unless such
standards are waived by the Planning Board.
(2)
An applicant for any approval may request, and the Planning Board
shall grant, waivers from any of the otherwise applicable
dimensional, landscaping, and parking requirements in the
underlying district, provided that the applicant can demonstrate
that the requested waivers are more in keeping with the existing
character of the South Hadley Falls area than the underlying
zoning would permit. The Planning Board may adopt design and
dimensional guidelines to guide applicants and the Board in its
decisions to grant such dimensional waivers.
(3)
E.
Master Plan and design guidelines. In making discretionary decisions
involving special permits and waivers of requirements in the underlying
districts, the Planning Board shall be guided by the provisions of the
Master Plan, as it may be amended from time to time, and any
applicable design guidelines adopted by the Planning Board.
F.
41.Editor's Note: The Use Table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-45 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-46
1:260
§ 255-46. Medical marijuana facilities and operations.
Purposes.
It is recognized that the nature of the substance cultivated,
processed, and/or sold by medical marijuana treatment centers
and off-site medical marijuana dispensaries may have objectionable
operational characteristics and may be located in such a way to
pose a threat to the health, safety, and general well-being of the
public as well as patients seeking treatment. Therefore, specific
and separate regulation of medical marijuana treatment center
(MMTC) and medical marijuana off-site dispensary (MMOSD)
facilities is necessary to ensure that adverse effects will not
contribute to blight in the surrounding neighborhood or exacerbate
risks to public health and safety associated with other nearby land
uses, and that such facilities are not located within close proximity
of minors within the Town of South Hadley.
(1)
Subject to the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw, Chapter 40A of the
Massachusetts General Laws, and 105 CMR 725.000, MMTC and
off-site medical marijuana dispensaries (OMMD) will be permitted
to provide medical support, security, and physician oversight that
meet or exceed state regulations as established by the
Massachusetts Department of Health (DPH).
(2)
A.
Where MMCPF allowed by site plan review or special permit.
A MMCPF is allowed in Industrial A and Industrial B Zoning
Districts by site plan review where either of the following
conditions are met:
The parcel on which the facility is located does not abut any
parcel on which a residence is located (a property situated
across the street from the proposed property shall not be
considered as "abutting").
(a)
The parcel on which the facility is located abuts one or more
parcels on which a residence is located but the facility housing
the MMCPF is located at least 300 feet from any such
residence.
(b)
(1)
A MMCPF may only be allowed in Industrial A and Industrial B
Zoning Districts where the parcel on which the facility is located
abuts one or more parcels on which a residence is located and the
facility housing the MMCPF is located within 300 feet of any such
residence upon issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board
in accordance with Article IX of the Zoning Bylaw.
(2)
B.
Prohibited locations. The building(s) in which MMTC or MMOSD uses
are permitted shall not be located:
(1) Within 300 feet of any building:
C.
§ 255-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-46
1:261
(a) Containing another MMTC or MMOSD; or
In which is located a public or private elementary school,
middle school, secondary school, preparatory school, licensed
day-care center, or any other facility in which children
commonly congregate in an organized ongoing formal basis; or
(b)
Owned by and operated as part of the campus of any private or
public institution of higher learning, or
(c)
(d) Housing a public library; or
(e) Any residential use; or
Within, on the same lot as, or on a lot immediately adjacent to a
licensed pharmacy; or
(2)
Within buildings that contain any pharmacy, medical doctor offices
or the offices of any other professional practitioner authorized
to prescribe the use of medical marijuana. An exception shall be
that the Planning Board may grant permission for palliative and
therapeutic care uses in the same building in which an MMTC or
MMOSD is operated; or
(3)
Within a building containing residential units, including transient
housing or group housing such as hotels, motels, lodging houses,
or dormitories.
(4)
Use. All MMCPF, MMTC, and MMOSD facilities may be used in
accordance with state laws and regulations and as specified below:
Such facilities may only be involved in the uses permitted by its
definition and may not include other businesses or services. This
does not preclude a multitenant building from housing other,
unrelated businesses; nor is this restriction to be construed as
precluding the use of MMCPF facilities for the cultivation and
processing of other agricultural and medicinal crops and products
where otherwise allowed by state, federal, or local law or
regulations.
(1)
No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed or
ingested within the premises.
(2)
The hours of operation shall be set by the Planning Board, but in
no event shall an MMTC or MMOSD facility be open to the public,
and no sale or other distribution of marijuana shall occur upon the
premises or via delivery from the premises between the hours of
8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3)
D.
Physical requirements.
All aspects of the use/facility relative to the acquisition, cultivation,
possession, processing, sale, distribution, dispensing, or
(1)
E.
§ 255-46 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-46
1:262
administration of marijuana, products containing marijuana,
related supplies, or educational materials must take place at a fixed
location within a fully enclosed building and shall not be visible
from the exterior of the business.
(2) No outside storage is permitted.
No MMOSD facility shall have a gross floor area in excess of 1,000
square feet.
(3)
Any MMTC with a dispensary included as part of the facility shall
be so apportioned and laid out that the portion of the building used
for dispensing to qualifying patients shall not occupy more than 5%
of the gross floor area.
(4)
Ventilation. All MMTC and OMMD facilities shall be ventilated in
such a manner that:
No pesticides, insecticides or other chemicals or products used
in the cultivation or processing are dispersed into the outside
atmosphere.
(a)
Odor from marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a
normal sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana
business or at any adjoining use or property.
(b)
(5)
Signage shall conform to § 255-85 of the South Hadley Zoning
Bylaw and requirements of state laws and regulations governing
such facilities. However, the signage and other marketing on the
exterior of the building or in any other manner visible from a
public way or adjoining property shall not promote or encourage:
a) the use or abuse of marijuana or other drugs for nonmedical
purposes; or b) the use or abuse of marijuana or other drugs by
minors; or c) the active marketing of marijuana or other drugs
for medicinal purposes; provided, however, that these restrictions
shall not preclude any signage required by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health.
(6)
Application requirements. Above and beyond the standard application
requirements for special permits, an application for a use under this
section shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of each owner of the facility/operation;
Copies of all required registrations issued to the applicant by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of its agencies for the
facility;
(2)
Evidence that the applicant has site control and the right to use the
site for a facility in the form of a deed or valid purchase and sale
agreement, or, in the case of a lease, a notarized statement from
the property owner and a copy of the lease agreement;
(3)
F.
§ 255-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-46
1:263
A notarized statement signed by the organization's chief executive
officer and corporate attorney disclosing all of its designated
representatives, including officers and directors, shareholders,
partners, members, managers, directors, officers, or other similarly
situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of the
above are entities rather than persons, the applicant must disclose
the identity of all such responsible individual persons;
(4)
In addition to what is normally required in a site plan and/or special
permit application under Articles XII and IX of the South Hadley
Zoning Bylaw, respectively, details showing all exterior proposed
security measures for the premises, including lighting, fencing,
gates and alarms, etc. ensuring the safety of employees and
patrons and to protect the premises from theft or other criminal
activity.
(5)
A management plan as required under the special permit rules and
regulations, including a description of all activities to occur on site,
including all provisions for the delivery of medical marijuana and
related products to MMOSDs or off-site direct delivery to patients.
(6)
A security plan, which is subject to approval by the Police Chief,
which details all exterior and interior proposed security measures
for the premises, including but not limit to: video monitoring and
recording, lighting, fencing, and alarms ensuring the safety of
employees and to protect the premises from theft or other criminal
activity. This plan must provide twenty-four-hour security and
monitoring for the facility, particularly those portions of the
building which are deemed by the Police Chief to be most
vulnerable to unauthorized entry and least visible from the public
ways.
(7)
A waste disposal plan which provides details for disposal of the
waste materials in accordance with applicable local and state laws
and regulations.
(8)
Reporting requirements.
All special permit and site plan approval holders for an MMCPF,
MMTC or MMOSD facility shall provide the Town Administrator,
Police Department, Fire Department (for the district in which it is
located), Building Commissioner/Inspector and the Planning Board
with the names, phone numbers and e-mail addresses of all
management staff and key-holders to whom one can provide notice
if there are operating problems associated with the establishment.
(1)
The Town Administrator, Building Commissioner/Inspector, Board
of Health, Police Department, Fire Department (for the district in
which it is located), and the Planning Board shall be notified in
writing by an MMTC or OMMD facility owner/operator/manager:
(2)
G.
§ 255-46 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-46
1:264
A minimum of 30 days prior to any change in ownership or
management of that facility.
(a)
A minimum of 12 hours following a violation or potential
violation of any law or any criminal or potential criminal
activities or attempts of violation of any law at the MMCPF,
MMTC or MMOSD.
(b)
Annual report.
Permitted MMCPF, MMTC and MMOSD facilities shall file an
annual report to the Planning Board no later than January
31, providing a copy of all current applicable state licenses
for the facility and/or its owners, and demonstrate continued
compliance with the conditions of the special permit.
(a)
Upon request by the Planning Board, the representatives of
the permitted facility shall appear before the Planning Board
in regard to the annual report and their compliance or
noncompliance with the conditions of the special permit at
such meeting as specified by the Town Planner.
(b)
(3)
The owner or manager is required to respond by phone or e-mail
within 24 hours of contact by a Town official concerning his/her
MMCPF, MMTC or MMOSD at the phone number or e-mail address
provided to the Town as the contact for the business.
(4)
Transfer or discontinuance of use.
As with all special permits as provided in Article IX of the Zoning
Bylaw, special permits granted under this section are
nontransferable.
(1)
Special permits granted under this section shall also have a term
limited to the duration of the applicant's ownership/control of the
premises as an MMTC or MMOSD.
(2)
An MMTC or MMOSD facility shall be required to remove all
material, plants, equipment and other paraphernalia prior to
surrendering its state registration.
(3)
H.
Dispensary security. During the hours of operation of a dispensary open
to serving patients or the public, whether part of a MMTC or MMOSD,
the operator shall provide full-time security using on-site, licensed
personnel. Provisions for providing such security shall be subject to
approval by the Chief of Police and the local licensing authority
(Selectboard).
I.
Multitenant facilities. When a MMCPF, MMTC, or MMOSD facility is
located in a multitenant building or on a parcel with multiple tenants
and one or more of the tenants involve concentrations of minors
(whether employees or visitors), the owner of the property and the
operator of the MMCPF, MMTC, or MMOSD facility must take measures
J.
§ 255-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-46
1:265
§ 255-47. Multifamily and multiple dwellings.
All multifamily developments and developments with more than one
building for dwelling purposes on a single parcel of land shall conform to
the provisions provided below.
to ensure that the minors are not interacting with the MMCPF, MMTC,
or MMOSD facility. The security plan required under Subsection F(7)
above shall detail the measures to be taken to ensure that this
interaction does not occur.
Selectboard approval. Recognizing the particular security, lighting, and
other issues not directly related to zoning associated with such
enterprises, in addition to obtaining a special permit or site plan review
as detailed above and in § 255-19, any entity seeking to establish or
operate a MMCPF, MMTC, or MMOSD facility must also obtain
approval from the Selectboard.
K.
Allowable unit count. The permitted number of dwelling units in a
multifamily building or development and developments with more than
one building for dwelling purposes on a parcel shall not exceed the
number permitted utilizing the methodologies established in § 255-31
for land located within the Residence A-1, Residence A-2 and
Agricultural Districts, and on the dimensional table footnotes relating
to the amount of lot area per dwelling unit for special permits in
all other districts.42 Density bonuses may not be granted unless the
development conforms to the flexible development process, procedures
and standards.
A.
Front entrances. Front entrances to multifamily buildings shall open
onto sidewalks and streets or common public spaces and not onto
parking lots. Multifamily buildings and developments shall create
shared open spaces, which may be, but shall not be required to be, open
to the general public, along a street or common green. Rear entrances
and entrances for services and delivery may be from parking areas.
B.
Conformity to other regulations. In all other respects, the layout and
relationship of buildings to each other and to streets, public spaces,
and parking areas shall be as provided in other applicable sections of
this bylaw as well as any design standards or guidelines adopted by the
Planning Board.
C.
Required open space. On parcels of at least two acres, multifamily
developments and developments with more than one building for
dwelling purposes on a single parcel of land shall include usable open
space in the same proportion and character as required of
developments under § 255-31 of the Zoning Bylaw.
D.
E. Exceptions.
42.Editor's Note: The Dimensional Table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-46 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-47
1:266
§ 255-48. Solar photovoltaic installations. [Added 5-9-2018 ATM by
Art. 17]
Such uses located within the South Hadley Falls Overlay District
shall not be subject to the density or open space restrictions within
this § 255-47.
(1)
Developments for which a permit has been granted or which have
been developed prior to May 10, 2014, shall not be subject to the
provisions of this § 255-47.
(2)
Parcels containing more than one building with a dwelling. A parcel
may contain more than one building with a dwelling, provided the
following conditions are satisfied:
Such use is identified as being allowed within the subject zoning
district by the Use Regulations Schedule included as an attachment
to this chapter; and
(1)
The parcel has sufficient acreage to comply with applicable density
limitations; and
(2)
The applicable density limitations are the same as what is allowed
under the flexible development provisions in § 255-31G, except
they may not exceed the cap set forth in Subsection F(4) below; and
(3)
In the Residence A-1, Residence A-2, and Agricultural Districts, no
parcel of any size may contain more than four dwelling units on it
except pursuant to the flexible development provisions of § 255-31;
and
(4)
Such a parcel may not be later subdivided unless the subdivided
lots conform to the dimensional regulations and the infrastructure,
including but not limited to the right-of-way and roadway
improvements conform to the subdivision regulations in effect
when the subdivision is proposed.43
(5)
F.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the
placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification
and removal of ground-mounted and canopy-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations, as permitted in Chapter 255, Attachment 1,
Use Regulations Schedule, that address public safety and minimize
impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources.
A.
Applicability. This section applies to all solar photovoltaic installations,
as permitted in Chapter 255, Attachment 1, Use Regulations Schedule,
proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section. This
section also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the
type, configuration, or size of these installations or related equipment.
B.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 360, Subdivision Regulations.
§ 255-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-48
1:267
As-of-right siting.
Solar photovoltaic installations, in many instances, are permitted
as-of-right in many zoning districts in the Use Regulations Schedule
(Chapter 255, Attachment 1). In most cases, these are still subject
to site plan review in accordance with requirements below and
Article XII of Chapter 255 of the Town Code (the Zoning Bylaw).
(1)
C.
Special application/plan requirements; special permits and site plan
review. All applications for which a special permit or site plan review
are required, in addition to the requirements of Chapter 255, Article
IX and Chapter 255, Article XII of the Town Code (and Planning Board
Regulations adopted pursuant to), shall also include and comply with
the following:
Plans shall include an analysis of the proposed cut and fill for the
site.
(1)
Required documents.
A site plan showing:
Drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation signed by
a professional engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed
layout of the system and any potential shading from
nearby structures.
[1]
One- or three-line electrical diagram detailing the solar
photovoltaic installation, associated components, and
electrical interconnection methods, with all Massachusetts
Electrical Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent
devices.
[2]
Documentation of the major system components to be
used, including the PV panels, mounting system, and
inverter.
[3]
Name, address, and contact information for proposed
system installer.
[4]
(a)
Stormwater management plan and assessment including an
analysis as to the impact that the installation might have on the
patterns and rate of stormwater runoff.
(b)
(c) Erosion and sediment control plan.
Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of
the project site.
(d)
An operation and maintenance plan including a schedule for
revisions to the plan.
(e)
(2)
D.
§ 255-48 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-48
1:268
Utility notification evidence that the utility company that
operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be
located has been informed of the solar photovoltaic installation
project proponent's intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator.
Exception: Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this
requirement.
[1]
(f)
Vegetative analysis and planting plan which identifies the
extent to which existing vegetation will be removed,
particularly native trees of a caliper of 10 inches or more and
plans to replant the area and meet the screening requirements.
(g)
Vegetative management plan. This plan is to address
maintenance of the vegetation on the entire site with particular
attention to vegetation under the ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations and methods taken to preclude any
impact on adjacent and nearby properties.
(h)
Landscaping and screening plan. This plan is to particularly
focus on replacement of the native trees and screening from
view of the roadway and adjacent and nearby residential
properties.
(i)
(j) Abandonment and decommissioning plan.
Wildlife analysis including a description as to how the
development has been designed to minimize adverse impacts
on wildlife.
(k)
General requirements.
Special Mount Holyoke Range siting restriction. No medium- or
large-scale installations are to be located in the area bounded as
follows: the Towns of Hadley and Amherst to the north; the Town of
Hadley and Route 47 to the west; Route 47, Pearl Street, and Elmer
Brook to the south; and Route 116 (north of Pearl Street) and the
Town of Granby to the east.
(1)
Dimension requirements.
Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, except as
provided elsewhere in Chapter 255, shall comply with the same
dimension requirements required of principal buildings in the
underlying district, except that for medium- and large-scale
installations the following shall apply:
Front, rear and side yard setbacks shall be a minimum 50
feet.
[1]
Access roads or driveways shall be setback at least 25 feet
from side and rear lot lines.
[2]
(a)
(2)
E.
§ 255-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-48
1:269
Where site plan review or a special permit is required,
the Planning Board may impose a greater setback if they
determine that a greater setback is essential to address
the criteria for granting such approval and will not unduly
restrict the installation and operation of the installation.
Exception: Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations shall not be subject to the maximum lot
coverage limitations unless the area under the panels
is paved or made otherwise less pervious for the
installation.
[a]
[3]
Canopy-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall comply
with the same dimension requirements required in the
underlying district for parking lots. However, if such
installations are not to be installed over preexisting parking
lots, the Planning Board may consider them to be principal
structures and require them to meet the corresponding
setback requirements.
(b)
Ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations when
combined with other developments on the parcel are not to
exceed the maximum allowed impervious surface of the zoning
district; except where the Planning Board finds unique
conditions which deem such higher levels of impervious
surface to be appropriate and fulfill the purpose of the Zoning
Bylaw.
(c)
Structures. All structures for ground-mounted and canopymounted
solar photovoltaic installations including all appurtenant
structures (such as, but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage
installations, transformers, and substations) shall be
architecturally compatible with each other.
(3)
Visual impact mitigation. The plan for ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations shall be designed to maximize the
preservation of on-site and abutting natural and developed
features.
In natural (undeveloped) areas, existing vegetation shall be
retained to the greatest extent possible.
(a)
In developed areas, the design of the installation shall consider
and incorporate human-designed landscape features to the
greatest extent, including contextual landscaping and
landscape amenities that complement the physical features of
the site and abutting properties.
(b)
Whenever reasonable, structures should be screened from
view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse
visual impacts and be architecturally compatible with each
other.
(c)
(4)
§ 255-48 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-48
1:270
Vegetation shall be of varieties native to New England and a
mix of deciduous and evergreen species.
(d)
Vegetative screening shall reach a mature form to effectively
screen the installation within five years of installation.
(e)
The mature height of the vegetated screening shall be such
that the installation's structures are not apparent to a person
upon any public road (or on a residential lot situated within
300 feet of the installation's structures) and viewing the
installation from a height of 10 feet.
Exception: The Planning Board may grant an exception
to this provision where topographic conditions of the site
make compliance with this restriction impractical or would
unduly restrict the installation. Where an exception is
made, the Planning Board may establish alternative
vegetative requirements.
[1]
(f)
Planting of the vegetative screening shall be completed prior
to final approval of the photovoltaic installation by the Building
Inspector.
(g)
Design standards.
Projects shall be designed to:
Minimize the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed
trees of 10 inches caliper or larger, the length of removed
stone walls, the area of wetland vegetation displaced, the
extent of stormwater flow increase from the site, soil
erosion, and threat of air and water pollution;
[1]
Maximize pedestrian and vehicular safety both on the site
and entering and exiting the site and on roadways
adjoining the site;
[2]
Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly
accessible locations;
[3]
Minimize visual intrusion by controlling the visibility of
parking, storage, or other outdoor service areas viewed
from public ways or premises residentially used or zoned;
[4]
Minimize glare from headlights and light trespass onto
adjoining residential properties;
[5]
Preclude glare impacts on motorists on adjacent and
nearby roadways;
[6]
Ensure adequate access to each structure for fire and
service equipment and adequate provision for utilities and
stormwater drainage.
[7]
(a)
(5)
§ 255-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-48
1:271
Site lighting. Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall
be consistent with local, state and federal law. All lighting
associated with the facility shall be limited to that required
for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably
shielded from abutting properties. Lighting of the solar
photovoltaic installations shall be directed downward and shall
incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
(b)
Signage. No signage on solar photovoltaic installations is
permitted other than those required to identify voltage and
electrocution hazards as well as the owner, and provide a
twenty-four-hour emergency contact phone number. Solar
photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any
advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the solar photovoltaic installation.
(c)
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the
Planning Board, shall be made to place all utility connections
from the solar photovoltaic installation underground,
depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and
topography of the site and any requirements of the utility
provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections
may be above ground if required by the utility provider.
(d)
Fencing. It is anticipated that solar photovoltaic installations
(especially ground-mounted medium- and large-scale
installations) will be enclosed by fencing. Any fencing installed
for a medium- or large-scale installation shall be designed
to minimize impacts on wildlife movements and aesthetics.
Accordingly, such fencing is to leave a gap of no less than
six inches between the ground and the bottom of the fencing.
Further, such fencing is to be of a color and texture so as to
blend into the background.
(e)
Screening. Medium- and large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installations shall be screened from view from
adjoining and nearby residential properties and from adjoining
roadways. This screening is to be incorporated into the
landscaping plan and should, to the extent appropriate, include
a combination of fencing and vegetation.
(f)
Impact on wildlife. Medium- and large-scale solar photovoltaic
installations shall be designed and constructed, to the extent
reasonable, so as not to have adverse impacts on wildlife
habitats and behavior patterns. Project proponents are to
demonstrate how they have taken this into consideration in
planning their development.
(g)
Safety and environmental standards.
Emergency services. Project proponents shall provide
whatever materials (such as, a copy of the project summary,
(a)
(6)
§ 255-48 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-48
1:272
electrical schematic, and site plan) and contact information are
requested by the Fire Chief and other appropriate authorities.
Project proponent shall cooperate with local emergency
services in developing an emergency response plan.
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of
natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for
the construction, operation and maintenance of the solar
photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable
laws, regulations, and bylaws. Such installations shall not
occur on any slopes greater than 15% in order to minimize
erosion. No more than 50% of the land parcel utilized for solar
photovoltaic installations shall contain land requiring clearing
of forest.
(b)
No topsoil shall be removed from the land parcel under
consideration for solar photovoltaic installations. If earthworks
operations are required, topsoil shall be stockpiled within the
property bounds and protected against erosion until such time
earthwork operations are completed and topsoil can be respread
over parcel. Earthworks shall be planned to limit export
of soil material (non-topsoil) to 1,000 cubic yards per acre
affected by installation. A detailed earthworks estimate is a
required submittal component proving this quantity is
maintained.
(c)
Impact on agricultural and environmentally sensitive land.
Solar photovoltaic installations and agricultural usage of the
properties should be mutually supportive and the solar
photovoltaic installation is to be designed and installed to
reflect this principal. Accordingly, medium- and large-scale
solar photovoltaic installations shall be designed to minimize
impacts to agricultural and environmentally sensitive land and
to be compatible with continued agricultural use of the land
whenever possible. No more than 50% of the total land area
proposed for the solar photovoltaic installation may be
occupied by the solar panels, with the remainder of the land
remaining as open space either in its natural state, developed
as community recreation, agricultural use, or similar state as
approved by the Planning Board.
(d)
Vegetation management. Herbicides, pesticides, or chemical
fertilizers shall not be used to manage vegetation at the
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation. Low-growing
herbaceous ground cover underneath the solar array is
encouraged wherever possible.
Generally, land associated with the ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation shall be covered and grown in natural
vegetation. Ground surface areas beneath solar arrays and
setback areas, to a reasonable extent shall be pervious to
(e)
§ 255-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-48
1:273
maximize on-site infiltration of stormwater. Impervious paving
of areas beneath solar arrays is prohibited. To the greatest
extent possible, a diversity of plant species shall be used, with
preference given to species that are native to New England.
Use of plants identified by the most recent copy of the
"Massachusetts Prohibited Plant List" maintained by the
Massachusetts Department of Agricultural Resources is
prohibited. Herbicides shall be applied only by properly
licensed personnel in conformance with all applicable state
regulations.
Stormwater. The installation shall be designed and maintained
to have no net impact on the preexisting stormwater runoff
either in rate or discharge point.
(f)
The cumulative amount of native trees of a caliper of 10 inches
or more which are to be removed for the installation and
operation of a medium- or large-scale solar photovoltaic
installation shall be replaced by a total amount of such trees
with the minimum planting size of five inches caliper.
(g)
Abandonment and decommissioning plan (medium- and large-scale
solar photovoltaic installations). Medium- and large-scale groundmounted
solar photovoltaic installation which has reached the end
of its useful life or has been abandoned [i.e., when either it fails
to be completed within a commercially reasonable time (such that
power generation can commence), or it fails to operate for an
elapsed time of more than one year without the written consent of
the Planning Board] shall be removed. The owner or operator shall
physically remove the installation within 150 days of abandonment
or the proposed date of decommissioning. The owner or operator
shall notify the Planning Board by certified mail of the proposed
date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
The abandonment and decommissioning plan, at a minimum, shall
include a detailed description of how all of the following will be
addressed:
Physical removal of all structures; equipment, building,
security barriers and transmission lines from the site,
including any materials used to limit vegetation.
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(b)
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Planning Board may allow the owner
or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation.
(c)
(7)
§ 255-48 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-48
1:274
Financial surety for decommissioning. Proponents shall
provide a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond
or other form of surety approved by the Planning Board to
cover the estimated cost of removal in the event the Town must
remove the installation and remediate the landscape, in an
amount and form determined to be reasonable by the Planning
Board. The project proponent shall submit a fully inclusive
detailed itemized cost estimate of the Town's estimated costs
associated with removal and full decommissioning of the
installation and site, prepared by a qualified engineer. The
amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased
removal costs due to inflation at the end of the installation's
useful life. Said estimated cost shall not include or deduct
the value of material recycling. Said surety in its full amount
shall be presented to the Planning Board prior to the
commencement of construction.
(d)
All legal documents required to enable the Town to exercise its
rights and responsibilities under the plan to decommission the
site, enter the property and physically remove the installation.
(e)
Monitoring and maintenance.
Solar photovoltaic installation conditions. Project proponents
shall maintain the installation in good condition. Maintenance
shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural repairs,
and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be
maintained to a level acceptable to the local Fire Chief. The
project proponent shall be responsible for the cost of
maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation.
(a)
Modifications. Any changes to the plans approved by the
Planning Board shall be submitted to the Town Planner/
Planning Director for determination if further Planning Board
review is warranted prior to issuance of the building permit.
If further Planning Board review is deemed warranted, such
further review and approval by the Planning Board shall be
obtained prior to issuance of the building permit.
(b)
Updating. Project proponent shall be responsible for updating
the operations and maintenance plan a) whenever personnel
with responsibilities identified in the plan change and b) no
less than every five years.
(c)
(8)
Outside consultant fees. In addition to the normal filing fee, the
Planning Board can charge the applicant with a fee to hire outside
consultants to assist the Board in administering and reviewing
applications.
(9)
Waivers. The Planning Board may, upon the prior written request
of the applicant, waive any of the requirements of this subsection,
(10)
§ 255-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-48
1:275
§ 255-49. Recreational marijuana. [Added 1-10-2018 STM by Art. 5]
but must state their reasons for doing so in writing as part of their
decision.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide standards for the
placement and operation of facilities and establishments associated
with the cultivation, production, and sale of marijuana and accessory
products by marijuana establishments as permitted in Chapter 255,
Attachment 1, Use Regulations Schedule, that address public safety and
health and minimize impacts on nearby residential uses.
A.
Applicability. This section applies to all specified marijuana
establishments, as permitted in Chapter 255, Attachment 1, Use
Regulations Schedule, proposed to be constructed after the effective
date of this section. This section also pertains to physical modifications
that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these
establishments or related equipment.
B.
Prohibited locations.
The building(s) in which a marijuana establishment are permitted
shall not be located:
Within 300 feet of any building:
Containing another marijuana establishment except that a
marijuana retailer may be located within the same building
as a marijuana product manufacturer which is providing
some or all of the product for the retailer; or
[1]
In which is located a public or private elementary school,
middle school, secondary school, preparatory school,
licensed daycare center, or any other facility in which
children commonly congregate in an organized ongoing
formal basis; or
[2]
Owned by and operated as part of the campus of any
private or public institution of higher learning; or
[3]
[4] Housing a public library; or
[5] Any residential use; or
(a)
Within a building containing residential units, including
transient housing or group housing such as hotels, motels,
lodging houses, or dormitories.
(b)
(1)
The property which is proposed to be permitted for a marijuana
establishment, at the time the application is received by the
Planning Board, shall not be located within 500 feet of a preexisting
public or private school providing education in
kindergarten or any of grades 1 through 12. If the parcel of land
(2)
C.
§ 255-48 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-49
1:276
on which a proposed marijuana establishment is to be located is
developed with one or more buildings occupied by more than one
tenant, then the Planning Board shall interpret "property which to
proposed to be permitted" to shall mean only the portion of the
building or property which is actually proposed to be used by the
marijuana establishment.
Maximum number of marijuana retail establishments. There shall be no
more than three marijuana retailers licensed to operate or operating
in the Town of South Hadley. In the event applications for multiple
retail establishments are submitted which, if approved, would result in
more than three such establishments being located in South Hadley, the
Planning Board shall delay a decision on any application which would
result in more than three such establishments until the appeal period
for the third establishment has lapsed.
D.
Marijuana retailer hours of operation. Marijuana establishments
engaged in the retail sale of marijuana shall be limited in their hours of
operation as follows:
(1) Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Sunday from 10:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
However, the Planning Board may limit the hours more restrictively if the
Board finds that retail establishments in the immediate area engaged in
the sale of off-premises consumed alcohol and/or cigarettes operate more
restrictively than specified above.
(2)
E.
Physical requirements.
All aspects of the use/facility relative to the acquisition, cultivation,
possession, processing, sales, distribution, dispensing, or
administration of marijuana, products containing marijuana,
related supplies, or educational materials must take place at a fixed
location within a fully enclosed building and shall not be visible
from the exterior of the business.
(1)
No outside storage is permitted. This prohibition applies to all
aspects of the product and waste associated with the marijuana
establishment.
(2)
Ventilation. All marijuana establishments shall be ventilated in such
a manner that no:
Pesticides, insecticides or other chemicals or products used
in the cultivation or processing are dispersed into the outside
atmosphere.
(a)
Odor from marijuana cannot be detected by a person with a
normal sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana
business or at any adjoining use or property.
(b)
(3)
F.
§ 255-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-49
1:277
Signage shall conform to § 255-85 of the South Hadley Zoning
Bylaw and requirements of state laws and regulations
governing such facilities.
(c)
Special application requirements. Above and beyond the standard
application requirements for special permits, an application for a use
under this section shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of each owner of the facility/operation;
Copies of all required registrations issued to the applicant by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any of its agencies for the
facility;
(2)
Evidence that the applicant has site control and the right to use the
site for a facility in the form of a deed or valid purchase and sale
agreement, or, in the case of a lease, a notarized statement from
the property owner and a copy of the lease agreement;
(3)
A notarized statement signed by the organization's Chief Executive
Officer and corporate attorney disclosing all of its designated
representatives, including officers and directors, shareholders,
partners, members, managers, directors, officers, or other similarly
situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of the
above are entities rather than persons, the applicant must disclose
the identity of all such responsible individual persons;
(4)
In addition to what is normally required in a site plan and/or special
permit application under Article IX and Article XII of the South
Hadley Zoning Bylaw, respectively, details showing all exterior
proposed security measures for the premises, including lighting,
fencing, gates and alarms, etc., ensuring the safety of employees
and patrons and to protect the premises from theft or other
criminal activity [however, this should not be at the same detail
as the Security Plan to be submitted to the Chief of Police under
Subsection G(7) below].
(5)
A management plan (inclusive of the operations maintenance plan)
as required under the special permit rules and regulations,
including a description of all activities to occur on site, including
all provisions for the delivery of marijuana products to and/or from
the site as well as the disposal of waste material.
Modifications. Any changes to the plans approved by the
Planning Board shall be submitted to the Town Planner/
Planning Director for determination if further Planning Board
review is warranted prior to issuance of the building permit.
If further Planning Board review is deemed warranted, such
further review and approval by the Planning Board shall be
obtained prior to issuance of the building permit.
(a)
(6)
G.
§ 255-49 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-49
1:278
§ 255-50. through § 255-79. (Reserved)
Updating. Project proponent shall be responsible for updating
the operations and maintenance plan a) whenever personnel
with responsibilities identified in the plan change and b) no
less than every five years.
(b)
Demonstration that the facility's security plan has been approved
by the Police Chief. This plan must detail all exterior and interior
proposed security measures for the premises, including but not
limit to: video monitoring and recording, lighting, fencing, and
alarms ensuring the safety of employees and to protect the
premises from theft or other criminal activity. This plan must
provide twenty-four-hour security and monitoring for the facility,
particularly, those portions of the building which are deemed by the
Police Chief to be most vulnerable to unauthorized entry and least
visible from the public ways.
(7)
A waste disposal plan which provides details for disposal of the
waste materials in accordance with applicable local and state laws
and regulations.
(8)
Deferred application review and decision. In the event that Town
Meeting votes to enact a ban on any of the five types of establishments
regulated in part by § 255-49, (craft marijuana cultivator cooperative,
marijuana cultivator, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana
testing facility, and/or marijuana retailer) the sixty-five-day time period
for holding a public hearing under §§ 255-128 and 255-147 of the
Zoning Bylaw shall not commence until such time as the vote on the
ballot question is certified by the Town. Further, the Planning Board
shall not render any decision on an application for such use(s) unless
and until the ballot question vote is certified. If such a ban passes Town
Meeting and a subsequent ballot question vote, the Planning Board
shall deny any application for such an establishment.
H.
§ 255-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-50
1:279

ARTICLE VIII
General Provisions
§ 255-80. Cornices.
Cornices may extend not more than 1 1/2 feet over or into any required
front, side or rear yard.
§ 255-81. Unsafe buildings.
This bylaw shall not be considered as preventing the strengthening or the
restoration to a safe or sanitary condition of any building or wall declared
unsafe or unsanitary by the Building Commissioner.
§ 255-82. Minimum open space.
No lot shall be so reduced in size or area that any required yard, court or
open space will be smaller than is prescribed by this bylaw for the district
in which it is located.
§ 255-83. Visual clearance.
Between the lines of streets intersecting at an angle of less than 135° and
a line joining points on such lines of 10 feet distant from that point of
intersection, no building or structure may be erected and no vegetation
maintained between a height of 2 1/2 feet and a height of eight feet above
the plane through their curb grades.
§ 255-84. Earth removal, extraction, and fill regulations.
Permit required; exemptions.
In any zoning district, removal or addition of sod, loam, clay, gravel,
quarried stone, or kindred materials shall not be undertaken if such
removal or addition results in a change in the contours of the land,
except by an earth removal, excavation, and/or fill permit from the
Building Commissioner.
(1)
Exemptions. The aforementioned permit shall not be required when
the removal, excavation and/or fill activity is incidental to and in
connection with any of the following activities:
Construction of a structure on the premises for which a
building permit has been issued, or incidental to the grading
and development of contiguous property, and provided that
such removal, excavation or addition is limited to the area
within a distance not more than 100 feet from the building or
improvements authorized under said permit.
(a)
Development of site improvements for a subdivision for which
definitive plans have been approved, and endorsed by the
Planning Board.
(b)
(2)
A.
§ 255-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-84
1:281
Classification of activities. Earth removal, excavation, and fill activities
are classified as either:
Major earth removal, excavation, and/or fill activities. These
activities involve the removal, excavation, and/or addition of 5,000
or more cubic yards of material for use on parcels of land other
than the parcel(s) from which the materials were removed or
extracted.
(1)
Other earth removal, excavation, and/or fill activities. These
activities involve the removal, excavation and/or addition of
materials not otherwise classified as major earth removal,
excavation and/or fill activities.
(2)
B.
Planning Board approval required; application requirements.
Major earth removal, excavation, and/or fill activities. Prior to
applying for a permit from the Building Commissioner, the
applicant must apply for and receive a special permit from the
Planning Board. Applications for such a special permit must include
all items required for a special permit application and items
required under this section.
(1)
Other earth removal, excavation, and/or fill activities. Prior to
applying for a permit from the Building Commissioner, the
applicant must receive approval of the plans for removal,
excavation, and fill from the Planning Board. Applications must
include all items required under this section of the Zoning Bylaw.
(2)
Application requirements. Each application for Planning Board
approval shall include the following items:
A map prepared at the expense of the applicant showing the
property boundaries, the existing contours of the land, and
the contours as they are proposed after completion of the
operations. Such map or plan shall be accurately drawn on
reproducible paper or cloth, the contour interval being two
feet, and shall contain complete information to make the
physical characteristics clear.
(a)
(b) Application fee.
(c) Pictures of the existing conditions of the site.
Description of proposed source of fill material to be added to
the site and use of excavated materials.
(d)
An estimate of the cost to restore the site to its proposed
finished condition.
(e)
(f) Timetable for completion of the operations.
(3)
C.
§ 255-84 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-84
1:282
Supplemental application requirements. For major activities, the
following items must also be included in the application:
A detailed cost estimate certified by a qualified engineer to
restore the site to its proposed finished condition.
(a)
Description of the proposed financial security to cover the cost
of restoring the site to its proposed finished condition.
(b)
Documentation of the elevation of the seasonal high water
table.
(c)
(4)
No permit shall be issued until such plan has been filed with
the Planning Board, the approval of said Planning Board recorded
on the plan, and a copy of said approved plan submitted to the
Building Commissioner.
(5)
Limitations on operations. No applicant shall carry on operations above
or below such a grade as may be fixed by the Planning Board without,
on each occasion, obtaining the permission of said board in writing, but
a tolerance of six inches shall be permitted during or at the termination
of operations. Further, operations must be carried out in accordance
with the conditions of the Planning Board approval.
Prohibited area. No major earth removal, excavation, or fill activity
shall be permitted in the area bounded as follows: on the south by
Route 47, Pearl Street, and Route 116; on the east by Route 116
and the Granby Town Line; on the north by the Amherst and Hadley
Town Lines; and on the west by Route 47 and the Hadley Town
Line.
(1)
Finished grade. The finished grade for any major earth removal,
excavation, and fill activity shall be no steeper than a 3:1 slope
unless the Planning Board, based upon adequate engineering
analysis and certification, determines that sufficient precautions
for erosion and runoff are established to ensure the work is
consistent with the purposes of the Zoning Bylaw.
(2)
Depth to water table. No excavation activity shall be nearer than
five feet to the seasonal high water table.
(3)
D.
Extension of time limit. A permit issued for the removal or addition of
materials shall state the time within which work is to be carried on and
finished and the land is brought to the predetermined grade, but the
Building Commissioner, with the approval of the Planning Board, and
without consent of any surety, may extend the permit from time to time.
E.
Surety requirement. The Planning Board may require a bond in a
sufficient penal sum with sufficient surety or sureties conditioned on
the performance of the requirements herein set forth and of the
conditions of the permit.
F.
§ 255-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-85
1:283
§ 255-85. Signs.
Signs in Business and Industrial Districts. Signs pertaining to the
occupant of the premises or to the type of goods sold or services
rendered on the premises are permitted in the Business A-1, Business
A, Business B, Business C, Industrial A, Industrial B, and Industrial
Garden Districts, provided the following requirements are adhered to:
The sign or signs shall be attached parallel to the wall of the
principal building; the aggregate area of such a sign or signs on
any one face of a building shall be less than 10% of the area of such
building face, including openings; and such signs do not extend
above a flat roof or eave line of a pitched roof more than 10% of the
average height of the front elevation of such building. No sign shall
be painted on the wall of any building.
(1)
One freestanding sign is permitted per lot if located at least 30 feet
from an adjoining lot line and 10 feet from the street line and does
not exceed an area of one square foot for each four lineal feet of lot
frontage occupied by the premises, or 60 square feet, whichever is
smaller.
(2)
Signs with any moving or flashing part, all signs of the traveling
light or animated type, and all beacons and flashing devices,
whether a part of, attached to, or apart from a sign, are prohibited.
All illumination of signs must be arranged and shielded so that the
source shall not be visible from a public way or adjacent property.
(3)
Notwithstanding the limitation of Subsection A(2), facilities with
multiple tenants, including separate tenants on freestanding
parcels which were created as a plan for such facility (i.e., shopping
centers, industrial parks, and office parks), are permitted to also
have a single freestanding sign to identify the name and location
of said center or park and list the names of the several businesses
located in said center or park.
This freestanding sign must be located at least 30 feet from
an adjoining lot line and 10 feet from the street line and shall
not exceed an area of one square foot for each four lineal feet
of lot frontage occupied by the premises, or 60 square feet,
whichever is smaller.
(a)
Names of businesses located on individual parcels which were
depicted as individual parcels on the site plan approved by
the Planning Board and subsequently divided from the original
parcel on which the center or park was developed may be
listed on the freestanding sign of the center or park; however,
50% of the area of the center or park sign which is occupied by
the name of the business is to be deducted from the maximum
size of the freestanding sign allowed on the individual parcel
on which the business is located.
(b)
(4)
A.
§ 255-85 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-85
1:284
The space allotted for the name of a business not located on
the parcel on which the sign structure is located may not
exceed 20 square feet.
(c)
Signs in Residence and Agricultural Districts. All signs are prohibited
in Residence and Agricultural Districts, except the following:
(1) Signs for home occupations, as provided in § 255-22 of this bylaw.
A single sign, not more than four square feet in area, located flat
on a building or dwelling in a Residence C District, identifying
the name of the building. Any illumination of such sign shall be
continuous indirect lighting.
(2)
Real estate signs having an area of not more than five square feet
advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which they
are maintained.
(3)
To provide for the identification of public facilities, to convey
activities and events associated with such facilities, and temporary
and emergency messages, one freestanding sign may be permitted
on a parcel occupied by a municipal (Town of South Hadley, South
Hadley Fire District Number One, and/or South Hadley Fire
District Number Two), state, or federal facility. Said sign shall be
located at least 30 feet from an adjoining lot line and 10 feet from
the street line and shall not exceed an area of 0.75 square foot for
each four lineal feet of lot frontage occupied by the premises, or 20
square feet, whichever is smaller. Further, the height of such signs
shall not exceed six feet at any point.
(4)
One residential development sign may be permitted in any zoning
district, provided the development and the sign conform to the
following: [Added 5-9-2018 ATM by Art. 19]
The development consists of no less than 10 residential
dwellings.
(a)
If the development is undertaken in multiple phases, the total
development shall only be permitted to have one residential
development sign.
(b)
The approved access within the development is not a Townaccepted
public way.
(c)
Removal of the sign will be required prior to the access
becoming a Town-accepted right-of-way.
(d)
The sign shall be located on private property and set back at
least 10 feet from any street lot line.
(e)
The maximum surface area of each side of the sign shall be at
the discretion of the Planning Board but shall not exceed 16
square feet.
(f)
(5)
B.
§ 255-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-85
1:285
(g) The sign shall not have more than two sides.
The top of the sign shall not rise more than five feet above the
ground or sidewalk within five feet of the sign.
(h)
The sign must be incorporated into and be an integral part of
the landscaping for the development.
(i)
The materials used for construction of the sign and the design
of the sign are to be reflective of the materials and character
of the development to the extent feasible.
(j)
Political signs. Political signs, including but not limited to signs
advertising or promoting candidates for public office or urging
positions on questions appearing on the ballot of a regular or special
election, are permitted in all districts, in excess of the usual limits, for
a period of 45 calendar days prior to the election and shall be removed
within 10 calendar days following the election.
C.
Traffic control. Traffic control and directional signs by municipal, state
and federal agencies are permitted in all districts.
D.
Directional signs. Directional signs by private nonprofit institutions or
nonprofit organizations shall also be allowed in all districts; provided,
however, that such signs shall be subject to the following limitations:
(1) The maximum size of such signs shall be 300 square inches.
No more than three such signs shall be permitted for any
institution or organization.
(2)
Any such sign erected or installed within the boundaries of a street
must be approved by the Town Engineer in order to ensure that it
does not constitute a safety hazard.
(3)
E.
Temporary signs. A temporary real estate sign, advertising the
availability of the property for sale, may be erected for a period
extending only until such property is sold. Such sign shall not exceed 20
square feet in area and shall be located at least 10 feet from the street
line or on a building if in closer proximity to the street line.
F.
Illumination of signs. No illuminated signs shall be permitted unless
first approved by the Planning Board. Prior to approving an illuminated
sign, the Planning Board must make a determination that the sign will
not be adverse to the character of the surrounding neighborhood or
the community. The Planning Board shall notify, by mail, abutters of
the date, time, and place of the Planning Board meeting at which the
request for an illuminated sign is to be considered.
Exception. Traffic control and directional signs by municipal, state
and federal agencies shall be excepted from this requirement.
(1)
G.
§ 255-85 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-85
1:286
§ 255-86. Off-street parking.
Adverse to surrounding neighborhood or community. Signs which
illuminate more than what is necessary to convey the message or
name being promoted or create glare which may impact motorists
are generally considered to have an adverse impact on the
community. Such adverse impact arises from excessive light
pollution. Therefore, in determining whether to approve the
illumination of a sign, the Planning Board shall:
Consider and minimize the illumination impact of the signage
illumination on the surrounding properties; and
(a)
Only approve internally illuminated signs where only the
lettering or logo of the enterprise or message being promoted
are illuminated; and
(b)
Ensure that the illuminated sign does not illuminate adjoining
or nearby residential properties or pose a danger to motorists
on adjoining or nearby roadways which might arise from glare
from the illumination source; and
(c)
(d) Not approve exposed or illuminated neon signs; and
Require that illumination sources not illuminate the
background or field of a sign except to the extent that the
background or field (due to the shape of the sign area) is
clearly a logo of the company or enterprise being advertised.
(e)
(2)
Findings and purpose. The Town finds that large and highly visible
parking areas represent one of the most objectionable aspects of
commercial development. Such parking lots damage the historic layout
and architectural fabric of traditional settlements, harm the natural
environment and visual character of the community, interfere with
pedestrian safety and accessibility, and reduce the quality of life in
developed areas. However, the Town also recognizes that inadequate
parking can diminish quality of life by creating traffic congestion, safety
hazards, and inconvenience. The Town therefore seeks to balance the
need for adequate parking with the need to minimize harm resulting
from the provision of parking, and to avoid the negative impacts of
excessive parking lot construction.
A.
Minimum parking required for residential uses.
For single-family or two-family dwelling: two spaces per dwelling
unit.
(1)
For multifamily dwelling: 1 1/2 spaces per dwelling unit. This
number may be increased by the Planning Board for dwelling units
with two or more bedrooms.
(2)
B.
§ 255-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-86
1:287
These requirements may be reduced for dwelling units with less
than 1,000 square feet of floor area, senior citizen housing, mixeduse
development, or other appropriate circumstances if the
Planning Board determines that such reductions are warranted.
(3)
Parking spaces in driveways shall count toward the fulfillment of
the minimum parking requirements, provided that they do not
interfere with pedestrian circulation or encroach into the public
right-of-way.
(4)
Parking requirements for nonresidential uses. The number and layout
of parking spaces for nonresidential uses shall be based on the need
to protect public safety and convenience while minimizing harm to the
character of the community and to environmental, historic, and scenic
resources. Since nonresidential uses vary widely in their need for offstreet
parking, parking requirements shall be based on the specific
operational characteristics of the proposed uses. The provisional
parking standards in Subsection C(1) below shall be applied and may
be increased or reduced by the Planning Board according to the criteria
in Subsection C(2) below.
Provisional parking standards.
Retail or personal services uses: four spaces per 1,000 square
feet of enclosed floor space, excluding space used for storage.
(a)
Industrial/Warehouse uses: one space per 1,000 square feet of
enclosed floor space or one space per anticipated employee,
customer, and company vehicle.
(b)
(c) Office uses: three spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor space.
Hotel, motel: one space for each guest room plus one space
for each nonresident employee and one space for every 200
square feet of floor space for meetings and functions.
(d)
Restaurants, theaters, and other places of public assembly: one
space for every three seats.
(e)
Uses not listed above: as appropriate to the circumstances
based upon information submitted by the applicant and
obtained by the Planning Board based upon its knowledge
of the community, conditions in the surrounding area, and
information provided from other sources.
(f)
(1)
Criteria for applying provisional standards. In applying or
modifying the provisional parking standards for any proposed use,
the Planning Board shall consider:
The maximum number of vehicles that would actually be
parked at the use at times of peak usage. Parking spaces shall
be sufficient to satisfy 85% of the anticipated peak demand.
(a)
(2)
C.
§ 255-86 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-86
1:288
The likelihood of people walking, bicycling, or carpooling to
the proposed use shall be taken into consideration.
(b) The size of the structure(s) and the site.
The environmental, scenic, or historic sensitivity of the site
(including applicable limitations on impervious surfaces). In
cases where sufficient area for parking cannot be created on
the site without disturbance to these resource values, the
Planning Board may require a reduction in the size of the
structure so that the available parking will be sufficient.
(c)
(d) The availability of safely usable on-street parking.
The availability of off-site off-street parking within 400 feet that
is open to the public, owned or controlled by the applicant,
or available on a shared-use basis, provided that the applicant
dedicates such off-site land for public parking or demonstrates
a legal right to shared use.
(e)
The requirements for parking for the disabled as prescribed by
the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(f)
Set-aside for future parking. The Planning Board may, as a
condition of reducing the provisional parking standards, require
an applicant to set aside land to meet potential future parking
needs. Such land may remain in its natural state or be attractively
landscaped, but may not be used in a manner that would prevent it
from being developed for parking in the future. Parking by patrons,
customers, or employees on a public or private street or way that is
not along the street frontage of the premises ("spillover parking")
shall be considered evidence of the inadequacy of the off-street
parking provided for both new uses and the conversion or
expansion of existing uses. Such spillover parking shall trigger
the requirement that land set aside for future parking shall be
improved for use as off-street parking. Such requirement shall be
enforced by the Building Commissioner in consultation with the
Town Planner.
(3)
Design, layout, and construction of parking areas for nonresidential and
multifamily residential uses.
Location and screening.
All off-street parking shall be located behind, underneath, or
to the side of the principal building, except as provided in
Subsection D(1)(b) and (c) below. The Planning Board may
modify or waive this requirement on lots that are located in
the Business and Industrial Districts where unusual lot
configurations such as corner lots, narrow lots, or through
lots make compliance with this requirement impractical or
impossible, where parking visible from the road is a
(a)
(1)
D.
§ 255-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-86
1:289
commercial necessity for the business, or where most
surrounding development already has parking in front of
buildings, provided that the applicant mitigates the visual
impacts of such parking areas using appropriate landscaped
buffers. Parking spaces located in a side yard shall, if possible,
be screened from public view. Adjoining parking areas shall be
connected directly to one another or to a service road or alley
wherever feasible to reduce turning movements onto roads.
Wherever feasible due to topographic conditions, parking shall
be located underneath buildings.
Within any district, parking may be located anywhere on the
site if it is screened from public roads and adjoining properties,
or if it is part of a commercial or institutional development
which is not visible from any public road, public recreation
area, public building, or residential property.
(b)
Within the Business A and Business B Districts, a maximum of
one row of on-site parallel, perpendicular, or diagonal parking
may be located in front of the principal building, but not within
the area required for the front setback. If parking spaces are
located in front of the principal building, a minimum of 20 feet
of the front setback area shall be planted with a row of street
trees or an appropriate combination of street trees and shrubs
spaced at intervals sufficient to provide suitable screening.
This tree-planting requirement may be modified or waived
where parking visible from the road is a commercial necessity
for the business. The shrub layer shall not be required within
the South Hadley Falls Overlay District.
(c)
If a parking lot containing 10 or more spaces lies within or
borders a Residential District, a buffer zone at least 30 feet
wide shall be planted with trees or dense vegetation to provide
screening along all boundary lines, unless the adjoining
properties are in nonresidential districts or contain a
nonresidential use.
(d)
Construction of parking areas. Parking areas shall be surfaced
with a suitable durable surface appropriate for the use of the
land, with adequate drainage. Surfacing, grading, and drainage
shall facilitate groundwater recharge by minimizing impervious
pavement and run-off. Overflow or peak period parking surfaces
shall be permeable. Pervious pavement shall be counted only
partially toward the maximum allowable impervious surface
requirements contained in § 255-21. (See definition of "impervious
surface coverage.") Oil traps may be required for larger paved
parking lots. Parking areas shall comply with all applicable
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(2)
Landscaping and lighting. Parking areas shall be landscaped and
lighted in compliance with Article XII.
(3)
§ 255-86 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-86
1:290
§ 255-87. Mobile homes and recreational vehicles.
Mobile homes, house trailers and recreational vehicles are prohibited as
structures for residential use in all zoning districts. Not more than one
mobile home, house trailer or recreational vehicle per family may be kept or
stored on any lot where the principal use of said lot is residential in nature,
and such mobile home, house trailer or recreational vehicle shall not be
used for living quarters.
§ 255-88. Unregistered motor vehicles.
Nonconforming parking lots shall be brought into conformity with
this § 255-86 to the extent practicable whenever a site plan or
special permit application is filed for an expansion or change of
the use. In applying this requirement, the Planning Board may
require reasonable improvements in landscaping, access, drainage,
lighting, and buffers that are proportionate in scope to the impact
of the change in use, provided that such required improvements do
not make the proposed change in use economically infeasible.
(4)
The Planning Board may promulgate rules, regulations, or
guidelines for the dimensions of parking spaces, parking lot aisles,
striping, and other design features internal to parking lots,
consistent with the regulations herein.
(5)
Commercial vehicles in Residence and Agricultural Districts. In
Residence or Agricultural Districts, no commercial vehicle other than
Class 1 commercial vehicles, as defined by the Massachusetts
Department of Transportation, at the DOT website
(http://www.massdot.state.ma.us/highway/TrafficTravelResources/
VehicleClassTypeClassifications.aspx), may be parked on any lot,
except in the case of a farm that is partially exempted from zoning
regulation under MGL c. 40A, § 3.
E.
South Hadley Falls Overlay District. The requirements of this § 255-86
may be waived by the Planning Board based upon a showing that they
are inappropriate or otherwise unreasonable under the provisions of
§ 255-45, South Hadley Falls Overlay District.
F.
The keeping of more than one unregistered vehicle, assembled or
disassembled, except by a person licensed under MGL c. 140, § 59, on
any premises shall not be permitted unless said motor vehicle is stored
in an enclosed building or otherwise out of sight of all abutters and
public ways.
A.
Whoever violates any provisions of this section shall be liable to a
penalty for each day of violation, commencing 10 days following date of
receipt of written notice from the Board of Selectmen. This section shall
not apply to motor vehicles which are designated and used for farming
purposes.
B.
§ 255-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-89
1:291
§ 255-89. Private swimming pools.
Private swimming pools, as defined herein, shall be permitted as accessory
uses to residential dwellings provided that they conform to the following
standards:
§ 255-90. Minimum floor area.
Each dwelling unit in a two-family (new or converted), three-family, or
multifamily structure shall contain a minimum floor area of 420 square feet.
In computing the required minimum floor area, only the area devoted to the
exclusive use of the dwelling unit for living purposes shall be considered.
Storage areas, hallways, breezeways, balconies, foyers, and other areas in
common with other tenants shall not be included.
§ 255-91. Floodplain regulations.
Location. The location on a lot of a pool and its appurtenant structures
shall conform to the minimum front, side and rear yard requirements of
the respective zoning district, but in no case shall the pool be located
nearer than 10 feet to any side or rear lot line.
A.
Operation. The operation and maintenance of all pools shall comply
with the rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
B.
Purposes. These floodplain regulations are intended to provide
standards for the use of those lands deemed subject to seasonal or
periodic flooding, and are enacted for the following purposes:
To eliminate potential dangers to the health and safety of occupants
of said lands, or of the public generally;
(1)
To prevent loss and damage to property, and relieve the burden
from the public of costs resulting from the unwise use of said lands;
and
(2)
To retain the natural storage capacity of the watershed, and assure
the continuation of the natural flow pattern of watercourses within
the Town, in order to avoid encroachment on the floodplain which
would increase the extent and severity of flooding up- and
downstream.
(3)
A.
Floodplain District.
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district.
The Floodplain District includes all special flood hazard areas
designated as Zone A, A1-30 on the South Hadley Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRM), and all areas within the limits of the onehundred-
year flood boundary indicated on the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map, said maps dated August 15, 1979, having been
prepared by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) and having been placed on file with the Town
(1)
B.
§ 255-89 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-91
1:292
Clerk, Planning Board and Building Commissioner. These maps, as
well as the accompanying South Hadley Flood Insurance Study, are
incorporated herein by reference.
The above-described Floodplain District is hereinafter also referred
to as the "floodplain." The floodway is hereby defined to include:
a) the area shown as within the floodway on the above-referenced
maps, and b) the area within the floodplain which lies 10 feet or
more below the elevation of the floodplain limits. The boundaries
of the floodway shall be determined by the limits of the more
extensive of the aforesaid areas.
(2)
Within Zone A, where the base flood elevation is not provided
on the FIRM, the applicant for any building permit shall obtain
any existing base flood elevation data and it shall be reviewed
by the Building Commissioner for its reasonable utilization toward
meeting the elevation or floodproofing requirements, as
appropriate, of this section and of the State Building Code.
(3)
Permitted uses.
Within the floodplain but outside of the floodway, all uses as
permitted in the applicable zoning district are allowed, provided
that the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, of any building
or structure is constructed at an elevation above the elevation of
the floodplain limits as defined in the above-referenced maps.
(1)
Within the floodway, only uses not involving a building, such as
farming, forest management, nurseries, conservation areas, parks,
playgrounds, boat landing ramps, public utility wires and pipe
lines, and vehicular parking areas are permitted. Open storage of
materials or equipment subject to flotation or washing away, such
as lumber storage, is not a permitted use nor is the storage of
inflammable liquids such as petroleum.
(2)
The addition or filling of soils, gravel, rocks, waste materials or
other substances to raise the elevation or contours of land in the
floodway is prohibited.
(3)
C.
Exceptions. The Planning Board, acting as the special permit granting
authority, may grant a special permit for the construction of
nonresidential structures or buildings in the floodplain but not in the
floodway, provided that the following conditions are satisfied:
The building or structure is a permitted use in the applicable
zoning district; and
(1)
Such building or structure shall be designed and constructed to
meet the structural design requirements for floodproofing as
specified in the Massachusetts State Building Code, as amended,
up to an elevation not less than two feet above the elevation of
the floodplain limits. Working plans and specifications bearing the
(2)
D.
§ 255-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-91
1:293
seal of a registered architect or engineer shall be submitted to the
Planning Board and the Building Commissioner to verify that the
proposed construction will withstand flood conditions as set forth
in said State Building Code.
The Planning Board may attach conditions to such special permit
to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the premises,
to prevent loss and damage to the property, and to ensure that
construction and improvements on the land will not result in flood
channel impoundments creating hazardous conditions for those
properties upstream from that of the applicant.
(3)
Floodway and base flood elevation data.
Floodway data. In Zone A and Zones A1-30, along watercourses
that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best
available federal, state, local, or other floodway data shall be used
to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(1)
Base flood elevation data. Within unnumbered A Zones, applicants
proposing developments (including but not limited to subdivisions)
involving more than 50 lots or five acres (whichever is the lesser)
must provide base flood elevation data.
(2)
E.
Notification of watercourse alteration. Any person intending to alter or
relocate a watercourse in a riverine situation must notify the following:
(1) Adjacent towns and cities.
The National Flood Insurance Program State Coordinator with the
Massachusetts Office of Water Resources.
(2)
The National Flood Insurance Program Specialist with the Federal
Emergency Management Agency for Region I.
(3)
F.
Compliance with other regulations.
All development and use of land in the Floodplain District,
including structural and nonstructural activities, whether
permitted by right, special permit or site plan review (noted as Y,
SP, SPR respectively in the Table of Use Regulations included as
an attachment to this chapter) must be in compliance with MGL c.
131, § 40 and with other state and local regulations, including, but
not limited to, the following:
Applicable section(s) of the Massachusetts State Building Code
which addresses floodplain and coastal high-hazard areas;
(a)
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) regulations
regarding:
(b)
(1)
G.
§ 255-91 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-91
1:294
§ 255-92. Solar access.
[1] Wetlands protection.
[2] Inland wetlands protection.
[3] Subsurface disposal of sanitary sewage.
Variances granted by the Town of South Hadley under MGL c. 40A
or the Town's Zoning Bylaw do not convey a grant of a variance
from state regulations. Accordingly, any variances from the
provisions and requirements of the state regulations referenced in
Subsection G(1)(a) or (b) above may only be granted in accordance
with the required variance procedures of the applicable state
regulations.
(2)
Supplemental requirements and restrictions.
In Zones A1-30, along watercourses that have a regulatory
floodway designated on the South Hadley FIRM, encroachments
are prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would result in
any increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(1)
All preliminary and definitive subdivision plan and site plan
proposals must be designed, and are to be reviewed, to assure that:
(a) Development and use proposals minimize flood damage; and
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(b)
Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposures to flood
hazards.
(c)
(2)
H.
Purpose. In view of the existing shortage of conventional energy
sources, it has been determined to be in the public interest to
encourage the use of solar energy for heating and cooling of buildings
and providing hot water for use in buildings or swimming pools. The use
of solar collectors for this purpose requires adequate access to sunlight
by each lot without obstruction by adjacent structures. It is the intent
of this section to encourage the use of solar collectors by protecting
access to sunlight in a manner consistent with the other purposes of
this bylaw.
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SOLAR COLLECTOR — A device, or combination of devices, structure,
or part of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into
thermal, chemical or electrical energy and that contributes significantly
to a structure's energy supply.
B.
§ 255-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-92
1:295
§ 255-93. Wind energy conversion systems.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffuse, and reflected)
received from the sun.
SOLAR SKYSPACE — The space between a solar energy collector and
the sun which must be free of obstructions that shade the collector to
an extent which precludes its cost-effective operation.
Permitted use. The use of solar energy collectors for the purpose of
providing energy for heating and/or cooling is a permitted use within
all zoning districts, whether as a part of a structure or incidental to a
structure or group of structures in the nearby vicinity. No guarantee
is hereby given that the use of solar collectors is economically or
technically feasible on all property within the Town.
C.
Protection of solar collectors' access to light. Skyspace easements
across contiguous or nearby lots, tracts, or land may be created to
establish a window or exposure to the sun so as to protect an existing
or intended solar collector's exposure to the sun from obstruction by
buildings or trees.
Solar skyspace easements may be purchased, reserved, granted
or otherwise obtained. Adverse possession cannot create such an
estate.
(1)
A solar skyspace easement may, at the discretion of the easement
owner, be recorded and filed with the Building Commissioner.
(2)
D.
Variances.
The inability of a property owner to site a structure within the
confines of the prevailing lot dimensions for the purpose of
obtaining unimpaired solar access may constitute a hardship under
the provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 10.
(1)
Variances may be granted by the Board of Appeals from
dimensional restrictions such as height, setback, and lot density
where such variances are necessary to permit unimpaired access
to the sun during hours of 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. so long as
such variances do not interfere with an existing solar collector
to any degree or preclude the construction of a solar collector
on northerly property within the reasonable vicinity and are not
otherwise injurious to adjacent property.
(2)
E.
Definition. A wind energy conversion system (WECS) is any device
(such as a wind charger, wind turbine, or windmill) that converts wind
power to another form of energy such as electricity or heat.
A.
Special permits. The construction of a wind energy conversion system
in excess of the height permitted by right in any district shall require a
special permit from the Planning Board. In addition to the procedures
and standards for special permits provided in Article IX of this bylaw,
B.
§ 255-92 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-93
1:296
§ 255-94. Temporary shelter.
Upon application to the Board of Selectmen, an owner of real estate located
within the Town of South Hadley may seek permission to be allowed to
reside with his or her family in a temporary shelter, which shall include
but not be limited to a mobile home, on said real estate, which proposed
habitation is necessitated by a disaster rendering his/her residence on
said property unfit for human habitation. Similarly, a tenant may request
such permission, provided that he or she has obtained written consent
from the owner. If the Board of Selectmen grants such permission, it shall
not exceed six months in duration from the date of a permit. Application
may be made to the Board of Selectmen for an extension of said sixmonth
permit by an individual originally granted a permit for a period not
exceeding an additional six months. In considering the granting of any such
extension(s), the Board of Selectmen shall determine if the restoration and/
or reconstruction of said residence on said premises has proceeded in a
diligent manner. It is not the intent of this provision that individuals shall
have the right to reside within a temporary shelter in conflict with other
provisions of the bylaw, but only under the circumstances outlined in this
section.
§ 255-95. through § 255-126. (Reserved)
the following additional provisions shall apply to special permits for
wind energy conversion systems:
Special permit applicants shall file technical performance and
safety data obtained from an appropriate testing facility that
illustrate sufficient safety levels in the operation of the system. The
Planning Board shall issue a special permit only upon certification
by the Town Engineer that the proposed project meets acceptable
standards of safety and durability.
(1)
The WECS shall be set back from any property line at least one foot
for every foot of the structure's height.
(2)
A fence of at least six feet in height with a locking portal shall
surround any WECS and the climbing apparatus shall stop at least
12 feet short of the ground so as to reduce the potential climbing
hazards.
(3)
If it is determined by the Town Engineer that a WECS facility
is causing interference to television or radio reception, the Town
reserves the right to rescind the applicable special permit and to
cause such facility to cease operation.
(4)
§ 255-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-95
1:297

ARTICLE IX
Special Permits
§ 255-127. Authority.
The Planning Board is hereby declared special permit granting authority,
and is authorized to hear and decide upon applications for special permits
in accordance with the law of the commonwealth and the provisions of
this bylaw. The special permit granting authority (hereinafter "SPGA") shall
hear and approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or disapprove
all applications for special permits. No special permit shall be authorized
unless specific provision for such special permit is made in this bylaw.
§ 255-128. Application procedure.44
Applications.
Applications for special permits shall be filed with the Planning
Board, on forms provided for this purpose. Applicants for special
permits shall file a copy of said completed form with the Town
Clerk.
(1)
The size, form, contents and style of plans and specifications
required as part of an application for a special permit are contained
in the rules and regulations of the SPGA, a copy of which is on file
in the Town Clerk's office.
(2)
The procedure for the submission of special permits is prescribed
in the rules and regulations of the SPGA, a copy of which is on file
in the Town Clerk's office.
(3)
All plans and documents required by this bylaw shall be considered
integral parts of an application. Applications shall be subject to
such rules and regulations relating to scale, dimensions, legend,
form, fees and other information as may from time to time be
promulgated by the SPGA. The SPGA may require additional
information in order to review an application adequately and make
a decision.
(4)
Applications for special permits shall also comply with the
submission requirements and approval criteria for site plan review
unless otherwise specified in this bylaw, and no separate site plan
approval application or approval process shall be required. Where
an applicant is applying for a special permit in which no site
alterations are involved, no site plan submission shall be required
and the site plan approval criteria shall not apply.
(5)
A.
B. Notification.
44.Editor's Note: See Appendix E, Application and Rules and Regulations for Special Permits,
included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-128
1:299
Following the filing of an application, and before taking any action
on the proposed special permit, the SPGA shall hold a public
hearing on the application within 65 calendar days. Notice of the
time and place of such public hearing, of the subject matter,
sufficient for identification, and of the place where applications,
texts and maps thereof may be inspected shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in South Hadley once in each of
two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than 14
calendar days before the day of the hearing, and such notice shall
be posted in the Town Hall for a period of not less than 14 days
before the day of said hearing. Notification of such public hearing
shall be mailed to all parties in interest as provided in Article XI of
this bylaw.
(1)
Within 21 calendar days following the filing of an application, and
before the public hearing, the SPGA may hold a public forum on an
application for a special permit. Notice of said public forum shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation not less than seven
days prior to the forum.
(2)
The SPGA may require that the applicant or his representative(s)
be present at such public forum as a condition of approval of the
special permit.
(3)
Hearings. Public hearings on applications for special permits shall be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of Article XI of this bylaw.
C.
Decisions. Within 90 calendar days following a public hearing, the
SPGA shall decide to approve, approve with modifications or conditions,
or disapprove an application for a special permit. The SPGA shall
inform, in writing, the applicant, the Building Commissioner, the Town
Clerk, and the Board of Selectmen of its decision and its reasons
therefor.
D.
Building or occupancy permits. Only after a special permit has been
approved by the SPGA, and the appeal period specified in § 255-131 has
elapsed, and the decision of the SPGA has been recorded in the Registry
of Deeds, may the Building Commissioner issue a building or occupancy
permit. Any such building or occupancy permit must conform to all
conditions or modifications attached to said special permit by the SPGA.
E.
Vote. Approval of a special permit application, or approval with
modifications or conditions, shall require an affirmative vote of at least
four of five members of the Planning Board.
Associate member appointment and vote. Pursuant to Chapter 7,
Article I, § 7-17, of the General Bylaws of the Town of South Hadley
and MGL c. 40A, § 9, there is to be appointed an associate member
to the Planning Board. The Selectboard and the Planning Board
shall jointly appoint this associate member for a three-year term.
In the event that a regular member of the Planning Board is unable
to participate in the voting on a special permit application, the
(1)
F.
§ 255-128 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-128
1:300
§ 255-129. Standards for special permits.
associate member may so vote on the application, provided that the
associate member has attended all of the relevant public hearings
and meetings on the application. The vote of the associate member
shall be considered as though a regular member of the Planning
Board.
Expiration of permit. A special permit secured under the provisions of
this section by vote of the SPGA shall expire if the work or change
involved is not commenced within one year of the date on which the
special permit is authorized, and if the work or change is not
substantially completed within two years.
G.
Eligible permittees. Applications for a special permit may be made by
a person or corporate entity and, if approved, shall be granted to said
person or entity. No special permit approved by the SPGA in accordance
with this section may be transferred or conveyed to any other person or
entity other than the original grantee.
H.
Except in the case of a special permit for changing a nonconforming
use or structure, which is governed by § 255-7B, the SPGA must make
written findings on the following mandatory standards, requiring that a
proposed use will:
Comply with all applicable land use district, overlay district, and
other specific requirements of this and other bylaws and
regulations, and be consistent with the purpose and intent of this
bylaw and of the land use district in which it is located;
(1)
Be suitable to the surrounding neighborhood and the "Land Use
Area" in which it is located. Land Use Areas are identified and
described in the section of South Hadley's Master Plan entitled
"Land Use Area Vision Statements" (pages 1-10 through 1-19).
In making this determination, the Planning Board shall take into
consideration any guidance provided by the land use goals
articulated in South Hadley's Master Plan, goals articulated in
South Hadley's open space and recreation plan, and input from
relevant boards, Town officials, and the public;
(2)
Be compatible with existing uses and uses allowed by right in the
neighborhood, Land Use Area, and zoning district;
(3)
Be compatible with the existing character of the neighborhood
and Land Use Area, and/or zoning district. "Character" shall be
understood to include prevalent patterns of: site design; setbacks
from property lines; amount and location of parking; amount, type,
location and quality of open spaces and landscaped areas; amount,
type, and location of impervious surfaces; distances and
relationships between buildings; density of building(s) relative to
land area; building massing; architectural style and detailing;
(4)
A.
§ 255-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-129
1:301
materials; buffering from adjacent uses; traffic volume and timing;
noise; odors; and light.
Be suitable for the property on which it is proposed, considering
the property's, scenic, cultural and historic significance, and its
ability to be buffered or screened from neighboring properties and
public roads.
(5)
(6) Provide safe access for fire, police, and other emergency vehicles.
Provide adequate water, drainage and waste disposal systems
without causing significant harm to any natural water system or
overloading any public water, drainage, or sewer system, or any
other municipal facility.
(7)
Not cause significant traffic congestion, impair pedestrian or
bicycle safety, or overload existing roads, sidewalks and trails,
considering their current width, surfacing, and condition, and any
improvements proposed to be made to them by the applicant.
(8)
Not result in excessive air, water, noise, or light pollution, or create
any other public or private nuisance;
(9)
Not degrade the scenic, rural, or historic character of the Town
with structures or other lot features which are deemed visually
objectionable in light of prevailing community as reflected in the
goals articulated in South Hadley's Master Plan;
(10)
Be consistent with the South Hadley Master Plan, provided that the
Comprehensive Plan provides legally sufficient guidance and that
the applicable provision of the Master Plan is not inconsistent with
any specific provision of this bylaw;
(11)
(12)Comply with applicable criteria for site plans under § 255-148.
In addition, the SPGA may include in its written findings, where
applicable, consideration of any or all of the following criteria to be
satisfied by the proposed use, building or structure:
For projects involving the removal of existing housing, not
adversely affect the availability of affordable housing in the Town;
(1)
Not have an overall off-site impact that is significantly greater than
the overall off-site impact that would be caused by full development
of the property with uses permitted by right, considering relevant
environmental, social, visual, and economic impacts;
(2)
The adequacy and configuration of off-street parking and loading
areas, including their nuisance impact on adjoining properties and
on properties generally in the district;
(3)
Harmony of signs and exterior lighting, if any, with surrounding
properties;
(4)
B.
§ 255-129 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-129
1:302
§ 255-130. Conditions attached to special permits.
§ 255-131. Appeal period.
No special permit, or any extension, modification or renewal thereof, shall
take effect until a copy of the decision bearing the certification of the Town
Clerk that 20 days have elapsed and no appeal has been filed, or that if
such appeal has been filed, that it has been dismissed or denied, is recorded
in the Hampshire County Registry of Deeds in the grantor index under
the name of the owner of record or is recorded and noted on the owner's
certificate of title.
The location of the site, and proposed buildings or structures
thereon, with respect to floodplains and floodways of rivers or
streams;
(5)
The absence of any other characteristic of the proposed use that
will be hazardous, harmful, offensive or will otherwise adversely
affect the environment or the value of the neighborhood or the
community; or
(6)
Provisions for energy conservation, for the use of renewable energy
sources, and for protection of solar access.
(7)
Specifications. Upon consideration of the standards and/or criteria
listed above, the SPGA may attach such conditions or modifications
to a special permit, in addition to those required elsewhere in this
bylaw, that it finds necessary to further the purposes of this bylaw.
Violation of any of these conditions or modifications shall be a violation
of this bylaw. Such conditions or modifications may include, but are not
limited to, specifications for: type of construction, increased setbacks
and yards, landscaping and screens or buffers, operational controls,
sureties, deed restrictions, restrictive covenants, locations of parking
and signs; or any other conditions necessary to fulfill the purposes of
this bylaw.
A.
Submission of information. In order to secure information upon which
to base its determination, the SPGA may require the applicant to
furnish, in addition to the information required for an application for
a special permit, such further information as it deems necessary to
establish its findings.
B.
Performance guarantee. A performance guarantee may be required
prior to and as a condition of the special permit granting authority's
approval of the special permit.
C.
Special municipal account: the applicant has paid the special municipal
account review fee as determined by the Board.
D.
§ 255-129 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-132
1:303
§ 255-132. Assessment of costs.
Costs of notice of the public hearing, and the fee for recording or
registering a special permit with the Registry of Deeds, shall be paid by the
applicant.
§ 255-133. Repetitive petitions.
No petition or application for a special permit under this article which has
been unfavorably acted upon by the SPGA shall be considered on its merits
by said SPGA within two years after the date of such unfavorable action,
except with the consent of all members of the Planning Board.
§ 255-132 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-133
1:304
ARTICLE X
Board of Appeals
§ 255-134. Appointment.
The Board of Selectmen shall, within 30 days after the adoption of this
bylaw and thereafter as terms expire or vacancies occur, make
appointments to a Board of Appeals as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 12, as
amended, having all the powers and duties as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 14.
Said powers shall include the authority:
§ 255-135. Membership.
The Board of Appeals shall consist of three members appointed for terms
of such length and so arranged that the term of one appointee shall expire
each year. There shall also be appointed two associate members for a term
of three years, so that in case of vacancy, inability to act, or interest on
the part of a member of said Board, the Board member's place may be
taken temporarily by the associate member. Said Board shall elect annually
a Chairman from its own members.
§ 255-136. Right of appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the Building Commissioner to issue
a permit or license on the grounds of noncompliance with this bylaw or any
person aggrieved by a decision of the Building Commissioner may appeal
to the Board of Appeals as provided in Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts
General Laws and all amendments thereto.
§ 255-137. Removal of member.
§ 255-138. Repetitive petitions.
No petition or appeal to the Board of Appeals under this article which has
been unfavorably acted upon by said Board shall be considered on its merits
by said Board within two years after the date of such unfavorable action,
except with the consent of all members of the Board of Appeals.
A. To hear and decide appeals in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 8;
To hear and decide petitions for variances from the dimensional
requirements set forth in this bylaw, under the provisions of MGL c.
40A, § 10.
B.
Any member of the Board of Appeals may be removed for cause by the
appointing authority on written charges and after a public hearing.
A.
Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as in
the case of original appointments. In case of a vacancy, inability to act
or interest on the part of a member of the Board, the Board member's
place shall be taken by the associate member.
B.
§ 255-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-138
1:305

ARTICLE XI
Administration
§ 255-139. Public hearings.
§ 255-140. Notification of decisions.
Upon the granting of a variance or special permit, or any extension,
modification or renewal thereof, the permit granting authority or special
permit granting authority shall issue to the owner and to the applicant if
other than the owner a copy of its decision, certified by said permit granting
In all cases where a public hearing is required under the provisions
of the MGL c. 40A, §§ 1 through 17, inclusive, required notice shall
be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in South
Hadley once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be
not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing, and by posting such
notice in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for a period of not less
than 14 days before the day of such hearing. In all cases where notice
to parties in interest or other boards or agencies is required, notice
shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid. "Parties in interest" as used in
this bylaw shall mean the petitioner, abutters, owners of land directly
opposite on any public or private way, and abutters to the abutters
within 300 feet of the property lines of the petitioner as they appear
on the most recent applicable tax lists, notwithstanding that the land
of any such owner is located in another city or town, and the Planning
Board of every city and town abutting South Hadley. The Assessors
maintaining any applicable tax list shall certify to the permit granting
authority or special permit granting authority the names and addresses
of parties in interest and such certification shall be conclusive for all
purposes. The permit granting authority or special permit granting
authority may accept a waiver of notice from or an affidavit of actual
notice to any party in interest or, in his stead, any successor owner
of record who may not have received a notice by mail, and may order
special notice to any such person, giving not less than five additional
days nor more than 10 additional days to reply.
A.
Publications and notices required by this section shall contain the name
of the petitioner, a description of the area or premises, street address,
if any, or other adequate identification of the location of the area or
premises which is the subject of the petition, the date and place of the
public hearing, the subject matter of the hearing, and the nature of
action or relief requested, if any. No such hearing shall be held on any
day on which a state or municipal election, caucus or primary is held in
South Hadley.
B.
At a public hearing, all persons shall abide by the order of the
Chairman. At any hearing, a party may be represented by an agent or
attorney. Hearings shall not be continued to other times except for good
cause. Questions may be asked through the Chair.
C.
§ 255-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-140
1:307
authority or special permit granting authority, containing the name and
address of the owner, identifying the land affected, setting forth compliance
with the statutory requirements for the issuance of such variance, permit
or special permit and certifying that copies of the decision and all plans
referred to in the decision have been filed with the Planning Board and
Town Clerk. No variance, permit or special permit, or any extension,
modification or renewal thereof, shall take effect until a copy of the decision
bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that 20 days have elapsed and
no appeal has been filed or that, if such appeal has been filed, it has been
dismissed or denied, is recorded in the Registry of Deeds for Hampshire
County and indexed in the grantor index under the name of the owner of
record or is recorded and noted on the owner's certificate of title. The fee
for recording or registering shall be paid by the applicant.
§ 255-141. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 255-142. Filing of plot plan.
Unless otherwise ordered by the Building Commissioner, all applications
for building permits under the provisions of the Building Code of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts shall be accompanied by plans in
duplicate. Such plans shall be drawn to scale, shall show the actual
dimensions, radii, and angles of the lot to be built on, the exact size and
location on the lot of the main building and accessory buildings to be
erected and such other information as may be necessary to determine
and provide for the enforcement of this bylaw, as amended. One copy of
plans filed by the applicant shall be returned to him when approved by the
Building Commissioner.
The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of this
bylaw as it may be amended. He shall refuse to grant a permit for the
construction, addition, alteration, extension or change of use of any
building, structure or premises if such proposed construction or change
would be in violation of the provisions of this bylaw, as amended, or
where any required approval has not been obtained (see Article V).
State and Town officers shall refuse any permit or license for a new use
of a building, structure or land, which use would be in violation of any
such bylaw or amendment thereof.
A.
Any person violating any provisions of this Zoning Bylaw, any of the
conditions or modifications under which a permit or special permit is
issued, or any decision rendered by the Board of Appeals shall be fined
$300 for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
B.
In addition to any other available method of enforcement, violations of
these bylaws may be enforced, in the manner provided in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, by the Building Commissioner, Zoning Enforcement Officer or
the Bylaw Enforcement Officer.
C.
§ 255-140 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-143
1:308
§ 255-143. Certificates of occupancy.
No land changed in occupancy or use, and no building or structure
hereafter erected or altered, shall be occupied or used, in whole or
in part, for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy is issued by
the Building Commissioner stating that the building, structure or use
complies with the provisions of this bylaw. No such certificate shall be
issued unless the building or structure and its uses, as well as the uses
of all the premises, are in conformity with the provisions of this bylaw.
A.
Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or altered.
Change in use of an existing building or structure or premises to a
different use.
(2)
(3) Any change in use of a nonconforming use.
B.
Upon completion of any building or structure and prior to the use of any
such building, structure or premises, a certificate of occupancy shall
be applied for on a form furnished by the Building Commissioner. Such
application shall be acted upon within 10 days after the filing thereof.
Such application shall be accompanied by a certificate of a surveyor
which shall state that the building or addition, as completed, complies
with the building permit issued therefor.
C.
§ 255-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-143
1:309

ARTICLE XII
Site Plan Review
§ 255-144. Purpose.
The purpose of site plan review is to ensure that new development is
designed in a manner that protects the health, safety, convenience and
general welfare of residents of the Town by ensuring that the proposed
development of specific sites complies with all applicable bylaws and
regulations, fulfills any applicable site design guidance provided by the
South Hadley Master Plan and applicable design guidelines adopted by the
Planning Board, preserves or enhances the unique character and visual
qualities of the Town, including, where appropriate, historic character, rural
character, natural areas, environmental and natural resources, and scenic
vistas, and promotes sustainable design and development that supports
long-term economic vitality and ecological integrity.
§ 255-145. Projects requiring site plan review.
Projects requiring site plan review:
(1) The construction or exterior expansion of commercial structures;
(2) The construction or exterior expansion of industrial structures;
The expansion of any parking lot by 10 or more parking spaces
or conversion of any use resulting in the addition of 10 or more
required parking spaces;
(3)
The construction or exterior expansion of any educational
institution or religious institution;
(4)
Any other use specified in the Use Regulations Schedule included
as an attachment to this chapter which indicates that site plan
review is required, unless the use is locating in an existing
structure and no additions to the structure are to be undertaken
and the Town Planner determines no additional parking will be
required to conform to the parking requirements outlined in Article
VIII of the Zoning Bylaw (§ 255-86). Where a use is allowed with
only site plan review and no special permit is required, the use
shall be approved if it satisfies the criteria in this Article XII.
(5)
Any use that requires a special permit as specified in the Use
Regulations Schedule, in which case a single review and approval
process shall be conducted, as provided in §§ 255-128A and
255-147C.
(6)
A.
No special permit or building permit shall be applied for or issued
for any of the above uses unless a site plan has been endorsed by
the Planning Board, after consultation with other boards, including but
not limited to the following: Building Commissioner, Board of Health,
Electric Light Department, Water Department, Conservation
B.
§ 255-144 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-145
1:311
§ 255-146. Application; fee.
Each application for site plan review shall be submitted to the Planning
Board on the appropriate form. The Planning Board shall adopt rules and
regulations setting forth the application requirements. As part of the
Planning Board's fee schedule, the Board shall require an application fee
with each submission sufficient to cover any expenses connected with the
public hearing and review of plans. A special municipal account under MGL
c. 44, § 53G may be required as determined by the Planning Board.
§ 255-147. Procedures for review.45
Commission, DPW Superintendent, Fire Department, Tree Warden and
Police Department.
Site plan review for any use exempt from zoning under MGL c. 40A is
for the purpose of ensuring compliance with reasonable regulations as
related to parking, open spaces, building height, and building setbacks
requirements as provided for in MGL c. 40A.
C.
Waiver permitted. The Planning Board may waive any and all
requirements of site plan review/approval for the following:
(1) New construction under 1,000 square feet; and
Exterior expansions, provided that the expansion is less than 25%
of the existing floor area of the structure. Where the structure is
part of a complex consisting of multiple buildings functioning as a
single facility, the sum of the total square footage of all structures
comprising the complex may be used to determine the threshold
for such a waiver.
(2)
D.
Finding required. Prior to granting any waiver of site plan review/
approval, the Planning Board must make a finding that the Board
determines the proposed development will have a de-minimis impact
relative to the criteria set forth in § 255-148.
E.
The Planning Board shall adopt rules and regulations setting forth
the application processing procedures. These procedures shall provide
for a reasonable and timely review of the application, including
advertising, notice and holding of a public hearing within 65 days of the
receipt of an application and a final decision within 90 days following
the public hearing.
A.
The Planning Board may make provisions in its rules and regulations
for "minor site plan review" for projects which would not qualify for
a waiver under § 255-145 of this Zoning Bylaw. Such provisions shall
allow approval of minor site plan review projects without holding a
B.
45.Editor's Note: See Appendix B, Planning Board Rules and Regulations for Site Plan
Review, included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 255-145 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-147
1:312
§ 255-148. Review criteria.
public hearing, provided the Board makes findings that the project
conforms to the site plan review criteria within this Zoning Bylaw.
If the proposed development requires a special permit, then the
requirements of MGL c. 40A, § 9 take precedence over this section, and
any required public hearing for site plan review shall be held jointly
with the special permit public hearing.
C.
For the purpose of securing the performance of all proposed work,
including landscaping and off-site improvements, the Board may, in
its sole discretion, require any of the following: a performance bond,
deposit of money, bank passbook, or letter of credit in an amount
determined by the Board to be sufficient to cover the cost of all or any
part of improvements required.
D.
The Planning Board shall review the site plan and supporting data,
taking into consideration whether the proposed site plan reasonably
fulfills the following objectives (As used in this § 255-148, the word
"shall" is mandatory and the words "should" and "may" are
recommended but optional.):
Compliance with all requirements of this bylaw, all other applicable
regulations and bylaws, and consistency with the South Hadley
Master Plan.
(1)
Integration of the site into the existing terrain, surrounding
landscape and built environment so as to minimize disruptions to
natural processes, existing land forms, architectural character, and
significant vistas.
(2)
Site design that, to the extent feasible:
Avoids wetlands, wetland buffers, rivers, river resource areas,
vernal pools, sensitive habitats, steep slopes, floodplains, and
hilltops;
(a)
Minimizes obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible
locations;
(b)
Preserves unique natural, scenic, cultural, or historical
features;
(c)
Minimizes tree, vegetation and soil removal and grade
changes;
(d)
Provides open space with a scale and character that is
appropriate to the surrounding area; and
(e)
Screens objectionable features from neighboring properties
and roadways.
(f)
(3)
A.
§ 255-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-148
1:313
If the proposal requires a special permit, it must also conform to
the special permit requirements in Article IX of this bylaw.
(4)
Structures shall be compatible with the character and scale of
structures in the neighborhood and zoning district.
Proposed structures shall be compatible in character and scale
through the use of appropriate massing, roof and wall lines,
facade proportions and detailing, fenestration, ornamentation,
and other architectural techniques.
(a)
A proposed building or buildings shall relate harmoniously to
neighboring buildings and each other with adequate light, and
air circulation and separation between buildings.
(b)
Where appropriate, buildings shall be arranged so as to define
outdoor spaces, including streets and plazas.
(c)
The Planning Board may consider whether the location, size,
and style of entrances are compatible with the neighborhood's
character.
(d)
Buildings shall be designed to avoid large expanses of
undifferentiated facades, and long, plain wall sections.
(e)
The Planning Board shall consider whether fenestration is
consistent with the neighborhood's and/or Town's character.
The Planning Board may consider window type (double-hung,
casement, etc.), alignment, proportions, percent of glazing,
and proportion to facade, but may not regulate building
materials.
(f)
Electrical and mechanical equipment (whether rooftop, ground
level, or wall-mounted) shall be screened from public view
using materials harmonious with the building or shall be
located where they are not visible from any public way.
(g)
Applicants are encouraged to locate and design buildings such
that they maximize solar access during cooler months and
control solar gain during warmer months.
(h)
(5)
Landscaping shall be an integral part of the proposed site design,
and shall enhance the design and arrangement of structures, define
usable public and private outdoor spaces, integrate the site into the
surrounding landscape, as appropriate, and provide buffering from
objectionable or noxious elements both within the site between the
site and the surrounding area.
Landscape plantings and other landscape elements shall be
encouraged to create pedestrian-scale spaces and to maintain
landscape continuity within the community.
(a)
(6)
§ 255-148 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-148
1:314
The need for irrigation, fertilization, and/or use of pesticides
should be minimized through the selection of vegetation that
thrives under the site's proposed conditions, including
temperature, light, moisture, air circulation, soil type and
quality, and stress from salt.
(b)
The preservation of mature plant species, hedgerows, and
woodlots shall be encouraged and included as a design
element in the development of the site and to serve as natural
buffer.
(c)
Landscape buffers shall be provided between parking lots and
public streets and between uses that may be incompatible,
such as large-scale commercial uses and residences. Such
buffers may include planted trees and shrubs, hedgerows,
berms, existing forestland, or forest created through natural
succession. The width of such buffer areas will depend upon
the topography, scale of the uses, and their location on the
property and nature of buffer composition, unless this bylaw
indicates that specific widths are required for a particular
situation. Where excessive noise contributes to the
incompatibility, sound barrier fencing may be required.
(d)
Screening shall be required for loading docks, storage areas,
dumpsters, utility buildings and similar features. Screening
may include planted trees and shrubs, hedgerows, berms,
existing vegetation, and fences.
(e)
The Planning Board may require that shade trees at least
six feet tall and two-inch caliper be planted and maintained
at twenty- to forty-foot intervals along roads, at a setback
distance acceptable to the Highway Superintendent.
(f)
The Planning Board may require that at least 30% of a new
parking area be shaded by tree and vegetation canopies upon
their full growth.
(g)
Where appropriate, planting areas should be designed to
capture, use and infiltrate stormwater runoff.
(h)
Site designs shall provide for the convenience and safety of
vehicular, bicycle, and pedestrian movement within the site and
should provide connections, wherever feasible and appropriate, to
adjoining public ways and properties.
The Planning Board shall encourage vehicular and pedestrian
connections between adjacent sites, streets, bikepaths, and
walkways to facilitate pedestrian use and to minimize traffic
entering existing roads.
(a)
(7)
§ 255-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-148
1:315
Where appropriate, the Planning Board may require bicycle
parking spaces and racks in an area that does not conflict with
vehicle circulation or parking.
(b)
Curb cuts shall be minimized to the extent practical. Sites
should be limited to one curb cut, unless safe and effective
traffic management requires multiple curb cuts or unusual
hardship exists. Curb cuts shall be located so as to minimize
hazardous entrances and exits and turning movements.
(c)
The project, including any road and intersection
improvements, shall not decrease the level of service (LOS) of
adjacent roads or intersections below the existing conditions
when the project is proposed. The Planning Board may
consider the incremental nature of development and
cumulative impacts on the LOS. This requirement to maintain
LOS shall not apply to development within the South Hadley
Falls Overlay District. The project proponent must
demonstrate that all cumulative and incremental traffic
impacts have been mitigated.
(d)
The site design shall provide for adequate measures to prevent
pollution of surface or ground water, to minimize erosion and
sedimentation, and to prevent changes in ground water levels,
increased run-off and potential for flooding.
(8)
The site design shall minimize and/or mitigate adverse impacts on
the Town's services and infrastructure.
(9)
The site design shall minimize intrusion of light into adjacent
properties and shall minimize excessive night-sky lighting while
ensuring adequate light for safe use of the property.
(10)
The site design shall place electric, telephone, cable TV, and other
utilities underground where physically and environmentally
feasible.
(11)
Drainage of the site shall recharge ground water to the extent
practical. The peak rate of surface water flowing off-site shall not
increase above predevelopment conditions and shall not adversely
affect drainage on adjacent properties or public roads or increase
turbidity of water flowing off-site.
(12)
In order to create more walkable and pedestrian-friendly
developments, minimum frontage occupancy requirements apply in
certain locations to create a sense of enclosure in the streetscape.
As used herein, "frontage occupancy" means the percentage of the
lot width at the front of the building that must be occupied by the
facade of a building.
(13)
§ 255-148 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-148
1:316
§ 255-149. Planning Board decision.
§ 255-150. Enforcement.
Minimum frontage occupancy requirements apply to the
following use categories as shown on the Use Table included
as an attachment to this chapter:
[1] Business.
[2] Public and institutional.
[3] Multifamily dwellings.
(a)
A minimum frontage occupancy of 80% is required in the South
Hadley Falls area along Main Street from Carew Street to
Pleasant Street and along Bridge Street from one parcel Main
Street to Lamb Street.
(b)
A minimum frontage occupancy of 50% is required along Route
116, from Boynton Street to Camden Street and along Route
33 from Route 202 to the Chicopee Town Line.
(c)
A minimum frontage occupancy of 50% is required along Route
116 from Camden Street to Route 202 and along Route 202
(Granby Road) from Easy Street to East Street.
(d)
Before approval of a site plan, the Planning Board may require that the
applicant make modifications in the proposed design of the project to
ensure that the above objectives are fulfilled.
B.
Except in the case of a minor site plan application which is governed
by § 255-147B above, the Planning Board shall render a decision within
90 days of the public hearing and shall file its written decision with the
Town Clerk's office.
A.
The Planning Board's decision shall consist of either:
(1) A written approval of the proposed project;
A written denial of the application, stating reason for such denial;
or
(2)
A written approval subject to any conditions, modifications, and
restrictions as the Planning Board may deem necessary to satisfy
this bylaw.
(3)
B.
The Planning Board's decision shall be mailed to the applicant and
filed with the Town Clerk. A copy shall also be sent to the Building
Commissioner.
C.
Violations of the approved site plan or any conditions of approval shall
be subject to the provisions of § 255-141 of the Zoning Bylaw.
A.
§ 255-148 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-150
1:317
§ 255-151. Appeal process.
If an aggrieved person wishes to appeal the decision of the Planning Board,
the procedures in MGL c. 40A, § 17 shall apply.
Site plan approval issued under this article shall lapse at the end of
one year after approval if work has not commenced, except where an
extension of time for good cause has been granted by the Planning
Board.
B.
§ 255-150 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 255-151
1:318
Chapter 300
BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 255-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 255-151
1:319

ARTICLE I
Energy-Producing Facilities
[Adopted 10-11-1988]
§ 300-1. Authority and purpose.
Pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31, these regulations are adopted in the interest
of protection and promotion of public health in the Town of South Hadley.
Such energy-producing plants now include energy generated by water, coal,
natural gas, nuclear power, oil, petroleum, and all other combustion-based
energy-generating facilities.
§ 300-2. Location restrictions.
No place within the Town of South Hadley shall be used, established,
maintained or operated by any person, persons, corporations, partnerships,
political subdivision, agency, or any other entity, as a site for such facility,
until such location or site has been assigned by the Board of Health of the
Town of South Hadley for such use in accordance with MGL c. 111, § 143.
The assignment of a place as a site for such a facility shall be subject to such
limitations with respect to the extent, character and nature of the facility,
thereof, as may be necessary to protect public health.
§ 300-3. Operating permit required; approval of plans; public
hearing.
No energy-producing facility shall be constructed, built, operated, or
maintained in the Town of South Hadley without a site assigned above,
and without first obtaining from the Town of South Hadley Board of Health
an operating permit for the right to construct, operate and or maintain an
energy-producing facility. Persons or entities who or which wish to secure
or hold such a permit from the Board of Health must, from the time of
filing, submit copies of all filings and correspondence with DEQE and other
state or federal agencies or boards relative to the facility to the Board
of Health. A facility shall not be constructed or operated unless a permit
is obtained from the Board of Health and plans or designs, along with a
written statement of use, have been approved by the Board of Health. The
Board of Health may issue the permit and approve the plans and use upon
a finding that such use or operation or facility will not pose a possible
nuisance or may be a danger to the public health or safety. No permit will
be granted before a public hearing on the request for a site assignment has
been held.
§ 300-4. Compliance required; nuisances prohibited.
The applicant must certify that such plans or designs and the use of the
facility shall be exactly what shall be constructed and operated on the site.
Any deviations in plans, design or use of the facility during construction
or operation shall require written approval by the Board of Health. Such
assignments and permits shall be entered into the records of the Town.
§ 300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-4
1:321
Every person, including every political subdivision of the commonwealth
maintaining or operating a facility, shall maintain and operate the same in a
manner as will protect the public health, and prevent a nuisance or a danger
to the public health.
§ 300-5. Revocation of permit.
The Board of Health may revoke such permit upon a finding that the
continued operation of the facility may pose a nuisance or danger to public
health and safety.
§ 300-6. Fee; permit expiration.
If such facility is owned and operated by any entity other than a city or
agency of the commonwealth, such entity shall pay a fee of $500. Said
permit shall expire on December 31 of each year.
§ 300-7. Rules and regulations.
The Board of Health shall adopt and may from time to time amend rules and
regulations for such facilities as it deems necessary.
§ 300-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-7
1:322
ARTICLE II
Illegal Disposal of Wastes into Town Drainage Systems
[Adopted 9-5-1989]
§ 300-8. Findings and purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to stop and prevent the improper disposal
of hazardous wastes into our drainage systems. These include many
common household hazardous wastes, such as waste automotive oils,
solvents, antifreeze, pool chemicals, etc. The illegal disposal of hazardous
wastes into Town drainage systems, which includes combined storm and
sewage drainage systems, poses various threats to public health, waters,
and the environment. There now exist safe available methods for proper
disposal of these wastes. Therefore, the following regulations are adopted
as reasonable and are intended to provide and promote protection of public
health and the environment.
§ 300-9. Discharge into drainage system prohibited.
No person or entity shall place, allow to flow, or cause to discharge into
the drainage systems in the Town of South Hadley any defined hazardous
wastes.
§ 300-10. Violations and penalties; liability for expenses.
§ 300-11. Effective date.
These regulations shall become effective on September 20, 1989.
Any person or entity in violation of these regulations shall be subject to
the following penalties:
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $50.
A.
Additionally, the party responsible, and in violation to this regulation,
shall be in debt for the payment of any incurred expenses by the Town
of South Hadley.
B.
§ 300-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-11
1:323

ARTICLE III
Dumping of Rubbish and Refuse
[Adopted 9-11-1990]
§ 300-12. Findings.
The illegal dumping of rubbish and refuse material upon private and public
properties is already prohibited by law. As a result of the current solid
waste crises, and the resulting increased legal disposal fees, this form of
land pollution to our environment has increased significantly and must be
brought under control.
§ 300-13. Illegal dumping prohibited; violations and penalties.
Any individual, firm, corporation or other entity who or which places or
causes to dump illegally any rubbish or refuse material on public or private
properties in the Town of South Hadley shall be fined a minimum penalty
of $500 for each offense. There shall be no warnings issued or waiver
of penalties. The violation notice shall be served as provided by MGL c.
40, § 21D, adopted by Town Meeting on May 6, 1989. Also, if a motor
vehicle is used in the illegal dumping, the violators shall be reported to the
Massachusetts Division of Registry of Motor Vehicles requesting additional
penalties as provided under MGL c. 270, § 16. The party responsible shall
incur all legal disposal costs for cleaning and legal disposal of rubbish and
refuse.
§ 300-14. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
REFUSE — Decaying or nondecomposable solid waste materials, consisting
of all combustible and noncombustible solid wastes, including garbage and
rubbish, but not including sewage.
RUBBISH — Combustible or noncombustible solid waste material, except
garbage and sewage, including but not limited to such material as paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood wastes, rubber, leather, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery, dust, ashes, construction wastes, industrial wastes,
demolition wastes, agricultural wastes, abandoned vehicles, street
sweeping, bulky wastes, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke,
or other combustible materials, and any other unwanted or discarded
material.
§ 300-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14
1:325

ARTICLE IV
Septic System Inspections
[Adopted July 1992]
§ 300-15. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health from present
and potential sources of pollution of the ground and surface waters from
existing in-ground sewage disposal systems.
§ 300-16. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVELOPED PROPERTY — A parcel of land with a structure(s) erected
upon it which has an in-ground sewage disposal system(s).
IN-GROUND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — Any on-site septic system
which disposes of septic wastes through the method of subsurface leaching.
INSPECTION —
An inspection shall consist of the following steps:
Visual inspection of the ground surface around the structure to look
for signs of sewage or high groundwater;
(1)
Review of all available records and inquiry to the owner to identify,
if possible, the location of the leaching facility and distribution box;
(2)
Review of all available records and inquiry to the owner to
determine, if possible, how often the septic tank has been pumped
during the 12 months preceding the inspection;
(3)
Location of all domestic water supply wells, lakes, ponds, streams
and watercourses within 100 feet of the leaching facility if its
location can be determined; or, if the location of the leaching
facility cannot be determined, within 100 feet of the septic tank;
(4)
(5) Opening the septic tank and pumping out its contents;
Personal observation, by a registered professional engineer or
registered sanitarian, of the pumping of the septic tank;
(6)
Recording observations of the following:
(a) The amount of septage pumped from the tank;
(b) Describing the accumulation of solids found in the tank;
Whether or not an outlet tee or baffle is in place in the septic
tank;
(c)
(7)
A.
§ 300-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16
1:327
OWNER — The owner(s) of record as documented by the most recent
deed of record in the Hampshire County Registry of Deeds. In the event
ownership is vested in more than one person (including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or any other legal entity),
responsibility for compliance with this regulation shall be joint and several.
SEPTIC SYSTEM INSPECTION REPORT — A report which includes system
description, statement of condition, and sketch of location in the format
provided by the Board of Health.
TITLE 5 — The Department of Environmental Protection regulation entitled
310 CMR 15.00: The State Environmental Code, Title 5: Minimum
Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage.
TRANSFER OF PROPERTY — An act by which the title of a property is
conveyed from one person to another.
§ 300-17. Inspection required.
Whether or not an inlet tee or baffle is in place in the septic
tank;
(d)
Whether or not the liquid level in the tank, prior to pumping, is
above the tank outlet;
(e)
Whether or not liquid is observed flowing from the outlet back
into the tank during or after pumping;
(f)
Nothing in the foregoing definition of "inspection" is intended to
require an engineer or sanitarian to excavate or directly certify the
condition of any leaching facility, distribution box, or septic tank inlet/
outlet lines. This definition adopts the approach that visual inspection
of the property, inspection of any available records, and observation of
pumping of the septic tank, together, provide a reasonable indicator
of the functioning of the septic system. Any opinion or certification
provided by the engineer or sanitarian is based solely upon this limited
inspection.
B.
The owner of a developed property in the Town of South Hadley shall
cause an inspection of all in-ground sewage disposal systems on the
property prior to a transfer of property.
A.
The inspection shall take place within 180 days prior to the transfer of
property.
B.
All inspections must be done by a registered professional engineer or
registered sanitarian.
C.
The engineer or sanitarian must submit the results of the inspection to
the Board of Health in the form of a septic system inspection report and
send copies to the seller, seller's attorney, seller's real estate broker/
salesperson and buyer. The Board of Health must receive the report
within seven days of completion of the inspection.
D.
§ 300-16 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-17
1:328
§ 300-18. Determinations; notice of work to be done.
§ 300-19. Exemptions.
The following properties are exempt from the requirements of this
regulation:
If the inspection finds evidence of sewage flow on the surface of the
ground, the Board of Health must be notified within 24 hours.
E.
The Board of Health will use the information in the septic system
inspection report to determine if the system constitutes a danger to the
public health.
A.
The Board of Health shall send a notification to owner within seven
days of the receipt of the septic system inspection report informing
him/her whether or not the system must be repaired or replaced. If
repair or replacement is necessary, the Board of Health shall designate
a reasonable amount of time for it to be completed.
B.
If the work is not completed within the time designated by the Board
of Health, the Board may impose fines in accordance with MGL c. 111,
§ 31, and/or may repair or replace the system at the expense of the
owner, in accordance with Title 5.
C.
Properties connected to the Town sewer system or a private sewage
treatment plant.
A.
Properties conveyed or devised to a surviving spouse or, in the case of
joint ownership, to one of the original owners.
B.
Properties with Title 5 systems which received final inspection approval
by the Board of Health within the five years preceding a transfer of
property, provided the sewage disposal system is adequately sized to
accommodate the dwelling(s) on the property according to the latest
Board of Health regulations. To qualify for this exemption, a copy of
the disposal works construction permit and/or other evidence showing
the date of installation must be submitted in lieu of the septic system
inspection report prior to a transfer of property.
C.
Properties transferred within two years of a prior inspection, upon
approval by the Board of Health. To qualify for this exemption, a copy
of the original septic system inspection report and/or notification to the
owner must be submitted for review prior to a transfer of property.
D.
Properties where the parties involved in the transfer of property intend
to replace the existing septic system with a Title 5 system. To qualify
for this exemption, the parties must apply in writing showing that they
have agreed to the arrangement. A proposed time frame for installation
must be submitted and approved of by the Board of Health at the time
of application.
E.
§ 300-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-20
1:329
§ 300-20. Severability.
Provisions of this regulation are severable; and if any provision hereof shall
be held invalid under any circumstances, such an invalidity shall not affect
any other provisions or circumstances.
§ 300-21. Enforcement.
§ 300-22. Costs.
In every case, the owner shall assume the responsibility for all costs
incurred in complying with this regulation.
Any owner who violates any provision of this regulation shall be subject
to the penalties provided under MGL c. 111, § 31, as amended. The
Board of Health and the Town Counsel shall take action deemed
necessary to enforce the provisions of this regulation.
A.
Sellers, sellers' real estate brokers and salespersons, and sellers'
attorneys, prior to the closing, shall be jointly and severally responsible
for providing to the buyer the septic system inspection report provided
by this regulation. It is the intent of this regulation that failure by
any attorney or real estate broker/salesperson to make this required
disclosure shall constitute an unfair or deceptive act or practice within
the meaning of the Massachusetts Consumer Protection Statute
(General Laws Chapter 93A) and the regulations promulgated
thereunder by the Attorney General (940 CMR 3.00).
B.
§ 300-20 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-22
1:330
ARTICLE V
Body Art Establishments
[Adopted 4-4-2001]
§ 300-23. Findings and purpose.
Whereas body art is becoming prevalent and popular throughout the
commonwealth; and whereas knowledge and practice of universal
precautions, sanitation, personal hygiene, sterilization and aftercare
requirements on the part of the practitioner should be demonstrated to
prevent the transmission of disease or injury to the client and/or
practitioner; now, therefore, the Board of Health of the Town of South
Hadley passes these rules and regulations for the practice of body art in the
Town of South Hadley as part of our mission to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the public.
§ 300-24. Authority.
These regulations are promulgated under the authority granted to the
Board of Health under MGL c. 111, § 31.
§ 300-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFTERCARE — Written instructions given to the client, specific to the body
art procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the body art and surrounding
area, including information about when to seek medical treatment, if
necessary.
APPLICANT — Any person who applies to the Board of Health for either a
body art establishment permit or practitioner permit.
AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a
specific temperature over a period of time.
AUTOCLAVING — A process which results in the destruction of all forms of
microbial life, including highly resistant spores, by the use of an autoclave
for a minimum of 30 minutes at 20 pounds of pressure (PSI) at a
temperature of 270° F.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS STANDARD — OSHA guidelines contained
in 29 CFR 1910.1030, entitled "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne
Pathogens."
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The South Hadley Board of Health.
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment by permitted
establishments and practitioners using, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and
scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered
medical procedures by the Board of Registration in Medicine, such as
implants under the skin, which procedures are prohibited.
§ 300-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-25
1:331
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT — A location, place, or
business that has been granted a permit by the Board, whether public or
private, where the practices of body art are performed, whether or not for
profit.
BODY ART PRACTITIONER or PRACTITIONER — A specifically identified
individual who has been granted a permit by the Board to perform body art
in an establishment that has been granted a permit by the Board.
BODY PIERCING — Puncturing or penetrating the skin of a client with
presterilized single-use needles and the insertion of presterilized jewelry or
other adornment into the opening. This definition excludes piercing of the
earlobe with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp system manufactured
exclusively for ear piercing.
BRAIDING — The cutting of strips of skin of a person, which strips are then
to be intertwined with one another and placed onto such person so as to
cause or allow the incised and interwoven strips of skin to heal in such
intertwined condition.
BRANDING — Inducing a pattern of scar tissue by use of a heated material
(usually metal) to the skin, making a serious burn, which eventually
becomes a scar.
CLEANING AREA — The area in a body art establishment used in the
sterilization, sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment
used for the practice of body art.
CLIENT — A member of the public who requests a body art procedure at a
body art establishment.
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Waste as defined in 105 CMR 480.000: Storage
and Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological
Waste, State Sanitary Code, Chapter VIII, and/or 29 CFR Part 1910.1030.
This includes any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious
material; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially
infectious material in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items on
which there is dried blood or other potentially infectious material and which
are capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and any
wastes containing blood or other potentially infectious materials.
COSMETIC TATTOOING — Also known as "permanent cosmetics,"
"micropigment implantation" or "dermal pigmentation," means the
implantation of permanent pigment around the eyes, lips and cheeks of the
face and hair imitation.
DISINFECTANT — A product registered as a disinfectant by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use
or handling.
§ 300-25 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-25
1:332
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the lobe of the ear with a presterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system following the manufacturer's
instructions.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,
devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all
other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation
of a body art establishment.
EXPOSURE — An event whereby there is an eye, mouth or other mucus
membrane, non-intact skin or parenteral contact with the blood or bodily
fluids of another person or contact of an eye, mouth or other mucous
membrane, nonintact skin or parenteral contact with other potentially
infectious matter.
HAND SINK — A lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body.
HOT WATER — Water that attains and maintains a temperature of 110° F.
to 130° F.
INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART — Hand pieces, needles, needle
bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body
or may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body art procedure.
INVASIVE — Entry into the client's body either by incision or insertion of
any instruments into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means
intended to puncture, break, or otherwise compromise the skin or mucosa.
JEWELRY — Any ornament inserted into a newly pierced area, which must
be made of surgical implant-grade stainless steel; solid 14k or 18k white
or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum; or a dense, low-porosity
plastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and has been
properly sterilized prior to use.
LIGHT-COLORED — A light reflectance value of 70% or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any trailer, truck, car, van,
camper or other motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, a shed, tent, movable
structure, bar, home or other facility wherein, or concert, fair, party or other
event whereat one desires to or actually does conduct body art procedures.
OPERATOR — Any person who, individually, or jointly or severally with
others, owns, or controls an establishment, but is not a body art
practitioner.
PERMIT — Board approval in writing to either (1) operate a body art
establishment or (2) operate as a body art practitioner within a body art
establishment. Board approval shall be granted solely for the practice of
body art pursuant to these model regulations. Said permit is exclusive of the
establishment's compliance with other licensing or permitting requirements
that may exist within the Board's jurisdiction.
§ 300-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-25
1:333
PERSON — An individual, any form of business or social organization
or any other nongovernmental legal entity, including but not limited to
corporations, partnerships, limited-liability companies, associations, trusts
or unincorporated organizations.
PHYSICIAN — An individual licensed as a qualified physician by the Board
of Registration in Medicine pursuant to MGL c. 112, § 2.
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts
the client's unclothed body during a body art procedure, skin preparation of
the area adjacent to and including the body art procedure, or any associated
work area which may require sanitizing.
SANITARY — Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
SANITIZE — The application of a USEPA-registered sanitizer on a cleaned
surface in accordance with the label instructions.
SCARIFICATION — Altering skin texture by cutting the skin and controlling
the body's healing process in order to produce wounds, which result in
permanently raised wheals or bumps known as "keloids."
SHARPS — Any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or
accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limited
to, needle devices, lancets, scalpel blades, razor blades, and broken glass.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leakproof container that can
be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is
labeled with the International Biohazard Symbol.
SINGLE-USE ITEMS — Products or items that are intended for one-time,
one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, but
not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or
plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel
blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves.
STERILIZE — The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores.
TATTOO — The indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced by
insertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the
skin.
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under
the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to
puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa.
This term includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing.
TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — The same as "mobile body
art establishment."
THREE-DIMENSIONAL ("3D") BODY ART OR BEADING OR
IMPLANTATION — The form of body art consisting of or requiring the
placement, injection or insertion of an object, device or other thing made
of matter such as steel, titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass or other inert
§ 300-25 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-25
1:334
materials, beneath the surface of the skin of a person. This term does not
include body piercing.
ULTRASONIC CLEANING UNIT — A unit approved by the Board, physically
large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all
foreign matter from the instruments by means of high-frequency oscillations
transmitted through the contained liquid.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — A set of guidelines and controls, published
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as "Guidelines
for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers"
in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol.
38, No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During
Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures" in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40,
No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the
employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids
are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include
hand washing; gloving; personal protective equipment; injury prevention;
and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and
blood- and body-fluid-contaminated products.
§ 300-26. Exemptions.
§ 300-27. Restrictions.
Physicians licensed in accordance with MGL c. 112, § 2 who perform
body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these
regulations.
A.
Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a presterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system are exempt from these
regulations.
B.
No tattooing, piercing of genitalia, branding or scarification shall be
performed on a person under the age of 18.
A.
Body piercing, other than piercing the genitalia, may be performed on
a person under the age of 18, provided that the person is accompanied
by a properly identified parent, legal custodial parent or legal guardian
who has signed a form consenting to such procedure. "Properly
identified" shall mean a valid photo identification of the adult and a
birth certificate of the minor.
B.
C. No body art shall be performed upon an animal.
The following body piercings are hereby prohibited: piercing of the
uvula; piercing of the tracheal area; piercing of the neck; piercing of
the ankle; piercing between the ribs or vertebrae; piercing of the web
area of the hand or foot; piercing of the lingual frenulum (tongue web);
piercing of the clitoris; any form of chest or deep muscle piercings,
D.
§ 300-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-27
1:335
§ 300-28. Operation of body art establishments.
Unless otherwise ordered or approved by the Board, each body art
establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained to meet the
following minimum requirements:
excluding the nipple; piercing of the anus; piercing of an eyelid,
whether top or bottom; piercing of the gums; piercing or skewering
of a testicle; so called "deep" piercing of the penis, meaning piercing
through the shaft of the penis, or "transpenis" piercing in any area
from the corona glandis to the pubic bone; so called "deep" piercing
of the scrotum, meaning piercing through the scrotum, or "transcrotal"
piercing; so called "deep" piercing of the vagina.
The following practices hereby prohibited unless performed by a
medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts:
tongue splitting; braiding; three-dimensional/beading/implementation
tooth filing/fracturing/removal/tattooing; cartilage modification;
amputation; genital modification; introduction of saline or other liquids.
E.
Physical plant.
Walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces shall be smooth,
durable, free of open holes or cracks, light-colored, washable, and
in good repair. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be maintained in
a clean condition. All procedure surfaces, including client chairs/
benches, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and
sanitized after each client.
(1)
Solid partitions or walls extending from floor to ceiling shall
separate the establishment's space from any other room used for
human habitation, any food establishment or room where food is
prepared, any hair salon, any retail sales, or any other such activity
that may cause potential contamination of work surfaces.
(2)
The establishment shall take all measures necessary to ensure
against the presence or breeding of insects, vermin, and rodents
within the establishment.
(3)
Each operator area shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of
floor space for each practitioner. Each establishment shall have an
area that may be screened from public view for clients requesting
privacy. Multiple body art stations shall be separated by a dividers
or partition at a minimum.
(4)
The establishment shall be well ventilated and provided with an
artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 footcandles three
feet off the floor, except that at least 100 footcandles shall be
provided at the level where the body art procedure is being
performed, where instruments and sharps are assembled and all
cleaning areas.
(5)
A.
§ 300-27 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-28
1:336
All electrical outlets in operator areas and cleaning areas shall be
equipped with approved ground fault (GFCI) protected receptacles.
(6)
A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold running
water under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist- or footoperated
controls and supplied with liquid soap, and disposable
paper towels stored in fixed dispensers shall be readily accessible
within the establishment. Each operator area shall have a hand
sink.
(7)
There shall be a sharps container in each operator area and each
cleaning area.
(8)
There shall be a minimum of one toilet room containing a toilet
and sink. The toilet room shall be provided with toilet paper, liquid
hand soap and paper towels stored in a fixed dispenser. A body
art establishment permanently located within a retail shopping
center, or similar setting housing multiple operations within one
enclosed structure having shared entrance and exit points shall not
be required to provide a separate toilet room within such body art
establishment if Board-approved toilet facilities are located in the
retail shopping center within 300 feet of the body art establishment
so as to be readily accessible to any client or practitioner.
(9)
The public water supply entering a body art establishment shall
be protected by a testable, reduced pressure backflow preventer
installed in accordance with 142 CMR 248, as amended from time
to time.
(10)
At least one covered, foot-operated waste receptacle shall be
provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles
in the operator area shall be emptied daily. Solid waste shall be
stored in covered, leakproof, rodent-resistant containers and shall
be removed from the premises at least weekly.
(11)
At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in each body art
establishment for use in cleaning the establishment and proper
disposal of noncontaminated liquid wastes in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws. Said sink shall be of
adequate size equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure and permit the cleaning of the establishment and any
equipment used for cleaning.
(12)
All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and
covered containers. Containers shall be kept in a secure area
specifically dedicated to the storage of all instruments and
supplies.
(13)
The establishment shall have a cleaning area. Every cleaning area
shall have an area for the placement of an autoclave or other
sterilization unit located or positioned a minimum of 36 inches from
the required ultrasonic cleaning unit.
(14)
§ 300-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-28
1:337
The establishment shall have a customer waiting area, exclusive
and separate from any work station, instrument storage area,
cleaning area or any other area in the body art establishment used
for body art activity.
(15)
No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment
except service animals used by persons with disabilities (e.g.,
Seeing Eye dogs). Fish aquariums shall be allowed in waiting
rooms and nonprocedural areas.
(16)
Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where body
art is performed, with the exception of nonalcoholic fluids being
offered to a client during or after a body art procedure.
(17)
Requirements for single-use items, including inks, dyes and pigments.
Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for
any reason. After use, all single-use sharps shall be immediately
disposed of in approved sharps containers pursuant to 105 CMR
480.000.
(1)
All products applied to the skin, such as but not limited to body
art stencils, applicators, gauze and razors, shall be single-use and
disposable.
(2)
(3) Hollow-bore needles or needles with cannula shall not be reused.
All inks, dyes, pigments, solid-core needles, and equipment shall be
specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and
shall be used according to manufacturer's instructions.
(4)
Inks, dyes or pigments may be mixed and may only be diluted
with water from an approved potable source. Immediately before
a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be
transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper
cups or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, these singleuse
cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded.
(5)
B.
Sanitation and sterilization measures and procedures.
All nondisposable instruments used for body art, including all
reusable solid-core needles, pins and stylets, shall be cleaned
thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an appropriate soap
or disinfectant solution and hot water (to remove blood and tissue
residue), and shall be placed in an ultrasonic unit sold for cleaning
purposes under approval of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
and operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
(1)
After being cleaned, all nondisposable instruments used for body
art shall be packed individually in sterilizer packs and subsequently
sterilized in a steam autoclave sold for medical sterilization
purposes under approval of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
All sterilizer packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or
(2)
C.
§ 300-28 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-28
1:338
internal temperature indicator. Sterilizer packs must be dated with
an expiration date not to exceed six months.
The autoclave shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according
to manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the manufacturer's
recommended procedures for the operation of the autoclave must
be available for inspection by the Board. Autoclaves shall be
located away from workstations or areas frequented by the public.
(3)
Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall
demonstrate that the autoclave used is capable of attaining
sterilization by monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shall
be verified through an independent laboratory. The permit shall not
be issued or renewed until documentation of the autoclave's ability
to destroy spores is received by the Board. These test records shall
be retained by the operator for a period of three years and made
available to the Board upon request.
(4)
All instruments used for body art procedures shall remain stored
in sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body
art procedure. After sterilization, the instruments used in body art
procedures shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly
covered container reserved for the storage of such instruments.
(5)
Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has been
breached or after the expiration date without first repackaging and
resterilizing.
(6)
If the body art establishment uses only single-use, disposable
instruments and products, and uses sterile supplies, an autoclave
shall not be required.
(7)
When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, the
operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically
recognized sterile techniques to ensure that the instruments and
gloves are not contaminated.
(8)
Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent
and mechanically dried after each use. The cloth items shall be
stored in a dry, clean environment until used. Should such items
become contaminated directly or indirectly with bodily fluids, the
items shall be washed in accordance with standards applicable to
hospitals and medical care facilities, at a temperature of 160° F. or
a temperature of 120° F. with the use of chlorine disinfectant.
(9)
Posting requirements. The following shall be prominently displayed:
A disclosure statement, a model of which shall be available from
the Board. A disclosure statement shall also be given to each client,
advising him/her of the risks and possible consequences of body art
procedures.
(1)
D.
§ 300-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-28
1:339
The name, address and phone number of the South Hadley Board
of Health.
(2)
An emergency plan, including:
A plan for the purpose of contacting police, fire or emergency
medical services in the event of an emergency;
(a)
A telephone in good working order shall be easily available
and accessible to all employees and clients during all hours of
operation; and
(b)
A sign at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correct
emergency telephone numbers.
(c)
(3)
An occupancy and use permit as issued by the local building
official.
(4)
(5) A current establishment permit.
(6) Each practitioner's permit.
Establishment recordkeeping. The establishment shall maintain the
following records in a secure place for a minimum of three years, and
such records shall be made available to the Board upon request:
Establishment information, which shall include:
(a) Establishment name;
(b) Hours of operation;
(c) Owner's name and address;
(d) A complete description of all body art procedures performed;
An inventory of all instruments and body jewelry, all sharps,
and all inks used for any and all body art procedures, including
names of manufacturers and serial or lot numbers, if
applicable. Invoices or packing slips shall satisfy this
requirement;
(e)
A Material Safety Data Sheet, when available, for each ink and
dye used by the establishment;
(f)
(g) Copies of waste hauler manifests;
(h) Copies of commercial biological monitoring tests;
(i) Exposure incident report (kept permanently); and
(j) A copy of these regulations.
(1)
Employee information, which shall include:
(a) Full legal names and exact duties;
(2)
E.
§ 300-28 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-28
1:340
§ 300-29. Standards of practice.
Practitioners are required to comply with the following minimum health
standards:
(b) Date of birth;
(c) Home address;
(d) Home/Work phone numbers;
(e) Identification photograph;
(f) Dates of employment;
(g) Hepatitis B vaccination status or declination notification; and
(h) Training records.
Client information, which shall include:
(a) Name;
(b) Age and valid photo identification;
(c) Address of the client;
(d) Date of the procedure;
(e) Name of the practitioner who performed the procedure(s);
Description of procedure(s) performed and the location on the
body;
(f)
(g) A signed consent form as specified by § 300-29D(2); and
If the client is a person under the age of 18, proof of parental or
guardian identification, presence and consent, including a copy
of the photographic identification of the parent or guardian.
Client information shall be kept confidential at all times.
(h)
(3)
Exposure control plan. Each establishment shall create, update,
and comply with an exposure control plan. The plan shall be
submitted to the Board for review so as to meet all of the
requirements of OSHA regulations, to include, but not limited to,
29 CFR 1910.1030, OSHA Bloodborne Pathogens Standards et
seq., as amended from time to time. A copy of the plan shall be
maintained at the body art establishment at all times and shall be
made available to the Board upon request.
(4)
No person shall establish or operate a mobile or temporary body art
establishment.
F.
§ 300-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-29
1:341
A practitioner shall perform all body art procedures in accordance with
Universal Precautions set forth by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
A.
A practitioner shall refuse service to any person who may be under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
B.
Practitioners who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the
manufacturer's directions for use, and to applicable U.S. Food and Drug
Administration requirements. No practitioner shall use an ear piercing
system on any part of the client's body other than the lobe of the ear.
C.
Health history and client informed consent. Prior to performing a body
art procedure on a client, the practitioner shall:
Inform the client, verbally and in writing, that the following health
conditions may increase health risks associated with receiving a
body art procedure:
(a) History of diabetes;
(b) History of hemophilia (bleeding);
History of skin diseases, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to
soaps, disinfectants, etc.;
(c)
History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or
other sensitivities;
(d)
(e) History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy;
Use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the
blood and/or interfere with blood clotting; and
(f)
(g) Any other conditions such as hepatitis or HIV.
(1)
Require that the client sign a form confirming that the above
information was provided, that the client does not have a condition
that prevents him/her from receiving body art, that the client
consents to the performance of the body art procedure and that
the client has been given the aftercare instructions as required by
Subsection K.
(2)
D.
A practitioner shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness,
conform to best standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes
when performing body art procedures. Before performing body art
procedures, the practitioner must thoroughly wash his/her hands in
hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry with
disposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as necessary to
remove contaminants.
E.
In performing body art procedures, a practitioner shall wear disposable
single-use gloves. Gloves shall be changed if they become pierced, torn,
or otherwise contaminated by contact with any unclean surfaces or
F.
§ 300-29 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-29
1:342
objects or by contact with a third person. The gloves shall be discarded,
at a minimum, after the completion of each procedure on an individual
client, and hands shall be washed in accordance with Subsection E
before the next set of gloves is put on. Under no circumstances shall
a single pair of gloves be used on more than one person. The use of
disposable single-use gloves does not preclude or substitute for handwashing
procedures as part of a good personal hygiene program.
The skin of the practitioner shall be free of rash or infection. No
practitioner affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions,
weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall
work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which
there is a likelihood that that person could contaminate body art
equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or
pathogenic organisms.
G.
Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during
the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a
new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the
procedure resumes.
H.
Preparation and care of a client's skin area must comply with the
following:
Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall
be free of rash or any visible infection.
(1)
Before a body art procedure is performed, the immediate skin area
and the areas of skin surrounding where the body art procedure is
to be placed shall be washed with soap and water or an approved
surgical skin preparation. If shaving is necessary, single-use
disposable razors or safety razors with single-service blades shall
be used. Blades shall be discarded after each use, and reusable
holders shall be cleaned and autoclaved after use. Following
shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be washed with soap
and water. The washing pad shall be discarded after a single use.
(2)
In the event of bleeding, all products used to stop the bleeding
or to absorb blood shall be single-use, and discarded immediately
after use in appropriate covered containers, and disposed of in
accordance with 105 CMR 480.000.
(3)
I.
Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application of
stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to receive a body
art procedure with sterile gauze or other sterile applicator to prevent
contamination of the original container and its contents. The applicator
or gauze shall be used once and then discarded.
J.
The practitioner shall provide each client with verbal and written
instructions on the aftercare of the body art site. The written
instructions shall advise the client:
K.
§ 300-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-29
1:343
§ 300-30. Exposure incident reports.
(1) On the proper cleansing of the area which received the body art;
To consult a health care provider for:
Unexpected redness, tenderness or swelling at the site of the
body art procedure;
(a)
(b) Any rash;
Unexpected drainage at or from the site of the body art
procedure; or
(c)
(d) A fever within 24 hours of the body art procedure; and
(2)
Of the address, and phone number of the establishment.
A copy shall be provided to the client. A model set of aftercare
instructions shall be made available by the Board.
(3)
Contaminated waste shall be stored, treated and disposed in
accordance with 105 CMR 480.000: Storage and Disposal of Infectious
or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waster, State Sanitary
Code, Chapter VIII.
L.
An exposure incident report shall be completed by the close of the
business day during which an exposure has or might have taken place
by the involved or knowledgeable body art practitioner for every
exposure incident occurring in the conduct of any body art activity.
A.
Each exposure incident report shall contain:
A copy of the application and consent form for body art activity
completed by any client or minor client involved in the exposure
incident;
(1)
A full description of the exposure incident, including the portion of
the body involved therein;
(2)
(3) Instrument(s) or other equipment implicated;
A copy of body art practitioner license of the involved body art
practitioner;
(4)
(5) Date and time of exposure;
A copy of any medical history released to the body art
establishment or body art practitioner; and
(6)
Information regarding any recommendation to refer to a physician
or waiver to consult a physician by persons involved.
(7)
B.
§ 300-29 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-31
1:344
§ 300-31. Injury and/or complication reports.
A written report of any injury, infection complication or disease as a result
of a body art procedure, or complaint of injury, infection complication or
disease, shall be forwarded by the operator to the Board which issued the
permit, with a copy to the injured client within five working days of its
occurrence or knowledge thereof. The report shall include:
§ 300-32. Complaints.
§ 300-33. Application for body art establishment permit.
A. The name of the affected client;
B. The name and location of the body art establishment involved;
C. The nature of the injury, infection complication or disease;
The name and address of the affected client's health care provider, if
any;
D.
E. Any other information considered relevant to the situation.
The Board shall investigate complaints received about an establishment
or practitioner's practices or acts, which may violate any provision of
the Board's regulations.
A.
If the Board finds that an investigation is not required because the
alleged act or practice is not in violation of the Board's regulations,
then the Board shall notify the complainant of this finding and the
reasons on which it is based.
B.
If the Board finds that an investigation is required, because the alleged
act or practice may be in violation of the Board's regulations, the Board
shall investigate, and if a finding is made that the act or practice
is in violation of the Board's regulations, then the Board shall apply
whatever enforcement action is appropriate to remedy the situation and
shall notify the complainant of its action in this manner.
C.
No person shall operate a body art establishment except with a valid
permit from the Board.
A.
Applications for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by and
available from the Board. An applicant shall submit all information
required by the form and accompanying instructions. The term
"application" as used herein shall include the original and renewal
applications.
B.
An establishment permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and for
no longer than one year unless revoked sooner by the Board.
C.
The Board shall require that the applicant provide, at a minimum, the
following information in order to be issued an establishment permit:
D.
§ 300-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-33
1:345
§ 300-34. Application for body art practitioner permit.
Name, address, and telephone number of:
(a) The body art establishment;
(b) The operator of the establishment; and
(c) The body art practitioner(s) working at the establishment;
(1)
The manufacturer, model number, model year, and serial number,
where applicable, of the autoclave used in the establishment;
(2)
A signed and dated acknowledgement that the applicant has
received, read and understood the requirements of the Board's
body art regulations;
(3)
A drawing of the floor plan of the proposed establishment to scale
for a plan review by the Board, as part of the permit application
process;
(4)
(5) Exposure report plan; and
(6) Such additional information as the Board may reasonably require.
The annual fee for the body art establishment permit shall be $275 plus
$175 per artist.
E.
A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable from one
place or person to another.
F.
No person shall practice body art or perform any body art procedure
without first obtaining a practitioner permit from the Board. The annual
fee for a Body Art Practitioner shall be $_____________.
A.
B. A practitioner shall be a minimum of 18 years of age.
A practitioner permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall
expire no later than one year from the date of issuance unless revoked
sooner by the Board.
C.
Application for a practitioner permit shall include:
(1) Name;
(2) Date of birth;
(3) Residence address;
(4) Mailing address;
(5) Phone number;
(6) Place(s) of employment as a practitioner; and
(7) Training and/or experience as set out in Subsection E below.
D.
§ 300-33 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-34
1:346
Practitioner training and experience.
In reviewing an application for a practitioner permit, the Board
may consider experience, training and/or certification acquired in
other states that regulate body art.
(1)
Training for all practitioners shall be approved by the Board and,
at a minimum, shall include the following:
Bloodborne pathogen training program (or equivalent) which
includes infectious disease control; waste disposal; handwashing
techniques; sterilization equipment operation and
methods; and sanitization, disinfection and sterilization
methods and techniques; and
(a)
Current certification in First Aid and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR). Examples of courses approved by the
Board include "Preventing Disease Transmission" (American
Red Cross) and "Bloodborne Pathogen Training" (U.S. OSHA).
Training/Courses provided by professional body art
organizations or associations or by equipment manufacturers
may also be submitted to the Board for approval.
(b)
(2)
The applicant for a body piercing practitioner permit shall provide
documentation, acceptable to the Board, that s/he completed a
course on anatomy and physiology with a grade of C or better at
a college accredited by the New England Association of Schools
and Colleges, or comparable accrediting entity. This course must
include instruction on the system of the integumentary system
(skin).
(3)
The applicant for a tattoo, branding or scarification practitioner
permit shall provide documentation, acceptable to the Board, that
s/he completed a course on anatomy and physiology with a grade of
C or better at a college accredited by the New England Association
of Schools and Colleges, or comparable accrediting entity. This
course must include instruction on the system of the integumentary
system (skin). Such other courses or programs as the Board shall
deem appropriate and acceptable may be substituted for the
anatomy course.
(4)
The applicant for all practitioners permits shall submit evidence
satisfactory to the Board of at least two years' actual experience in
the practice of performing body art activities of the kind for which
the applicant seeks a body art practitioner permit to perform,
whether such experience was obtained within or outside of the
commonwealth.
(5)
E.
A practitioner's permit shall be conditioned upon continued compliance
with all applicable provisions of these rules and regulations.
F.
§ 300-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-35
1:347
§ 300-35. Suspension, denial, revocation, or refusal to renew
permit.
The Board may suspend a permit, deny a permit, revoke a permit or
refuse to renew a permit on the following grounds, each of which, in
and of itself, shall constitute full and adequate grounds for suspension,
denial, revocation or refusal to renew:
Any actions which would indicate that the health or safety of the
public would be at risk;
(1)
Fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit, or its
renewal;
(2)
Criminal conduct which the Board determines to be of such a
nature as to render the establishment, practitioner or applicant
unfit to practice body art as evidenced by criminal proceedings
resulting in a conviction, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere or
an admission of sufficient facts;
(3)
Any present or past violation of the Board's regulations governing
the practice of body art;
(4)
Practicing body art while the ability to practice is impaired by
alcohol, drugs, physical disability or mental instability;
(5)
Being habitually drunk or being dependent on or a habitual user
of narcotics, barbiturates, amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other
drugs having similar effects;
(6)
Knowingly permitting, aiding or abetting an unauthorized person
to perform activities requiring a permit;
(7)
Continuing to practice while his/her permit is lapsed, suspended,
or revoked;
(8)
Having been disciplined in another jurisdiction in any way by the
proper permitting authority for reasons substantially the same as
those set forth in the Board's regulations; and
(9)
Other just and sufficient cause which the Board may determine
would render the establishment, practitioner or applicant unfit to
practice body art;
(10)
A.
The Board shall notify an applicant, establishment or practitioner in
writing of any violation of the Board's regulations, for which the Board
intends to deny, revoke, or refuse to renew a permit. The applicant,
establishment or practitioner shall have seven days after receipt of such
written notice in which to comply with the Board's regulations. The
Board may deny, revoke or refuse to renew a permit if the applicant,
establishment or practitioner fails to comply after said seven days,
subject to the procedure outlined in § 300-37
B.
§ 300-35 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-35
1:348
§ 300-36. Suspension of permit.
The Board may summarily suspend a permit pending a final hearing on
the merits on the question of revocation if, based on the evidence before
it, the Board determines that an establishment and/or a practitioner is an
immediate and serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The
suspension of a permit shall take effect immediately upon written notice of
such suspension by the Board.
§ 300-37. Hearing procedures.
§ 300-38. Severability.
If any provision contained in the these regulations is deemed invalid for any
reason, it shall be severed and shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions.
§ 300-39. Violations and penalties.
The fine for a violation of any provision of these rules and regulations shall
be not more than $1,000 per offense. Each day that a violation continues
shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 300-40. Noncriminal disposition.
In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D and Chapter 46, Penalties and
Enforcement, of the General Bylaws, whoever violates any provision of
these rules and regulations may be penalized by noncriminal disposition.
§ 300-41. Effective date.
These rules and regulations shall be effective as of April 4, 2001.
C. Applicants denied a permit may reapply at any time after denial.
The owner of the establishment or practitioner shall be given written
notice of the Board's intent to hold a hearing for the purpose of
suspension, revocation, denial or refusal to renew a permit. This
written notice shall be served through a certified letter sent return
receipt requested or by constable. The notice shall include the date,
time and place of the hearing and the owner of the establishment's or
practitioner's right to be heard. The Board shall hold the hearing no
later than 21 days from the date the written notice is received.
A.
In the case of a suspension of a permit as noted in § 300-35, a hearing
shall be scheduled no later than 21 days from the date of the
suspension.
B.
§ 300-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-41
1:349

ARTICLE VI
Smoking in Membership Associations and Private Clubs
[Adopted effective 1-1-2005]
§ 300-42. Findings and purpose.
Whereas conclusive evidence exists that tobacco smoke causes cancer,
respiratory and cardiac diseases, negative birth outcomes, irritations to the
eyes, nose, and throat; and whereas the harmful effects of tobacco smoke
are not confined to smokers but also cause severe discomfort and illness
to nonsmokers; and whereas environmental tobacco smoke (hereinafter
"ETS"), which includes both exhaled smoke and the side-stream smoke
from burning tobacco products, causes the death of 53,000 Americans
each year (McGinnis JM, Foege W, "Actual Causes of Death in the United
States", JAMA 1993 270:2207-2212); and whereas the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency classified secondhand smoke as a known human
carcinogen and the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) of
the World Health Organization also classified secondhand smoke as a known
human carcinogen (IARC-WHO, 2002); now, therefore, the South Hadley
Board of Health of the Town of South Hadley, MA recognizes the right of
those who wish to breathe smokefree air and establishes this regulation to
protect and improve the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking
in membership associations.
§ 300-43. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated under the authority granted to the South
Hadley Board of Health under MGL c. 111, § 31 that "[b]oards of health
may make reasonable health regulations." It is also promulgated pursuant
to MGL c. 270, § 22(2)(j), which states in part that "[n]othing in this section
shall permit smoking in an area in which smoking is or may hereafter
be prohibited by law including, without limitation: any other law or . .
. health . . . regulation. Nothing in this section shall preempt further
limitation of smoking by the commonwealth . . . or political subdivision of
the commonwealth."
§ 300-44. Definitions.
For the purposes of this regulation, the following words shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any membership association to be the manager or otherwise
in charge of said membership association.
ENCLOSED — A space bounded by walls, with or without windows or
fenestrations, continuous from floor to ceiling and enclosed by one or more
doors, including, but not limited to, an office, function room or hallway.
MEMBERSHIP ASSOCIATION (also known as a "PRIVATE CLUB") — A notfor-
profit entity that has been established and operates, for a charitable,
§ 300-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-44
1:351
philanthropic, civic, social, benevolent, educational, religious, athletic,
recreation or similar purpose, and is comprised of members who collectively
belong to: (i) a society, organization or association of a fraternal nature that
operates under the lodge system, and having one or more affiliated chapters
or branches incorporated in any state; or (ii) a corporation organized under
MGL c. 180; or (iii) an established religious place of worship or instruction
in the commonwealth whose real or personal property is exempt from
taxation; or (iv) a veterans' organization incorporated or chartered by the
Congress of the United States, or otherwise, having one or more affiliated
chapters or branches incorporated in any state. Except for a religious place
of worship or instruction, an entity shall not be a membership association
for the purposes of this definition unless individual membership containing
not less than full membership costs and benefits is required for all members
of the association for a period of not less than 90 days.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, including, but not limited to, an
owner, operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any building,
establishment, business, or restaurant or retail store, or the business agents
or designees of any of the foregoing.
SMOKING or SMOKE — The lighting of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
tobacco product or possessing a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
tobacco or non-tobacco product designed to be combusted and inhaled.
§ 300-45. Smoking prohibited.
§ 300-46. Posting notice of prohibition.
Every membership association upon which smoking is prohibited by and
under the authority of this regulation shall have "no smoking" signs
conspicuously posted so that the signs are clearly visible to all employees,
members and guests. Approved signs and templates for signage design may
be obtained from the Department of Public Health or the South Hadley
Board of Health. It shall be the responsibility of the membership association
to ensure that the appropriate signage is displayed and that an individual or
group renting the space enforces the prohibition against smoking.
§ 300-47. Violations and penalties.
Smoking is prohibited in the enclosed indoor space of membership
associations.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person having control of the membership
association upon which smoking is prohibited by this regulation, or the
business agent or designee of such membership association, to permit
a violation of this regulation.
B.
Any membership association, person having control of the premises or
its business agent, who violates any provision of this regulation, the
violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may be penalized by
A.
§ 300-44 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-47
1:352
§ 300-48. Enforcement.
§ 300-49. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be illegal or
against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the legality of
any remaining paragraphs or provisions.
§ 300-50. Conflict with other laws or regulations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing § 300-45 of this regulation,
nothing in this regulation shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable
fire, health or other regulations so as to permit smoking in areas where it is
prohibited by such fire, health or other regulations.
§ 300-51. Effective date.
This regulation shall be effective as January 1, 2005.
the noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D
or by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue. It shall be
the responsibility of the membership association, person having control
of the premises or its business agent, to ensure compliance with all
sections of this regulation.
The violator shall receive:
(1) In the case of a first violation, a fine of $100.
In the case of a second violation within 24 months of the date of the
first violation, a fine of $200.
(2)
In the case of three or more violations within 24 months of the
current violation, including the current violation, a fine of $300.
(3)
B.
This regulation shall be enforced by the Board of Health and its
designees.
A.
One method of enforcement may be periodic, unannounced inspections
of those establishments subject to this regulation. Any person may
register a complaint to initiate an investigation and enforcement with
the Board of Health.
B.
§ 300-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-51
1:353

ARTICLE VII
Medical Sharps
[Adopted 5-31-2005]
§ 300-52. Findings.
Spent sharps generated in noncommercial, primarily residential settings
can cause serious problems to solid waste and janitorial workers. See
attached DEP policy.46
§ 300-53. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to provide safe collection and disposal of
sharps generated in South Hadley by noncommercial users.
§ 300-54. Collection and disposal.
In accordance with the attached DEP policy,47 the DPW Solid Waste
Coordinator and staff, in coordination with other Town of South Hadley
agencies such as the Board of Health and Council on Aging, will provide
collection and disposal of medical sharps.
§ 300-55. Collection containers.
Each Town of South Hadley residential user of sharps will be provided with
an approved sharps container free of charge. When full, these containers
may be brought to the DPW or other participating location and exchanged
for an empty approved sharps container. The full containers will be
aggregated and shipped under a written agreement with an approved
medical waste hauler, all in accordance with the attached DEP policy.48
46.Editor's Note: The Policy for the Management of Sharps Generated from Noncommercial
Sources is included as an attachment to this chapter.
47.Editor's Note: The Policy for the Management of Sharps Generated from Noncommercial
Sources is included as an attachment to this chapter.
48.Editor's Note: The Policy for the Management of Sharps Generated from Noncommercial
Sources is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 300-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-55
1:355

ARTICLE VIII
Outdoor Wood-Burning Boilers
[Adopted effective 2-1-2007]
§ 300-56. Findings and purpose; effective date.
§ 300-57. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OUTDOOR WOOD-BURNING BOILER — A wood-fired boiler, surrounded by
a water jacket, in a freestanding structure with a smoke stack, used to heat
water that is carried by piping to provide heat or hot water to a building/
dwelling.
WOOD FUEL — All wood intended to be used as fuel, including but not
limited to trees, cordwood, logs, lumber, sawdust, and wood from
manufacturing processes (butt offs, shavings, turnings, sander dust), wood
pellets, slabs, bark, chips waste pallets. This definition does not include
materials chemically treated with any preservative, paint or oil.
§ 300-58. Permit required; nuisances.
Whereas outdoor wood-burning boilers have been shown, because of
their design, to emit high quantities of particulate matter and other
noxious fumes; and whereas health, safety and nuisance problems have
arisen from the use of these boilers; and whereas poor management
and poor fuel exacerbate the effects of the smoke created by the
firing of these units; the Board of Health of the Town of South Hadley,
pursuant to MGL c. 111, §§ 31 and 31C, hereby adopts these regulations
in order to minimize the human health hazards resulting from the
smoke and noxious fumes emitted by outdoor wood-burning boilers, to
encourage proper techniques in the use and location of these boilers,
and to promote the public comfort and convenience.
A.
B. These regulations shall be effective February 1, 2007.
A permit is required from the Board of Health to operate an existing
outdoor wood-burning boiler after February 1, 2007. The use of an
existing outdoor wood-burning boiler shall conform to the following
conditions:
Boilers located less than 400 feet from a dwelling other than the
one being served must have a smokestack height of at least 50% of
the height of the eave line of the highest abutting residence plus
two feet.
(1)
Manufacturer's recommendations for the installation and use of the
unit must be followed.
(2)
(3) Only untreated wood fuel may be burned in the boiler unit.
A.
§ 300-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-58
1:357
§ 300-59. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 300-60. Variances.
§ 300-61. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of these regulations shall be punished as described in MGL c.
111, § 31C. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
The use of an existing outdoor wood burning boiler not permitted
within 60 days of the effective date of these regulations is
prohibited.
(4)
The Board of Health shall have the right to take appropriate
enforcement or other action, in accordance with Chapter 111 of the
General Laws, with respect to any such boiler that it determines
constitutes a nuisance.
B.
The installation of outdoor wood burning boilers after the effective date
of these regulations is prohibited.
C.
The Board of Health may vary any provision of these regulations with
respect to any particular case when, in its opinion:
(1) The enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice; and
The applicant has proved that the same degree of protection can be
achieved without strict application of the particular provision.
(2)
A.
B. All variances shall be considered at a hearing by the Board of Health.
§ 300-58 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-61
1:358
ARTICLE IX
Floor Drains
[Adopted 6-12-2007]
§ 300-62. Purpose.
§ 300-63. Authority; applicability.
The Town of South Hadley Board of Health adopts the following regulation
pursuant to authorization granted by MGL c. 111, §§ 31 and 122. The
regulations shall apply, as specified herein, to all applicable facilities,
existing and new, as well as private residences within the Town of South
Hadley.
§ 300-64. Definitions.
For the purposes of this regulation, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings:
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL FACILITY — A public or private
establishment where the principal use is the supply, sale, and/or
Whereas:
Floor drains in industrial and commercial facilities and private
dwellings are often tied to a system leading to a leaching structure
(e.g., dry well, cesspool, leach field) or a septic system; and
(1)
Poor management practices and accidental and/or intentional
discharges may lead petroleum and other toxic or hazardous
materials into these drainage systems in facilities managing these
products; and
(2)
Improper maintenance or inappropriate use of these systems may
allow the passage of contaminants or pollutants entering the drain
to discharge from the leaching structures and septic systems have
repeatedly threatened surface and ground water quality
throughout Massachusetts; and
(3)
Surface and ground water resources in the Town of South Hadley
contribute to the Town's drinking water supplies.
(4)
A.
Therefore, the Town of South Hadley Board of Health adopts the
following regulation, under its authority as specified in § 300-63, as a
preventative measure for the purposes of:
Preserving and protecting the Town of South Hadley's drinking
water resources from discharges of pollutants to the ground via
floor drains; and
(1)
Minimizing the threat of economic losses to the Town due to such
discharges.
(2)
B.
§ 300-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-64
1:359
manufacture of services, products, or information, including, but not limited
to: manufacturing, processing, or other industrial operations; service or
retail establishments; printing or publishing establishments; research and
development facilities; small- or large-quantity generators of hazardous
waste; laboratories; hospitals.
DEPARTMENT — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
DISCHARGE — The accidental or intentional disposal, deposit, injection,
dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration, or placing of toxic or hazardous
material or waste upon or into any land or water so that such hazardous
waste or any constituent thereof may enter the land or waters of the
commonwealth. Discharge includes, without limitation, leakage of such
materials from failed or discarded containers or storage systems and
disposal of such materials into any on-site leaching structure or sewage
disposal system.
FLOOR DRAIN — An intended drainage point on a floor constructed to be
otherwise impervious which serves as the point of entry into any subsurface
drainage, treatment, disposal, containment, or other plumbing system.
LEACHING STRUCTURE — Any subsurface structure through which a fluid
that is introduced will pass and enter the environment, including, but not
limited to, dry wells, leaching catch basins, cesspools, leach fields, and oil/
water separators that are not water-tight.
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A device designed and installed so as to
separate and retain petroleum-based oil or grease, flammable wastes as
well as sand and particles from normal wastes while permitting normal
sewage or liquid wastes to discharge into the drainage system by gravity.
Other common names for such systems include MDC traps, gasoline and
sand traps, grit and oil separators, grease traps, and interceptors.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual,
or potential hazard to water supplies or other hazards to human health if
such substance or mixture were discharged to land or water of the Town
of South Hadley. Toxic or hazardous materials include, without limitation,
synthetic organic chemicals, petroleum products, heavy metals, radioactive
or infectious wastes, acids and alkalis and all substances defined as toxic
or hazardous under Massachusetts General Laws (MGL) Chapters 21C and
21E or Massachusetts hazardous waste regulations (310 CMR 30.000), and
also include such products as solvents, thinners, and pesticides in quantities
greater than normal household use.
USE OF TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — The handling, generation,
treatment, storage, or management of toxic or hazardous materials.
§ 300-65. Discharge prohibitions.
With the exception of discharges that have received (or have applied and
will receive) a Department-issued permit prior to the effective date of this
§ 300-64 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-65
1:360
regulation, no floor drain(s) shall be allowed to discharge, with or without
pretreatment (such as an oil/water separator), to the ground, a leaching
structure, or septic system in any industrial or commercial facility if such
floor drain is located in either:
§ 300-66. Requirements for existing facilities.
A. An industrial or commercial process area;
A petroleum, toxic, or hazardous materials and/or waste storage area;
or
B.
A leased facility without either Subsection A or B of this section, but in
which the potential for a change of use of the property to a use which
does have either Subsection A or B is, in the opinion of the Board of
Health or its agent, sufficient to warrant the elimination of the ground
discharge at the present.
C.
The owner of a facility in operation prior to the effective date of this
regulation with a prohibited (as defined under § 300-65) floor drain
system shall:
Disconnect and plug all applicable inlets to and outlets from (where
possible) applicable leaching structures, oil/water separators, and/
or septic systems;
(1)
Remove all existing sludge in oil/water separators, septic systems
and, where accessible, leaching structures. Any sludge determined
to be a hazardous waste shall be disposed of in accordance with
state hazardous waste regulations (310 CMR 30.000). Remedial
activity involving any excavation and/or soil or groundwater
sampling must be performed in accordance with appropriate
Department policies;
(2)
Alter the floor drains systems so that the floor drain shall be either:
Connected to a holding tank that meets all applicable
requirements of Department policies and regulations, with
hauling records submitted to the South Hadley Board of Health
at the time of hauling;
(a)
Connected to a municipal sanitary sewer line, if available, with
all applicable department and local permits; or
(b)
Permanently sealed. (Any facility sealing a drain shall be
required to submit for approval to the Board of Health a
hazardous waste management plan detailing the means of
collecting, storing, and disposing of any hazardous waste
generated by the facility, including any spill or other discharge
of hazardous materials or wastes.)
(c)
(3)
A.
§ 300-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-66
1:361
§ 300-67. Effective dates for all facilities.
The effective date of this regulation is the date posted on the front page
of the regulations, which shall be identical to the date of adoption of the
regulation.
§ 300-68. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with provisions of this regulation will result in the levy
of fines of not less than $200, but no more than $1,000. Each day's failure
to comply with the provisions of this regulation shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 300-69. Severability.
Each provision of this regulation shall be construed as separate to the end
that, if any provision, or sentence, clause or phrase thereof shall be held
invalid for any reason, the remainder of that section and all other sections
shall continue in full force and effect.
Compliance with all provisions of this regulation must be accomplished
in a manner consistent with Massachusetts Plumbing, Building, and
Fire Code requirements.
B.
Upon complying with one of the options listed under Subsection A(3),
the owner/operator of the facility shall notify the Department of the
closure of said system by filing the Department's UIC Notification Form
(which may be obtained by calling 617/292-5770) with the Department,
and sending a copy to the South Hadley Board of Health.
C.
Existing facilities.
Owners/Operators of a facility affected by this regulation shall
comply with all of its provisions within 120 days of the effective
date.
(1)
All applicable discharges to the leaching structures and septic
systems shall be discontinued.
(2)
A.
New facilities.
As of the effective date of the regulation, all new construction and/
or applicable change of use within the Town of South Hadley shall
comply with the provisions of this regulation.
(1)
Certification of conformance with the provisions of this regulation
by the Board of Health shall be required prior to issuance of
construction and occupancy permits.
(2)
The use of any new oil/water separator shall comply with the
same requirements as for existing systems, as specified above in
§ 300-66B.
(3)
B.
§ 300-66 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-69
1:362
ARTICLE X
Fees for Use of Outside Consultants49
[Adopted 11-23-2010]
§ 300-70. Authority and purpose; when effective.
As provided by Chapter 593 of the Acts of 1989, MGL c. 44, § 53G, and
pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31, the South Hadley Board of Health adopts
the following regulation for the establishment of a special account, effective
upon publication.
§ 300-71. Authority to impose fees.
The South Hadley Board of Health may impose reasonable fees for the
employment of outside consultants, engaged by the Board of Health, for
the review of any application submitted to the Board of Health pursuant to
the requirements of the Subdivision Control Law, the State Environmental
Code, or any other state or municipal statute, bylaw or regulation, as they
may be amended or enacted from time to time.
§ 300-72. Deposit of funds; expenditures.
Funds received by the Board pursuant to this regulation shall be deposited
with the Town Treasurer, who shall establish a special account for this
purpose. Expenditures from this special account shall be made at the
direction of the Board of Health without further appropriation as provided
in MGL c. 44, § 53G.
§ 300-73. Authorized expenditures; failure to pay fee.
Expenditures from this special account shall be made only in connection
with the review of a specific project or projects for which a review fee has
been or will be collected from the applicant. Failure of an applicant to pay a
review fee shall be grounds for denial of the permit application.
§ 300-74. Notice of consultant selection; appeals.
The Board of Health shall give written notice to the applicant of the
selection of an outside consultant, which notice shall state the identity
of the consultant and the amount of the fee to be charged to the
applicant. Such notice shall be deemed to have been given on the date
it is mailed or delivered.
A.
The applicant may appeal the selection of the outside consultant to the
South Hadley Selectboard, which may disqualify the outside consultant
selected only on the grounds that the consultant has a conflict of
interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The
minimum qualifications shall consist either of an educational degree in
B.
49.Editor's Note: See the consultant selection form, included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 300-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-74
1:363
or related to the field at issue or three or more years of practice in
the field at issue or a related field. Such an appeal must be in writing
and received by the Selectboard, and a copy received by the Board of
Health, so as to be received within 10 days of the date of the notice of
the selection of the consultant. The required time limits for action upon
the application shall be extended by the duration of the administrative
appeal.
§ 300-74 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-74
1:364
ARTICLE XI
Refuse and Recycling Collection
[Adopted effective 5-1-2013; amended in its entirety 9-6-2017]
§ 300-75. Findings, purpose and authority.
§ 300-76. Hauler permits; collection requirements.
These regulations provide for the systematic collection of refuse and
recyclables in order to promote recycling, to comply with statemandated
waste bans and to assist in cost reduction for residential
waste disposal by removing those items from the waste stream which
can be managed more effectively in other ways. The Board of Health of
the Town of South Hadley adopts these regulations under the provisions
of Chapter 111, §§ 31, 31A, 31B, 122 and 150A of the Massachusetts
General Laws.
A.
South Hadley has a mandatory recycling bylaw that requires all
residents and businesses to recycle. All commerical haulers collecting,
removing, and/or transporting solid waste and/or recyclables on behalf
of Town residents or businesses must obtain an annual permit from the
Board of Health and must comply with the following Board of Health
regulations.
B.
All haulers shall apply annually for a hauler permit from the South
Hadley Board of Health by submitting an application form provided
by the Board. A completed application form, including any information
requested by the Town, and payment of related fees are required
before a permit will be processed. Any application which fails to include
all information requested in the Board of Health regulations shall be
deemed incomplete and shall be denied. The permit shall be valid for
one calendar year and shall be renewable on the first day of January
each year.
A.
All collection vehicles shall display a Town of South Hadley refuse
hauler permit sticker at all times.
B.
Haulers must provide refuse and recycling services bundled together,
i.e., the hauler may not provide refuse services alone. The bundled
service must provide customers with solid waste and recyclables
collection at a rate that reflects the cost of providing both services.
Solid waste and recycling services must be provided by the same
permitted hauler unless otherwise preapproved by the Board of Health.
C.
Haulers shall only collect for disposal those items acceptable for
disposal. Waste ban items, which include recyclables, should not be
included with trash. It is the responsibility of the hauler to refuse
to accept a container with mixed trash and recyclables. Improper
collection of waste may be cause for immediate and permanent
revocation of the hauler's permit. Please refer to the attached list of
D.
§ 300-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-76
1:365
§ 300-77. Recycling; solid waste containers; refusal to collect;
monitoring of compliance.
§ 300-78. Enforcement; vehicle requirements; violations and
penalties.
waste banned items, which may not be accepted at Massachusetts'
disposal facilities.50
Recycling services must be provided to all customers as a part of
the hauler's provision of integrated waste management services. This
includes the collection of both solid waste and recyclable materials and
the delivery of these materials to an appropriate disposal facility (in
the case of solid waste) and recycling processing facility (in the case of
recycling materials).
A.
The following information must be provided annually prior to renewal
of annual permit:
(1) A completed solid waste and recycling report.
A copy of your "sorry note" or other means of notifying customers
of improper recycling or trash disposal.
(2)
A copy of recycling educational material you provide to your
customers.
(3)
Copies of certificates of insurance for public liability and property
insurance.
(4)
B.
Haulers shall request their customers to put refuse in secured
containers to prevent littering by animals. All storage bins/dumpsters
provided to customers for storage of refuse shall be covered.
C.
In the event that the hauler refuses to collect any materials, the hauler
will notify such customers in writing of the reason(s) for refusal to
collect the waste. The Board of Health will, where possible, assist
the hauler in helping customers come into compliance with these
regulations.
D.
The Board of Health and its agents, as defined in § 300-78A, reserve
the right to monitor collection vehicles, loads, litter and/or nuisance
conditions and routes at reasonable times in order to ensure that all
hauler services comply with all applicable state and local laws, bylaws
and regulations. The Board of Health retains the right to define and
determine nuisance conditions.
E.
The individuals empowered to enforce the provision of these
regulations shall be the agent of the Board of Health, any member
of the Board of Health, the DPW Solid Waste Coordinator, other DPW
A.
50.Editor's Note: Said list is on file in the Town offices.
§ 300-76 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-78
1:366
§ 300-79. Appeals.
Any party cited for a violation of these regulations may appeal such citation
by filing a written notice of appeal with the South Hadley Board of Health
within seven days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, from
the date of said citation. A hearing will be held within 60 days from the
date of the filing of the appeal. Written notice of the hearing date will
be delivered to the applicant at least two weeks prior to the scheduled
date. The hearing will be conducted in accordance with the established
procedures of the Board of Health.
§ 300-80. Severability.
If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this regulation or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid or
unenforceable, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby, but shall
continue in full force and effect.
personnel designated by the Superintendent or any police officer of the
Town.
Enforcement agent(s) may inspect collection vehicles and loads at
reasonable times in order to ensure that they comply with all applicable
state laws or local regulations.
B.
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street or highway within the
Town unless such vehicle is so constructed and so loaded as to prevent
its contents from spilling, dropping, shifting, leaking or otherwise
escaping. Vehicles loaded with any material which may be blown about
by the wind shall be suitably covered to prevent the contents from
being blown upon the streets or highways. All vehicles must comply
with the Town's traffic regulations.
C.
In the event that a hauler fails to follow these regulations, the Board
of Health reserves the right to impose reasonable fines or take other
action in accordance with state and local regulations. Failure to comply
with the requirements of these regulations could result in the loss of
the refuse hauler's permit.
D.
§ 300-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-80
1:367

ARTICLE XII
Smoking in Workplaces and Public Places
[Adopted 12-31-2013]
§ 300-81. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to protect the health of the employees and
general public in the Town of South Hadley.
§ 300-82. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated under the authority granted to the South
Hadley Board of Health pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31 that "[b]oards of
health may make reasonable health regulations." (Note: This sentence is
only applicable to Board of Health regulations. If enacting an ordinance or
bylaw, this section can begin with the second sentence, with the word "also"
omitted.) It is also promulgated pursuant to MGL c. 270, § 22(j), which
states in part that "[n]othing in this section shall permit smoking in an
area in which smoking is or may hereafter be prohibited by law including,
without limitation: any other law or. . . health. . . regulation. Nothing in this
section shall preempt further limitation of smoking by the commonwealth. .
. or political subdivision of the commonwealth."
§ 300-83. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following words shall have the following
meanings, unless the context requires otherwise:
COMPENSATION — Money, gratuity, privilege, or benefit received from
an employer in return for work performed or services rendered.
E-CIGARETTE — Any electronic device, not approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration, composed of a mouthpiece,
heating element, battery and/or electronic circuits that provides a
vapor of liquid nicotine to the user, or relies on vaporization of any
liquid or solid nicotine. This term shall include such devices whether
they are manufactured as e-cigarettes, e-cigars, e-pipes or under any
other product name.
EMPLOYEE — An individual or person who performs a service for
compensation for an employer at the employer's workplace, including
a contract employee, temporary employee, and independent contractor
who performs a service in the employer's workplace for more than a deminimus
amount of time.
EMPLOYER — An individual, person, partnership, association,
corporation, trust, organization, school, college, university or other
educational institution or other legal entity, whether public, quasipublic,
private, or nonprofit, which uses the services of one or more
employees at one or more workplaces, at any one time, including the
Town of South Hadley.
A.
§ 300-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-83
1:369
§ 300-84. Smoking prohibited.
ENCLOSED — A space bounded by walls, with or without windows or
fenestrations, continuous from floor to ceiling and enclosed by one or
more doors, including but not limited to an office, function room or
hallway.
OUTDOOR SPACE — An outdoor area, open to the air at all times and
which cannot be enclosed by a wall or side covering.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment which is not required
to possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or
offer for sale to consumers, but not for resale, tobacco products and
paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is merely incidental,
and in which the entry of persons under the age of 18 is prohibited at all
times, and which maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco
products as required to be issued by the South Hadley Board of Health.
SMOKING (OR SMOKE) — The lighting of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other tobacco product or possessing a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other tobacco or non-tobacco product designed to be combusted and
inhaled.
SMOKING BAR — An establishment that primarily is engaged in the
retail sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the
premises and is required by MGL c. 270, § 22 to maintain a valid permit
to operate a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department
of Revenue. "Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those
establishments that are commonly known as "cigar bars" and "hookah
bars."
WORKPLACE — An indoor area, structure or facility, or a portion
thereof, at which one or more employees perform a service for
compensation for an employer, other enclosed spaces rented to or
otherwise used by the public; and where the employer has the right or
authority to exercise control over the space.
Terms not defined herein shall be defined as set forth in MGL c.
270, § 22 and/or 105 CMR 661. To the extent any of the definitions
herein conflict with MGL c. 270, § 22 and 105 CMR 661, the definition
contained in this regulation shall control.
B.
It shall be the responsibility of the employer to provide a smoke-free
environment for all employees working in an enclosed workplace.
A.
Smoking is hereby prohibited in South Hadley in accordance with MGL
c. 270, § 22 (commonly known as the "Smoke-free Workplace Law).
B.
Pursuant to MGL c. 270, § 22(j), smoking is also hereby prohibited in
the following places:
(1) Smoking bars, including cigar bars and hookah bars.
(2) Retail tobacco stores.
C.
§ 300-83 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-84
1:370
In the area within 30 feet of any municipal building entrance or
exit.
(3)
(4) Municipal-owned parks and playgrounds.
(5) Municipal-owned athletic fields.
(6) Municipal-owned beaches and swimming areas.
(7) Membership associations (private clubs).
(8) Hotels, motels, bed-and-breakfasts and lodging homes.
All outdoor areas of restaurants, bars, taverns and private clubs
where food and/or beverages are sold, served, or otherwise
consumed or carried.
(9)
A nursing home, licensed pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 71, may apply to
the South Hadley Board of Health for designation of part of the facility
as a residence.
All applications shall designate the residential area of the nursing
home. The residential area shall not contain an employee
workspace, such as offices, rest rooms or other areas used
primarily by employees.
(1)
(2) The entire facility may not be designated as a residence.
The designated residential area must be for the sole use of
permanent residents of the facility. No temporary or short-term
resident may reside in the residential portion of the facility.
(3)
All areas in the designated residential area in which smoking is
allowed shall be conspicuously designated as smoking areas and
be adequately ventilated to prevent the migration of smoke to
nonsmoking areas.
(4)
The facility shall provide suitable documentation, acceptable to the
South Hadley Board of Health, that the facility is the permanent
domicile of the residents residing in that portion of the facility, that
information on the hazards of smoking and secondhand smoke have
been provided to all residents and that smoking cessation aids are
available to all residents who use tobacco products.
(5)
The designated residential area shall be in conformance with the
smoking restriction requirements of MGL c. 111, § 72X and 105
CMR 150.015(D)(11)(b). All residential areas shall be clearly
designated as such and shall not be altered or otherwise changed
without the express approval of the South Hadley Board of Health.
(6)
All areas of a nursing home not designated as a residence shall
comply with this section.
(7)
D.
§ 300-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-84
1:371
§ 300-85. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The nursing home shall make reasonable accommodations for an
employee, resident or visitor who does not wish to be exposed to
tobacco smoke.
(8)
Upon compliance with this section, submission of the required
documentation and satisfactory inspection, the South Hadley Board
of Health shall certify the designated portion of the facility as a
residence. The certification shall be valid for one year from the date
of issuance. No fewer than 30 days before the expiration of the
certification, the facility may apply for recertification. If the South
Hadley Board of Health does not renew the certification before its
expiration, or provide notice that it has found sufficient cause to
not recertify the residence portion of the nursing home as such, the
certification shall be considered to continue until the time as the
Board of Health notifies the nursing home of its certification status.
(9)
The use of e-cigarettes is prohibited wherever smoking is prohibited
per MGL c. 270, § 22 and Subsection C of this section.
E.
An owner, manager, or other person in control of a building, vehicle or
vessel who violates this article, in a manner other than by smoking in a
place where smoking is prohibited, shall be punished by a fine of:
(1) For the first violation: $100;
For a second violation occurring within two years of the date of the
first offense: $200; and
(2)
For a third or subsequent violation occurring within two years of
the second violation: $300.
(3)
A.
Each calendar day on which a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
B.
This regulation shall be enforced by the Board of Health and its
designees.
C.
Violations of § 300-84B shall be disposed of by a civil penalty using the
noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D without an enabling ordinance or bylaw. The disposition of fines
assessed shall be subject to MGL c. 111, § 188.
D.
Violations of § 300-84A, C, D and E may be disposed of by a civil penalty
using the noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in
MGL c. 40, § 21D.
E.
If an owner, manager or other person in control of a building, vehicle
or vessel violates this regulation repeatedly, demonstrating egregious
noncompliance as defined by regulation of the Department of Public
Health, the Board of Health may revoke or suspend the license to
F.
§ 300-84 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-85
1:372
§ 300-86. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be illegal or
against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the legality of
any remaining paragraphs or provisions.
§ 300-87. Conflict with other laws or regulations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 300-84 of this regulation, nothing in this
regulation shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable fire, health or
other regulations so as to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by
such fire, health or other regulations.
§ 300-88. Effective date.
This regulation shall be effective as of December 31, 2013.
operate and shall send notice of the revocation or suspension to the
Department of Public Health.
Any person may register a complaint to initiate an investigation and
enforcement with the Board of Health, the local inspection department
or the equivalent.
G.
§ 300-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-88
1:373

ARTICLE XIII
Sale of Tobacco Products and Nicotine Delivery Products
[Adopted 4-1-2015; amended in its entirety 4-6-2016, effective
9-6-2017]
§ 300-89. Findings and purpose.
Findings.
Whereas there exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoking
causes cancer, respiratory and cardiac diseases, negative birth
outcomes, irritations to the eyes, nose and throat. [NOTE: Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, (CDC) (2012), Health Effects of
Cigarette Smoking Fact Sheet. Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/
tobacco/data_statistice/fact_sheets/health_effects/
effects_cig_smoking/index.htm.]
(1)
Whereas among the 15.7% of students nationwide who currently
smoke cigarettes and were less than 18 years old, 14.1% usually
obtained them by buying them in a store (i.e. convenience store,
supermarket, or discount store) or gas station. [NOTE: CDC (2009),
Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance Summaries [Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR) 2010: 59, 11 (No. 55-55)]
Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/HealthyYouth/yrbs/index.htm.]
(2)
Whereas the United States Department of Health and Human
Services has concluded that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine or
herein [NOTE: CDC (2010), How Tobacco Smoke Causes Disease:
The Biology and Behavioral Basis for Smoking-Attributable
Disease. Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/
data_statistics/sgr/2010/.] and the Surgeon General found that
nicotine exposure during adolescence, a critical window for brain
development, may have lasting adverse consequences for brain
development [NOTE: Health and Human Services. 2014. The
Health Consequences of Smoking — 50 Years of Progress: A Report
of the Surgeon General, 2014 U.S. Surgeon General's Report
Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, Executive
Summary p. 13. Retrieved from:http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/
library/reports/50-years-of-progress/exec-summary.pdf.] and that it
is addiction to nicotine that keeps youth smoking past adolescence.
[NOTE: Health and Human Services. 2014. The Health
Consequences of Smoking — 50 Years of Progress: A Report of
the Surgeon General, 2014 U.S. Surgeon General's Report Atlanta:
U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, Executive Summary
p. 13. Retrieved from: http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/
reports/50-years-of- progress/exec-summary.pdf.]
(3)
Whereas a Federal District Court found that Phillip Morris, RJ
Reynolds and other leading cigarette manufacturers "spent billions
(4)
A.
§ 300-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-89
1:375
of dollars every year on their marketing activities in order to
encourage young people to try and then continue purchasing their
cigarette products in order to provide the replacement smokers
they need to survive" and that these companies were likely to
continue targeting underage smokers. [NOTE: United States v.
Phillip Morris, Inc., RJ Reynolds Tobacco Co., et al., 449 F. Supp.2d
1 (D.D.C. 2006) at Par. 3301 and Pp. 1605-07.]
Whereas more than 80% of all adult smokers begin smoking before
the age of 18, more than 90% do so before leaving their teens,
and more than 3.5 million middle and high school students smoke.
[NOTE: SAMHSA, Calculated based on data in 2011 National
Survey on Drug Use and Health and U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services (HHA). The Health Consequences of Smoking-50
Years of Progress. A Report of the Surgeon General, 2014.]
(5)
Whereas the Institute of Medicine (IOM) concludes that raising the
minimum age of legal access to tobacco products to 21 will reduce
tobacco initiation, particularly among adolescents 15 to 17, and
will improve health across the lifespan and save lives. [NOTE: IOM
(Institute of Medicine) 2015. Public Health Implications of Raising
the Minimum Age of Legal Access to Tobacco Products. Washington
DC: The National Academies Press, 2015.]
(6)
Whereas sales of flavored little cigars increased by 23% between
2008 and 2010 [NOTE: Delnevo, C., Flavored Little Cigars memo,
September 21, 2011, from Neilson market scanner data.] and many
noncigarette tobacco products, such as cigars and cigarillos, can
be sold in a single dose; enjoy a relatively low tax as compared to
cigarettes; are available in fruit, candy and alcohol flavors; and are
popular among youth. [NOTE: CDC (2009), Youth Risk Behavior,
Surveillance Summaries (MMWR 2010: 59, 12, note 5). Retrieved
from: http:www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss5905.pdf.]
(7)
Whereas the federal Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco
Control Act (FSPTCA), enacted in 2009, prohibited candy- and
fruit-flavored cigarettes, [NOTE: 21 U.S.C. § 387g.] largely because
these flavored products were marketed to youth and young adults,
[NOTE: Carpenter CM, Wayne GF, Pauly JL, et al. 2005. "New
Cigarette Brands with Flavors that Appeal to Youth: Tobacco
Marketing Strategies." Health Affairs. 24(6): 1601-1610; Lewis M
and Wackowski O. 2006. "Dealing with an Innovative Industry: A
Look at Flavored Cigarettes Promoted by Mainstream Brands."
American Journal of Public Health. 96(2): 244-251; Connolly GN.
2004. "Sweet and Spicy Flavours: New Brands for Minorities and
Youth." Tobacco Control. 13(3): 211-212; U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services. 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth
and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S.
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 537,
www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-
(8)
§ 300-89 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-89
1:376
tobacco-use/full-report.pdf.] and younger smokers were more likely
to have tried these products than older smokers, [NOTE: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing
Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the
Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health,
p. 539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing- youthtobacco-
use/full-report.pdf.] neither federal nor Massachusetts
laws restrict sales of flavored noncigarette tobacco products, such
as cigars, cigarillos, smokeless tobacco, hookah tobacco, and
electronic devices and the nicotine solutions used in these devices.
Whereas the United States Food and Drug Administration and the
United States Surgeon General have stated that flavored tobacco
products are considered to be "starter" products that help establish
smoking habits that can lead to long-term addiction. [NOTE: Food
and Drug Administration. 2011. Fact Sheet: Flavored Tobacco
Products, www.fda.gov/downloads/TobaccoProducts/
ProtectingKidsfromTobacco/Flavored Tobacco/UCMJ83214.pdf;
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing
Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the
Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health,
p. 539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youthtobacco-
use/full-report.pdf.]
(9)
Whereas the United States Surgeon General recognized in his
2014 report that a complementary strategy to assist in eradicating
tobacco related death and disease is for local governments to
ban categories of products from retail sale. [NOTE: Health and
Human Services. 2014. The Health Consequences of Smoking — 50
Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General, 2014 Atlanta:
U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 85.]
(10)
Whereas the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention has reported that current electronic cigarette use
among middle and high school students tripled from 2013 to 2014.
[NOTE: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2015.
"Tobacco Use Among Middle and High School Students — United
States, 2011-2014," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
(MMWR) 64(14): 381-385.]
(11)
Whereas nicotine solutions, which are consumed via electronic
or battery-operated delivery smoking devices, such as electronic
cigarettes, are sold in dozens of flavors that appeal to youth, such
as cotton candy and bubble gum. [NOTE: Cameron JM, Howell
DN, White JR, et al. 2013. "Variable and Potentially Fatal Amounts
of Nicotine in E-cigarette Nicotine Solutions." Tobacco Control.
[Electronic publication ahead of print],
http://tobaccocontrol.bmi.com/content/early/2013/02/12/
(12)
§ 300-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-89
1:377
tobaccocontrol-2012-050604.full; U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and
Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S.
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health
Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 549,
www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youthtobacco-
use/full-report.pdf.]
Whereas the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection has classified liquid nicotine in any amount as an
"acutely hazardous waste" (310 CMR 30.136).
(13)
Whereas in a lab analysis conducted by the FDA, electronic
cigarette cartridges that were labeled as containing no nicotine
actually had low levels of nicotine present in all cartridges tested,
except for one. [NOTE: Food and Drug Administration, Summary
of Results: Laboratory Analysis of Electronic Cigarettes Conducted
by FDA, available at: http://www.fda.gov/newsevents/publichealth
focus/ucm 173146.htm.]
(14)
Whereas according to the CDC's youth risk behavior surveillance
system, the percentage of high school students in Massachusetts
who reported the use of cigars within the past 30 days is 10.8%
in 2013. [NOTE: CDC (2013) Youth Risk Behavior, Surveillance
Summaries (MMWR 2014: 63 (No SS-04)). Retrieved from:
www.cdc.gov.]
(15)
Whereas data from the National Youth Tobacco Survey indicate
that more than 2/5 of United States middle and high school
smokers report using flavored little cigars or flavored cigarettes.
[NOTE: King BA, Tynan MA, Dube SR, et al. 2013. "Flavored-
Little-Cigar and Flavored-Cigarette Use Among U.S. Middle and
High School Students." Journal of Adolescent Health, [article in
press], www.jahonline.org/article/S1054-139X%2813%2900415-1/
abstract.]
(16)
Whereas in Massachusetts, youth use of cigars and smokeless
tobacco (12.3%) is higher than the rate of current cigarette use
(10.7%) for 2013 and has remained elevated since 2009. [NOTE:
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Data Brief, Youth Tobacco Use in
Massachusetts: Survey Results from 1993 to 2013.]
(17)
Whereas research shows that increased cigar prices significantly
decreased the probability of male adolescent cigar use and a 10%
increase in cigar prices would reduce use by 3.4%. [NOTE: Ringel,
J., Wasserman, J., & Andreyeva, T. (2005) Effects of Public Policy on
Adolescents' Cigar Use: Evidence from the National Youth Tobacco
Survey. American Journal of Public Health, 95(6), 995-998, doi:
10.2105/AJPH.2003.030411 and cited in Cigar, Cigarillo and Little
Cigar Use among Canadian Youth: Are We Underestimating the
(18)
§ 300-89 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-89
1:378
§ 300-90. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted to the
South Hadley Board of Health by Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter
111, § 31 which states "Boards of Health may make reasonable health
regulations."
§ 300-91. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
BLUNT WRAP — Any tobacco product manufactured or packaged as a wrap
or as a hollow tube made wholly or in part from tobacco that is designed or
intended to be filled by the consumer with loose tobacco or other fillers.
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR — A distinguishable taste or aroma, other than
the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint or wintergreen, imparted or
detectable either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product or
component part thereof, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas
relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert,
alcoholic beverage, herb or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco
product shall be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because
of the provision of ingredient information or the use of additives or
Magnitude of this Problem?, J. Prim. P. 2011, Aug: 32(3-4): 161-70.
Retrieved from: www.nebi.nim.gov/pubmed/21809109.]
Whereas the sale of tobacco products is incompatible with the
mission of health care institutions because these products are
detrimental to the public health and their presence in health care
institutions undermines efforts to educate patients on the safe and
effective use of medication, including cessation medication.
(19)
Whereas educational institutions sell tobacco products to a
younger population, who is particularly at risk for becoming
smokers and such sale of tobacco products is incompatible with
the mission of educational institutions that educate a younger
population about social, environmental and health risks and harms.
(20)
Whereas the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has held that "
. . . [t]he right to engage in business must yield to the paramount
right of government to protect the public health by any rational
means. [NOTE: Druzik et al v. Board of Health of Haverhill, 324
Mass. 129 (1949).]
(21)
Now, therefore it is the intention of the South Hadley Board of Health
to regulate the sale of tobacco products.
B.
§ 300-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-91
1:379
flavorings that do not contribute to the distinguishable taste or aroma of the
product.
CIGAR — Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any
substance containing tobacco with or without a tip or mouthpiece not
otherwise defined as a cigarette under Massachusetts General Law, Chapter
64C, § 1, Paragraph 1.
COMPONENT PART — Any element of a tobacco product, including, but not
limited to, the tobacco, filter and paper, but not including any constituent.
CONSTITUENT — Any ingredient, substance, chemical or compound, other
than tobacco, water or reconstituted tobacco sheet, that is added by the
manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacturing
or packaging of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke
constituent.
COUPON — Any card, paper, note, form, statement, ticket or other issue
distributed for commercial or promotional purposes to be later surrendered
by the bearer so as to receive an article, service or accommodation without
charge or at a discount price.
DISTINGUISHABLE — Perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Any public or private college, school,
professional school, scientific or technical institution, university or other
institution furnishing a program of higher education.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust or
other organized group of individuals that uses the services of one or more
employees.
FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any tobacco product or component
part thereof that contains a constituent that has or produces a
characterizing flavor. A public statement, claim or indicia made or
disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person
authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public
statements concerning such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has
or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence
that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product.
HEALTH CARE INSTITUTION — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or trust or any person or group of persons that provides health
care services and employs health care providers licensed, or subject to
licensing, by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under MGL
c. 112, or a retail establishment that provides pharmaceutical goods and
services and is subject to the provisions of 247 CMR 6.00. Health care
institutions include, but are not limited to, hospitals, clinics, health centers,
pharmacies, drugstores, doctor offices, optician/optometrist offices and
dentist offices.
LIQUID NICOTINE CONTAINER — A bottle or other vessel which contains
nicotine in liquid or gel form, whether or not combined with another
§ 300-91 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-91
1:380
substance or substances, for use in a tobacco product, as defined herein.
The term does not include a container containing nicotine in a cartridge
that is sold, marketed, or intended for use in a tobacco product, as defined
herein, if the cartridge is prefilled and sealed by the manufacturer and not
intended to be opened by the consumer or retailer.
LISTED OR NONDISCOUNTED PRICE — The higher of the price listed
for a tobacco product on its package or the price listed on any related
shelving, posting, advertising or display at the place where the tobacco
product is sold or offered for sale plus all applicable taxes if such taxes are
not included in the state price, and before the application of any discounts
or coupons.
MINIMUM LEGAL SALES AGE (MLSA) — The age an individual must be
before that individual can be sold a tobacco product in the municipality.
NONRESIDENTIAL ROLL-YOUR-OWN (RYO) MACHINE — A mechanical
device made available for use (including to an individual who produces
cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, or roll-your-own
tobacco solely for the individual's own personal consumption or use) that
is capable of making cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products. RYO
machines located in private homes used for solely personal consumption are
not nonresidential RYO machines.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of
tobacco products who applies for and receives a tobacco product sales
permit or any person who is required to apply for a tobacco product sales
permit pursuant to these regulations, or his or her business agent.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, including but not limited to, an owner,
operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any establishment,
business or retail store.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment that is not required to
possess a retail food permit, whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for
sale, but not for resale, tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia, in
which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and to which the entry
of persons under the minimum legal sales age is prohibited at all times, and
maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products as required
to be issued by the South Hadley Board of Health.
SCHOOLS — Public or private elementary or secondary schools.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may select a
tobacco product, as defined herein, without assistance from an employee or
store personnel.
SMOKE CONSTITUENT — Any chemical or chemical compound in
mainstream or sidestream tobacco smoke that either transfers from any
component of the tobacco product to the smoke or that is formed by the
combustion or heating of tobacco, additives or other component of the
tobacco product.
§ 300-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-91
1:381
SMOKING BAR — An establishment that primarily is engaged in the retail
sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the premises
and is required by MGL c. 270, § 22, to maintain a valid permit to operate
a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue.
"Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those establishments that
are commonly known as "cigar bars" and "hookah bars."
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested
by any other means, including, but not limited to: cigarettes, cigars, little
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, or electronic cigarettes,
electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah, or other similar
products, regardless of nicotine content, that rely on vaporization or
aerosolization. "Tobacco product" includes any component or part of a
tobacco product. "Tobacco product" does not include any product that has
been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration either as
a tobacco use cessation product or for other medical purposes and which is
being marketed and sold or prescribed solely for the approved purpose.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated or mechanical self-service device,
which upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses or makes cigarettes or any other tobacco products, as defined
herein.
§ 300-92. Sales to persons under minimum legal sales age
prohibited.
No person shall sell tobacco products or permit tobacco products, as
defined herein, to be sold to a person under the minimum legal sales
age; or not being the individual's parent or legal guardian, give tobacco
products, as defined herein, to a person under the minimum legal sales
age. The minimum legal sales age in South Hadley is 21.
A.
Required signage.
In conformance with and in addition to Massachusetts General
Law, Chapter 270, § 7, a copy of Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 270, § 6, shall be posted conspicuously by the owner or
other person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to
sell tobacco products at retail. The notice shall be provided by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health and made available
from the South Hadley Board of Health. The notice shall be at
least 48 square inches and shall be posted conspicuously by the
permit holder in the retail establishment or other place in such a
manner so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the
floor. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products at retail shall conspicuously post
(1)
B.
§ 300-91 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-92
1:382
§ 300-93. Tobacco product sales permit.
any additional signs required by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health.
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at retail shall
conspicuously post signage provided by the South Hadley Board of
Health that discloses current referral information about smoking
cessation.
(2)
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at retail shall
conspicuously post a sign stating that "The sale of tobacco
products, including e-cigarettes, to someone under the minimum
legal sales age of 21 years is prohibited." The notice shall be
no smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches and shall be posted
conspicuously in the retail establishment or other place in such a
manner so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the floor.
(3)
Identification; face-to-face sales.
Each person selling or distributing tobacco products, as defined
herein, shall verify the age of the purchaser by means of a valid
government-issued photographic identification containing the
bearer's date of birth that the purchaser is 21 years old or older.
Verification is required for any person under the age of 27.
(1)
All retail sales of tobacco products, as defined herein, must be faceto-
face between the seller and the buyer and occur at the permitted
location.
(2)
C.
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco products, as
defined herein, within the Town of South Hadley without first obtaining
a tobacco product sales permit issued annually by the South Hadley
Board of Health. Only owners of establishments with a permanent,
nonmobile location in South Hadley are eligible to apply for a permit
and sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at the specified location in
South Hadley.
A.
As part of the tobacco product sales permit application process, the
applicant will be provided with the South Hadley regulation. Each
applicant is required to sign a statement declaring that the applicant
has read said regulation and that the applicant is responsible for
instructing any and all employees who will be responsible for tobacco
product sales regarding federal, state and local laws regarding the sale
of tobacco and this regulation.
B.
§ 300-92 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-93
1:383
Each applicant who sells tobacco products is required to provide proof
of a current tobacco retailer license issued by the Massachusetts
Department of Revenue, when required by state law, before a tobacco
product sales permit can be issued.
C.
The fee for a tobacco product sales permit shall be determined by the
South Hadley Board of Health annually.
D.
A separate permit is required for each retail establishment selling
tobacco products, as defined herein.
E.
Each tobacco product sales permit shall be displayed at the retail
establishment in a conspicuous place.
F.
A tobacco product sales permit is nontransferable. A new owner of
an establishment that sells tobacco products, as defined herein, must
apply for a new permit. No new permit will be issued unless and until
all outstanding penalties incurred by the previous permit holder are
satisfied in full.
G.
Issuance of a tobacco product sales permit shall be conditioned on
an applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic inspections of his/her
retail establishment to ensure compliance with this regulation.
H.
A tobacco product sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder
has failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to appeal the fines
has expired and/or the permit holder has not satisfied any outstanding
permit suspensions.
I.
A tobacco product sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder
has sold a tobacco product to a person under the MLSA (§ 300-92A)
three times within the previous permit year and the time period to
appeal has expired. The violator may request a hearing in accordance
with § 300-105D.
J.
Maximum number of tobacco product sales permits.
At any given time, there shall be no more than 15 tobacco product
sales permits issued in South Hadley. No permit renewal will be
denied based on the requirements of this subsection, except any
permit holder who has failed to renew his or her permit within 30
days of expiration will be treated as a first-time permit applicant.
New applicants for permits who are applying at a time when the
maximum number of permits have been issued will be placed on
a waiting list and will be eligible to apply for a permit on a firstcome,
first-served basis as issued permits are either not renewed,
revoked, or are returned to the Board of Health.
(1)
A tobacco product sales permit shall not be issued to any new
applicant for a retail location within 500 feet of a public or private
elementary or secondary school as measured by a straight line from
the nearest point of the property line of the school to the nearest
(2)
K.
§ 300-93 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-93
1:384
§ 300-94. Cigar sales regulated.
§ 300-95. Sale of flavored tobacco products prohibited.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any
flavored tobacco product, except in smoking bars and retail tobacco stores.
§ 300-96. Sale of blunt wraps prohibited.
No person or entity shall sell or distribute blunt wraps in South Hadley.
§ 300-97. Free distribution and coupon redemption.
point of the property line of the site of the applicant's business
premises.
Applicants who purchase an existing business that holds a current
tobacco product sales permit at the time of the sale of said business
must apply within 60 days of such sale for the permit held by
the seller if the buyer intends to sell tobacco products, as defined
herein.
(3)
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed a
single cigar.
A.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any
original factory-wrapped package of two or more cigars, unless such
package is priced for retail sale at $5 or more.
B.
This section shall not apply to:
The sale or distribution of any single cigar having a retail price of
$2.50 or more.
(1)
A person or entity engaged in the business of selling or distributing
cigars for commercial purposes to another person or entity
engaged in the business of selling or distributing cigars for
commercial purposes with the intent to sell or distribute outside
the boundaries of South Hadley.
(2)
C.
The South Hadley Board of Health may adjust from time to time the
amounts specified in this section to reflect changes in the applicable
Consumer Price Index by amendment of this regulation.
D.
No person shall:
Distribute, or cause to be distributed, any free samples of tobacco
products or nicotine delivery products. No means, instruments or
devices that allow for the redemption of all tobacco products or
nicotine delivery products for free or cigarettes at a price below
the minimum retail price determined by the Massachusetts
Department of Revenue shall be accepted by any permit holder.
(1)
A.
§ 300-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-97
1:385
§ 300-98. Out-of-package sales; liquid nicotine sales.
§ 300-99. Self-service displays.
All self-service displays of tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited. All humidors, including, but not limited to, walk-in humidors
must be locked.
§ 300-100. Vending machines.
All vending machines containing tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited.
Distribute or cause to be distributed, any free samples of tobacco
products, as defined herein; accept or redeem, offer to accept or
redeem, or cause or hire any person to accept or redeem or offer
to accept or redeem any coupon that provides any tobacco product,
as defined herein, without charge or for less than the listed or
nondiscounted price; or
(2)
Sell a tobacco product, as defined herein, to consumers through
any multi-pack discounts (e.g., buy-two-get-one-free) or otherwise
provide or distribute to consumers any tobacco product, as defined
herein, without charge or for less than the listed or nondiscounted
price in exchange for the purchase of any other tobacco product.
(3)
This section shall not apply to products for which there is a state
law prohibiting them from being sold as loss leaders and for which a
minimum retail price is required by state law.
B.
The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, in any
form other than an original factory-wrapped package is prohibited,
including the repackaging or dispensing of any tobacco product, as
defined herein, for retail sale. No person may sell or cause to be sold
or distribute or cause to be distributed any cigarette package that
contains fewer than 20 cigarettes, including single cigarettes.
A.
A retailer of liquid nicotine containers must comply with the provisions
of 310 CMR 30.000, and must provide the South Hadley Board of
Health with a written plan for disposal of said product, including
disposal plans for any breakage, spillage or expiration of the product.
B.
All retailers must comply with 940 CMR 21.05 which reads: "It shall be
an unfair or deceptive act or practice for any person to sell or distribute
nicotine in a liquid or gel substance in Massachusetts after March 15,
2016, unless the liquid or gel product is contained in a child-resistant
package that, at a minimum, meets the standard for special packaging
as set forth in 15 U.S.C. §§ 1471 through 1476 and 16 CFR § 1700 et
seq."
C.
§ 300-97 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-101
1:386
§ 300-101. Nonresidential roll-your-own machines.
All nonresidential roll-your-own machines are prohibited.
§ 300-102. Sale by health care institutions prohibited.
No health care institution located in South Hadley shall sell or cause to
be sold tobacco products, as defined herein. No retail establishment that
operates or has a health care institution within it, such as a pharmacy,
optician/optometrist or drugstore, shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco
products, as defined herein.
§ 300-103. Sale by educational institutions prohibited.
No educational institution located in South Hadley shall sell or cause to
be sold tobacco products, as defined herein. This includes all educational
institutions as well as any retail establishments that operate on the property
of an educational institution.
§ 300-104. Compliance with state regulations required.
The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, must comply
with those provisions found at 940 CMR 21.00 (Sale and Distribution of
Cigarettes, Smokeless Tobacco Products, and Electronic Smoking Devices
in Massachusetts).
§ 300-105. Violations and penalties.
It shall be the responsibility of the establishment, permit holder and/or
his or her business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this
regulation. The violator shall receive:
(1) In the case of a first violation, a fine of $100.
In the case of a second violation within a thirty-six-month period
of the date of the current violation, a fine of $200 and the tobacco
product sales permit shall be suspended for 14 consecutive
business days.
(2)
In the case of three or more violations within a thirty-six-month
period, a fine of $300 and the tobacco product sales permit shall be
suspended for 30 consecutive business days.
(3)
In the case of four violations or repeated, egregious violations of
this regulation within a thirty-six-month period, the Board of Health
shall hold a hearing in accordance with Subsection D and may
permanently revoke a tobacco product sales permit.
(4)
A.
Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this regulation shall
result in the suspension of the tobacco product sales permit for 30
consecutive business days.
B.
§ 300-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-105
1:387
§ 300-106. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by the
noncriminal method of disposition as provided in Massachusetts General
Laws, Chapter 40, § 21D, or by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate
venue.
§ 300-107. Separate violations.
Each day any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 300-108. Enforcement.
§ 300-109. Severability.
If any provision of this regulation is declared invalid or unenforceable, the
other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full force
and effect.
In addition to the monetary fines set above, any permit holder who
engages in the sale or distribution of tobacco products while his or her
permit is suspended shall be subject to the suspension of all Board of
Health issued permits for 30 consecutive business days.
C.
The South Hadley Board of Health shall provide notice of the intent
to suspend or revoke a tobacco product sales permit, which notice
shall contain the reasons therefor and establish a time and date for a
hearing which date shall be no earlier than seven days after the date
of said notice. The permit holder or its business agent shall have an
opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of the
Board of Health's decision and the reasons therefor in writing. After
a hearing, the South Hadley Board of Health shall suspend or revoke
the tobacco product sales permit if the Board of Health finds that a
violation of this regulation occurred. For purposes of such suspensions
or revocations, the Board shall make the determination
notwithstanding any separate criminal or noncriminal proceedings
brought in court hereunder or under the Massachusetts General Laws
for the same offense. All tobacco products, as defined herein, shall be
removed from the retail establishment upon suspension or revocation
of the tobacco product sales permit. Failure to remove all tobacco
products, as defined herein, shall constitute a separate violation of this
regulation.
D.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the South Hadley Board of
Health or its designated agent(s).
A.
Any resident who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the
regulation may do so by contacting the South Hadley Board of Health
or its designated agent(s) and the Board shall investigate.
B.
§ 300-105 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-110
1:388
§ 300-110. Effective date.
This regulation shall take effect on June 1, 2016, with the exception of
§ 300-98C, which shall take effect on March 15, 2016.
§ 300-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-110
1:389

ARTICLE XIV
Use of Polystyrene Containers in Food Establishments
[Adopted effective 4-1-2015]
§ 300-111. Findings and purpose.
Findings.
Whereas styrene is a synthetic compound often used to make
rubber, plastic, insulation, fiberglass, pipes, automobile parts,
carpet backing and disposable food containers. [Note: Agency for
Toxic Substances & Disease Registry, (2011), Toxic Substances
Portal (Styrene). Retrieved from: http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/
substances/ oxsubstance.asp?toxid=74].
(1)
Whereas published in the National Toxicology Program's 12th
Report on Carcinogens (2011), styrene, a key ingredient in
polystyrene and expanded polystyrene, is reasonably anticipated to
be a human carcinogen. [Note: National Toxicology Program (NTP)
(2011), 12th Report on Carcinogens (RoC) {Substance Profile
(Styrene)}. Retrieved from: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/roc/
roc12/ index.html].
(2)
Whereas styrene exposure can occur through smoking, inhalation
of indoor air, and ingestion of food. [Note: National Toxicology
Program (NTP) (2011), 12th Report on Carcinogens (RoC)
{Substance Profile (Styrene)}. Retrieved from:
http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/roc/roc12/index.html].
(3)
Whereas styrene seeps out of polystyrene containers and into warm
food and drink, causing a recommendation against microwaving
polystyrene food containers. [Note: The Way To Go (2008),
Polystyrene Fact Sheets. Retrieved from: http://isites.harvard.edu/
fs/docs/icb.topic967858.files/PolystyreneFactSheets.pdf].
(4)
Whereas in a study concerning the migration of styrene in
polystyrene cups to hot drinks, it was determined that the
concentration of styrene monomer found in the drinks was above
the Environmental Protection Agency recommended levels,
including the Maximum Contaminant Level Goal (MCLG) standard.
[Note: Informa Healthcare (2009), Toxicology Mechanisms and
Methods (Determination of migration monomer styrene from GPPS
(general purpose polystyrene) and HIPS (high impact polystyrene)
cups to hot drinks). Retrieved from: http://informahealthcare.com/
doi/abs/10.1080/15376510802510299].
(5)
Whereas the amount of styrene monomer migration from
polystyrene into hot drinks was dependent on the temperature
and fat content of the drinks. [Note: Informa Healthcare (2009),
Toxicology Mechanisms and Methods (Determination of migration
monomer styrene from GPPS (general purpose polystyrene) and
(6)
A.
§ 300-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-111
1:391
HIPS (high impact polystyrene) cups to hot drinks). Retrieved from:
http://informahealthcare.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
15376510802510299].
Whereas exposure to styrene vapor can cause irritations of the
eyes, nose, throat, and skin, as well as toxic effects on the liver,
and can act as a depressant on the central nervous system that also
causes neurological impairment. [Note: Informa Healthcare (2009),
Toxicology Mechanisms and Methods (Determination of migration
monomer styrene from GPPS (general purpose polystyrene) and
HIPS (high impact polystyrene) cups to hot drinks). Retrieved from:
http://informahealthcare.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
15376510802510299].
(7)
Whereas potential effects of styrene exposure during its production
can cause eye and mucosal irritations and gastrointestinal issues.
Possible effects on the central nervous system include headache,
weakness, fatigue, depression, general dysfunction, hearing loss
and peripheral neuropathy. [Note: Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) (2000), Styrene. Retrieved from: http://www.epa.gov/
tto/atw/hlthef/styrene.html].
(8)
Whereas workers with high exposure to styrene showed increased
cancer of the lymphohematopoietic system and possibly related
mortality, as well as increased levels of DNA adducts and genetic
damage to lymphocytes. [Note: National Toxicology Program (NTP)
(2011), 12th Report on Carcinogens (RoC) (Substance Profile
(Styrene). Retrieved from: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/roc/
roc12/ index.html].
(9)
Whereas occupational studies concerning styrene have shown risks
for workers for lymphohematopoietic cancers, such as leukemia
and lymphoma, and genetic damage in the white blood cells, or
lymphocytes, as well as increased risks for pancreatic and
esophageal cancers. [Note: National Toxicology Program (NTP)
(2011), 12th Report on Carcinogens (RoC) (Fact Sheet (Styrene).
Retrieved from: http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/roc/roc12/
index.html].
(10)
Whereas styrene has caused lung tumors in mice. [Note: National
Toxicology Program (NTP) (2011), 12th Report on Carcinogens
(RoC) (Fact Sheet (Styrene). Retrieved from:
http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/pubhealth/roc/roc12/index.html].
(11)
Whereas benzene, a component of polystyrene, is a known
carcinogen and enters the body through the respiratory system
and skin contact. [Note: The Way To Go (2008), Polystyrene Fact
Sheets. Retrieved from: http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/
icb.topic967858.files/PolystyreneFactSheets.pdf].
(12)
Whereas polystyrene is a harm to the environment. It makes up
a considerable amount of debris in cities, and is harmful to the
(13)
§ 300-111 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-111
1:392
marine wildlife that it often arrives in. [Note: The Way To Go
(2008), Polystyrene Fact Sheets. Retrieved from:
http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic967858.files/
PolystyreneFactSheets.pdf].
Whereas the environmental impacts of polystyrene rank second
behind aluminum for total environmental impacts, especially in
energy consumption and greenhouse gas effects. [Note: The Way
To Go (2008), Polystyrene Fact Sheets. Retrieved from:
http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic967858.files/
PolystyreneFact Sheets.pdf].
(14)
Whereas over 80% of plastic pollution to the ocean comes from
urban litter such as polystyrene. [Note: Californians Against Waste
(2014), The Problem of Polystyrene. Retrieved from:
http://www.cawrecycles.org/issues/plastic_campaign/ polystyrene/
problem].
(15)
Whereas less than 35% of fast food restaurants' waste does not
end up in landfills. [Note: Californians Against Waste (2014),
Polystyrene Takeout Food Packaging Pollution. Retrieved from:
http://www.cawrecycles.org/issues/plastic_campaign/ polystyrene].
(16)
Whereas polystyrene is not biodegradable and does not easily
deteriorate in landfills, taking up more space than paper. [Note:
The Way To Go (2008), Polystyrene Fact Sheets. Retrieved from:
http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/ cb.topic967858.files/
PolystyreneFactSheets.pdf].
(17)
Whereas programs to recycle polystyrene are expensive, costing
thousands of dollars per ton and litter clean-up costs billions.
[Note: Californians Against Waste (2014), The Problem of
Polystyrene. Retrieved from: http://www.cawrecycles.org/ issues/
plastic_campaign/polystyrene/problem].
(18)
Whereas polystyrene is not recycled because it is not economic to
wash, degrease, transport, and store in order to recycle. [Note:
The Way To Go (2008), Polystyrene Fact Sheets. Retrieved from:
http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/ icb.topic967858.files/
PolystyreneFactSheets.pdf].
(19)
Whereas over 100 American, Canadian, European and Asian cities
and towns have enacted a polystyrene ban. [Note: The Way To
Go (2008), Polystyrene Fact Sheets. Retrieved from:
http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/ icb.topic967858.files/
PolystyreneFactSheets.pdf].
(20)
Therefore, it is the intention of the South Hadley Board of Health to
prohibit the purchase, sale, distribution and use of any polystyrene
disposable food container used to serve prepared food in a food
establishment.
B.
§ 300-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-112
1:393
§ 300-112. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated to the authority granted to the South Hadley
Board of Health by MGL c. 111, § 31 that "boards of health may make
reasonable health regulations."
§ 300-113. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
DISPOSABLE FOOD CONTAINER — Single-use disposable containers used
for the purpose of serving and transporting prepared, and ready-to-consume
food or beverages. This includes but is not limited to plates, cups, bowls,
trays, and hinged or lidded containers. This does not include single-use
packaging for unprepared food, nor single-use items such as disposable
straws, cup lids, or utensils.
EXPANDED POLYSTYRENE (EPS) — Polystyrene that has been expanded or
"blown" using a gaseous blowing agent into a solid form.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — An operation that stores, prepares, packages,
serves, vends or otherwise provides food for human consumption, as further
defined in 105 CMR 590.002. Any establishment requiring a permit to
operate in accordance with the State Food Code, 105 CMR 590.000 et
seq., shall be considered a food establishment for purposes of this Board of
Health regulation.
POLYSTYRENE — Can also be referred to as "Styrofoam," a trademarked
brand owned by the Dow Chemical Company. A type of expanded
polystyrene, a thermoplastic petrochemical material utilizing a styrene
monomer and processed by any number of techniques, including, but not
limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead polystyrene),
injection molding, form molding, and extrusion-blow molding (extruded
foam polystyrene). "Polystyrene" also refers to clear or solid polystyrene,
also known as "oriented polystyrene."
PREPARED FOOD — Food and beverage prepared on the food provider's
premises for consumption using any food preparation or cooking technique.
This does not include unprepared food such as uncooked raw meat, fish or
eggs unless provided for consumption without further food preparation.
STYRENE — A colorless, flammable liquid, characterized with a sweet odor
and high volatility. This industrial chemical is used to make polystyrene.
§ 300-114. Use, purchase and sale prohibited.
No food establishment shall use disposable food containers made from
polystyrene or expanded polystyrene to provide prepared food to
customers. No person shall purchase, offer for purchase, sell, give away,
or distribute any polystyrene disposable food container from a food
establishment.
§ 300-112 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-115
1:394
§ 300-115. Responsibility for compliance; violations and penalties.
§ 300-116. Deferment.
Upon written request to the South Hadley Board of Health and
demonstration of how this regulation would cause undue hardship to the
food establishment, such establishment may receive temporary deferment
of this regulation to its operation for up to one year. Food establishments
may apply to the deferment process in accordance with the following:
§ 300-117. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by the
noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D or by
It shall be the responsibility of the establishment, state food code
permit holder and/or his or her business agent to ensure compliance
with this regulation pertaining to the prohibition of his or her
distribution of polystyrene disposable food containers in the
establishment.
A.
The violator shall receive:
(1) In the case of a first violation, a fine of $100.
In the case of a second violation within 36 months of the date of
the current violation, a fine of $200 and the state food code permit
shall be suspended for seven consecutive business days.
(2)
In the case of three or more violations within a thirty-six-month
period, a fine of $300 and the state food code permit shall be
suspended for 30 consecutive business days.
(3)
B.
An application for deferment must include all information necessary for
the Board of Health to make its decision, including but not limited to
documentation showing the factual support of undue hardship for the
claimed deferment. "Undue hardship" is defined as a situation unique
to the food establishment in which there are no reasonable alternatives
to the use of polystyrene and expanded polystyrene disposable food
containers and compliance with this regulation would create significant
economic hardship for the food establishment and its operators. The
Board of Health may request additional documentation from the
applicant to make a decision regarding deferment.
A.
A food establishment that receives deferment must reapply prior to the
end of that period and continue to demonstrate undue hardship if its
operators seek to continue their deferment. Deferments may only be
granted for periods of up to one year.
B.
The Board of Health may approve the deferment with or without
conditions. All deferment applications are final and effective
immediately.
C.
§ 300-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-117
1:395
filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue. Each day any violation
exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 300-118. Enforcement.
§ 300-119. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 300-120. Effective date.
This regulation shall take effect on April 1, 2015.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the South Hadley Board of
Health or its designated agent(s).
A.
Any person who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the
regulation may do so by contacting the South Hadley Board of Health
or its designated agent(s) and the Board shall investigate.
B.
§ 300-117 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-120
1:396
ARTICLE XV
Funeral Establishments
[Adopted 9-2-2015]
§ 300-121. Findings and purpose.
Findings.
Whereas in 2003, the majority of the 2,448,288 reported deaths
in the United States were embalmed. [Note: Davidson, S.S., and
Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and Tracking of Work-
Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral Industry. American
Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
(1)
Whereas in 2003, an infectious disease was the reported cause of
death for 99,232 individuals. [Note: Davidson, S.S., and Benjamin,
W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and Tracking of Work-Related
Infectious Diseases in the Funeral Industry. American Journal of
Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
(2)
Whereas in 2007, 70% of deaths were casketed and accompanied
by some type of ceremony. [Note: Jimenez, D. (n.d.). Funeral
Homes/Funeral Services. Retrieved from http://www.sbdcnet.org/
small-business-research-reports/funeral-homes-funeral -services].
(3)
Whereas in 2011, the percentage of people who chose cremation
was 42.2%. [Note: Sanburn, Josh. A. (2013). The New American
Way of Death. Time, 181(24), 30-38. Retrieved from
http://web.a.ebscohost.com.silk.library.umass.edu/ ehost/detail/
detail?vid=3&sid=8336b266-edd0-4f97-83e0-28f44843a5e4%40
sessionmgr4003&hld=4104&bdata=
JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGI2ZSZzY29wZT1 zaXRI÷=aph&AN=8
8213977].
(4)
Whereas the routine transport and embalming of cadavers place
funeral service professionals in a position to be exposed to multiple
infectious agents that are transmissible by mucocutaneous
contamination, aerosolization, and direct inoculation. [Note:
Davidson, S.S., and Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and
Tracking of Work-Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral
Industry. American Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajic.2006.05.290].
(5)
Whereas exposure by way of splashes to the mucus membranes,
inhalation of aerosolized body fluids, and direct inoculation can
result in infectious diseases caused by multiple species of bacteria,
viruses, and prions. [Note: Davidson, S.S., and Benjamin, W.H.
(2006). Risk of Infection and Tracking of Work-Related Infectious
(6)
A.
§ 300-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-121
1:397
Diseases in the Funeral Industry. American Journal of Infection
Control, 34(10), 655-660. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
Whereas measures such as good hygiene, avoidance of direct
contact with body fluids, and hand washing are necessary to
prevent the spread of infection. [Note: Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. Issues to Consider in Preparing for Disposition
of Decedents (2015). Retrieved from: http://www.mass.gov/eohhs/
gov/departments/ dph/programs/environmental-health/
commsanitation/burial-and-cremation.html].
(7)
Whereas because of the prevalence of MRSA in the population,
funeral service professionals have a potential exposure risk from
the remains of individuals who passed away in health care facilities
and those who died in other settings. [Note: Davidson, S.S., and
Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and Tracking of Work-
Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral Industry. American
Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
(8)
Whereas Group A streptococcus has been shown to survive on the
cadavers of victims of invasive disease, which presents a serious
infectious risk to the funeral service provider because it may be
transmitted through direct contact or inoculation. [Note: Davidson,
S.S., and Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and Tracking
of Work-Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral Industry.
American Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660. DOI:
10.1016/j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
(9)
Whereas funeral service professionals may be exposed to
gastrointestinal organisms through direct contact with leaking
fecal material when manipulating corpses, which can lead to
transmission via the fecal-oral route. [Note: Davidson, S.S., and
Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and Tracking of Work-
Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral Industry. American
Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660. DOI: 10.1016/
j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
(10)
Whereas two microorganisms at greatest risk for transmission via
the fecal-oral route are nontyphi Salmonella and hepatitis A. [Note:
Davidson, S.S., and Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and
Tracking of Work-Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral
Industry. American Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
(11)
Whereas infectious agents transmitted through the airborne route
include Mycobacterium tuberculosis and the virus responsible for
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). [Note: Davidson, S.S.,
and Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and Tracking of Work-
Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral Industry. American
(12)
§ 300-121 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-121
1:398
Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660. DOI:10.1016/
j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
Whereas funeral home employees with a present or past history
of embalming deceased-human remains were twice as likely to be
reactive for tuberculosis as were nonembalming personnel (14.9%
versus 7.2%, p <0.01). [Note: Gershon, R.M., Vlahov, D., Escamilla-
Cejudo, J.A., Badawl, M., McDiarmid, M., Karkashian, C., Grimes,
M., and Comstock, G.W. (1998). Tuberculosis Risk in Funeral Home
Employees (Abstract). Journal of Occupational and Environmental
Medicine, 40(5), 497-503].
(13)
Whereas tuberculin reactivity was found to be associated in
embalming personnel with the number of years spent performing
embalmings (greater than or equal to 20), and, in nonembalming
personnel, with a history of close contact with infected individuals.
[Note: Gershon, R.M., Vlahov, D., Escamilla-Cejudo, J.A., Badawl,
M., McDiarmid, M., Karkashian, C., Grimes, M., and Comstock,
G.W. (1998). Tuberculosis Risk in Funeral Home Employees
(Abstract). Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine,
40(5), 497-503].
(14)
Whereas embalming, a common practice in funeral practitioning,
may expose the embalmer to infectious diseases and blood. [Note:
Beck-Sague, C.M., Jarvs, W.R., Fruehiling, J.A., Ott, C.E., Higgins,
M.T., and Fred, L. (1991). Universal Precautions and Mortuary
Practitioners: Influence on Practices and Risk of Occupationally
Acquired Infection (Abstract). Journal of Occupational Medicine,
33(8)].
(15)
Whereas the use of sharp instruments during the embalming
procedure places funeral service professionals at risk of
bloodborne pathogen exposure via needlestick, cuts, and splashes.
[Note: Davidson, S.S., and Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection
and Tracking of Work-Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral
Industry. American Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660.
DOI:10.1016/j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
(16)
Whereas the routine aspiration of blood and other body fluids
creates the risk of aerosolization of droplet nuclei. [Note: Davidson,
S.S., and Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and Tracking
of Work-Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral Industry.
American Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660.
DOI:10.1016/j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
(17)
Whereas the collection of fluid in the chest cavity of the deceased
because of the putrefaction of tissue can lead to frothing and
gurgling through the nose and mouth of the corpse. [Note:
Davidson, S.S., and Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk of Infection and
Tracking of Work-Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral
(18)
§ 300-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-121
1:399
Industry. American Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
Whereas in a study concerning the occupational exposure to
bloodborne pathogens for funeral service practitioners, 19% of
participants reported a bloodborne exposure within the past six
months. [Note: Gershon, R.M., Vlahov, D., Farzadegan, H., and
Alter, M.J. (1995). Occupational Risk of Human Immunodeficiency
Virus, Hepatitis B Virus, and Hepatitis C Virus Infections Among
Funeral Service Practitioners in Maryland. Infection Control &
Hospital Epidemiology, 16(4), 194-197. DOI:http://dx.dol.org/
10.1086/647089].
(19)
Whereas indirect spread of HBV and HCV can occur through
contact when objects freshly contaminated with tainted blood enter
the body or contact damaged skin. [Note: Sattar, S.A., Tetro, J.,
Springthrope, V.S., and Giulivi, A. (2002, May 9). Preventing the
spread of hepatitis B and C viruses: Where are germicides
relevant? American Journal of Infection Control, 29(3), 187-197.
DOI: dol:10.1067/mic.2001.114233].
(20)
Whereas the three most common bloodborne pathogens are human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV) and hepatitis
C virus (HCV). [Note: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC)/The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
(NIOSH). Information for Employers Complying with OSHA's
Bloodborne Pathogens Standard (2009). Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/docs/2009-111/].
(21)
Whereas hepatitis B and hepatitis C are the most prevalent
bloodborne pathogens. [Note: Sattar, S.A., Tetro, J., Springthrope,
V.S., and Giulivi, A. (2002, May 9). Preventing the spread of
hepatitis B and C viruses: Where are germicides relevant?
American Journal of Infection Control, 29(3), 187-197. DOI:
doi:10.1067/mic.2001.114233].
(22)
Whereas HBV and HCV spread mainly occurs through direct
parenteral or percutaneous exposure to tainted body fluids and
tissues. [Note: Sattar, S.A., Tetro, J., Springthrope, V.S., and Giulivi,
A. (2002, May 9). Preventing the spread of hepatitis B and C
viruses: Where are germicides relevant? American Journal of
Infection Control, 29(3), 187-197. DOI: doi:10.1067/
mic.2001.114233].
(23)
Whereas infections of hepatitis B and hepatitis C viruses can lead
to liver cirrhosis and carcinoma. [Note: Sattar, S.A., Tetro, J.,
Springthrope, V.S., and Giulivi, A. (2002, May 9). Preventing the
spread of hepatitis B and C viruses: Where are germicides
relevant? American Journal of Infection Control, 29(3), 187-197.
DOI: doi:10.1067/mic.2001.114233].
(24)
§ 300-121 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-121
1:400
Whereas transmission of Marburg and Ebola hemorrhagic fever
is known to occur following unprotected exposure to patients and
cadavers through mucocutaneous contact, blood and body fluid
exposure. [Note: Davidson, S.S., and Benjamin, W.H. (2006). Risk
of Infection and Tracking of Work-Related Infectious Diseases in
the Funeral Industry. American Journal of Infection Control, 34(10),
655-660. DOI: 10.1016/j.ajlc.2006.05.290].
(25)
Whereas the Ebola virus can be detected in patients who die of
the virus after their death. [Note: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). Guidance for Safe Handling of Human Remains
of Ebola Patients in U.S. Hospitals and Mortuaries (2015, February
11). Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/
hospitals/handling-human-remains.html].
(26)
Whereas it is possible for Ebola to continue to be transmitted in
postmortem care settings if remains are handled improperly. [Note:
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Guidance for
Safe Handling of Human Remains of Ebola Patients in U.S.
Hospitals and Mortuaries (2015, February 11). Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/healthcare-us/hospitals/handlinghuman-
remains.html].
(27)
Whereas Ebola is spread through direct contact with body fluids
such as blood, saliva, urine, and semen of an infected individual
and by contact with contaminated surfaces and/or equipment,
including linen soiled by body fluids from an infected individual.
[Note: World Health Organization (2014). Infection Prevention and
Control (IPC) Guidance Summary. Retrieved from
http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/ebola/evd-guidancesummary/
en/].
(28)
Whereas depending on the infected individual and strain of the
virus, Ebola hemorrhagic fever may be fatal in 50% to 90% of
cases. [Note: Occupational Safety & Health Administration (n.d.).
Ebola. Retrieved from https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/ebola/].
(29)
Whereas the mode of transmission of prions such as transmissible
spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs) or Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(CJD), including kuru, iatrogenic and new variant CJD (vCJD), is
not completely understood, yet it is known that iatrogenic CJD
has been passed from cadavers to recipients of human growth
hormone, dura mater, and corneal grafts, as well as between living
patients following use of contaminated neurosurgical equipment.
[Note: Davidson, S.S., and Benjamin, W. H. (2006). Risk of Infection
and Tracking of Work-Related Infectious Diseases in the Funeral
Industry. American Journal of Infection Control, 34(10), 655-660,
DOI:10.1016/J.ajic.2006.05.290].
(30)
Therefore, it is the intention of the South Hadley Board of Health to
regulate the operations of funeral establishments.
B.
§ 300-121 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-122
1:401
§ 300-122. Authority.
§ 300-123. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
APPRENTICE EMBALMER — Any individual engaged in learning the
practice of embalming under the instruction and personal supervision of a
registered embalmer.
BIOHAZARD — A biological or chemical substance that is dangerous to
human health or the environment.
BLOOD — Human blood, human blood components, and human blood
products.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS — Pathogenic microorganisms that are
present in human blood and can cause disease in humans. Pathogens
include, but are not limited to, hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus
(HCV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
BOARD — The South Hadley Board of Health, including its members and
appointed agents.
CATEGORY A AGENT —
This regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted to
the South Hadley Board of Health by MGL c. 111, § 31 that "boards of
health may make reasonable health regulations."
A.
Also, this regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted
to the South Hadley Board of Health by MGL c. 111, § 122 that "The
board of health shall examine into all nuisances, sources of filth and
causes of sickness within its town, or on board of vessels within the
harbor of such town, which may, in its opinion, be injurious to the
public health, shall destroy, remove or prevent the same as the case
may require, and shall make regulations for the public health and safety
relative thereto and to articles capable of containing or conveying
infection or contagion or of creating sickness brought into or conveyed
from the town or into or from any vessel."
B.
As classified by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, various
biological agents that pose a risk to national security because they have
the following characteristics [Note: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). Bioterrorism Agents/Diseases (n.d.). Retrieved from
http://emergency.cdc.gov/agent/agentlist.asp]:
(1) Can be easily disseminated or transmitted from person to person.
Result in high mortality rates and have potential for major public
health impact.
(2)
(3) Might cause public panic and social disruption.
A.
§ 300-122 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-123
1:402
CONTAMINATED — The presence of a reasonably anticipated presence of
blood or other potentially infectious material on an item or surface.
CONTAMINATED LAUNDRY — Laundry that has been soiled with blood or
other potentially infectious materials.
CREMATION — The act of using intense heat to reduce human remains to
ash.
DISPOSE or DISPOSAL — The process of collecting contaminated materials
to be discarded from the funeral establishment and transferred to a final
disposal site approved by the South Hadley Board of Health.
EBOLA VIRUS DISEASE — Also known as "Ebola" and previously known
as "Ebola hemorrhagic fever," it is a rare and deadly disease caused by
infection with one of the Ebola virus strains.
EMBALMER — Any individual holding a funeral director's registration or a
person who is engaged, or holding himself or herself out as engaged, in the
business, practice, science or profession of embalming, whether on his or
her own behalf or by the employment of a registered and licensed funeral
director.
FUNERAL DIRECTOR — Any individual licensed to practice funeral
directing within the Town of South Hadley, Massachusetts.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Waste that is dangerous or potentially harmful to
human health or the environment. Hazardous waste can be liquids, solids,
gases, or sludges.
HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL CONTAINER — A container approved by
the Environmental Protection Agency to dispose of hazardous waste.
HEPATITIS B (HBV) — A viral infection that attacks the liver and can cause
acute and chronic disease. The virus is transmitted through blood and other
body fluid contact of an infected individual.
HEPATITIS C (HCV) — A liver disease caused by the hepatitis C virus that
can result in both acute and chronic infection. Hepatitis C is a bloodborne
virus.
HERMETICALLY SEALED CASKET — A casket that is airtight and secured
against the escape of microorganisms. Such casket shall be accompanied
by valid documentation that it has been hermetically sealed and upon
inspection of the casket the seal is not visibly broken.
HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS (HIV) — A virus spread through
body fluids that affects immune system cells (CD4 cells/T cells) and that
impairs the body's ability to respond to infections and disease.
INFECTIOUS DISEASE — A disease caused by pathogenic microorganisms,
such as bacteria, viruses, parasites or fungi. Examples of infectious disease
(4) Require special action for public health preparedness.
Examples of Category A agents include anthrax, botulism, plague,
smallpox, tularemia, and viral hemorrhagic fevers.
B.
§ 300-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-123
1:403
include MRSA, Group A streptococcus, salmonella, hepatitis A, B, and C,
SARS, tuberculosis, human immunodeficiency virus, Marburg hemorrhagic
fever, and Ebola hemorrhagic fever.
LEAKPROOF BAG — A body bag that is puncture-resistant and sealed. The
bag shall be sealed in a way that contains all contents and prevents leakage
of fluid during handling, transport or shipping.
LICENSED FUNERAL ESTABLISHMENT — A fixed place or establishment
owned or maintained by a person, partnership, corporation, association or
other organization which has been duly registered by the Board and which
is located, constructed, equipped and operated for the purpose of providing
sanitary handling, preparation, disposition and care of dead human bodies.
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE — Actual or reasonably anticipated skin, eye,
mucous membrane or parenteral contact with blood or other potentially
infectious materials which results or may result from the performance of an
employee's duties.
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT — Specialized clothing or
equipment worn by an employee for protection against a hazard. General
work clothes not intended to function as protection against a hazard are not
considered to be personal protective equipment.
PERSONAL SUPERVISION — Supervision by an individual in the same
building where the activity is occurring.
POTENTIALLY INFECTIOUS MATERIAL — Human body fluids, including
semen, vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal fluids, synovial fluid, pleural fluid,
pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid, amniotic fluid, saliva, feces, urine, any
body fluid contaminated by blood, and all body fluids where it is impossible
to differentiate between body fluids are considered potentially infectious
material. Any unfixed tissue or organ other than intact skin, from a living or
dead human body, as well as HIV-containing cell or tissue cultures, HIV- or
HBV-containing culture medium or solutions, and blood, organs, and tissues
from experimental animals infected with either HIV or HBV.
PRION — A pathogen causing prion diseases or transmissible spongiform
encephalopathies (TSEs), which are a family of rare progressive
neurodegenerative disorders. Examples include Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(CJD) and kuru, iatrogenic and new variant CJD (vCJD).
PROFESSION AND BUSINESS OF EMBALMING AND FUNERAL
DIRECTING — Duties involved in the practice of this profession include, but
are not limited to, the sale or provision of any of the following goods or
services:
Consulting with members of the general public about and/or making
arrangements concerning the disposition of human remains, including
arrangements for cremation for compensation;
A.
B. Removing a human body from the place of death;
C. Transporting human remains;
§ 300-123 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-123
1:404
REGISTERED FUNERAL HOME ASSISTANT — Any individual registered
to and working under the personal supervision of a funeral director and
embalmer.
D. Embalming;
Performing restorative and cosmetic work on human remains, including
hairdressing;
E.
F. Dressing, and retail sale of clothing for use in dressing, human remains;
G. Casketing of human remains;
Sale of caskets, either at retail or at wholesale, and/or rental of caskets
to the general public;
H.
I. Arranging for disposition of flowers used in funeral or funeral services;
Making arrangements for obituaries and death notices in newspapers,
on the internet, radio and television;
J.
Making cemetery cremation and/or anatomical gift arrangements at the
request of a decedent or the decedent's family;
K.
Providing hearses, flower vehicles, limousines and sedans in connection
with a funeral;
L.
Arranging for services and an officiant at the interment of human
remains;
M.
Providing assistance during visiting hours and at the funeral service,
and for other funeral service related functions and responsibilities;
N.
Securing and processing required documents, including but not limited
to death certificates, burial/transfer permits, certified copies of death
certificates and visas for foreign shipment of human remains;
O.
P. Making arrangements with medical examiners;
Providing acknowledgement cards, register books, local and longdistance
telephone messages and telegrams in connection with a
funeral;
Q.
Preparing, negotiating or executing any pre-need funeral contract, or
receiving, controlling or managing any funds tendered as payment for
the funeral goods and/or services identified in such a pre-need funeral
contract;
R.
S. Disposition of ashes or cremated remains;
Engaging in such other activities as are considered to be a part of
the business, practice, science or profession of embalming or funeral
directing, as commonly practiced.
T.
§ 300-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-123
1:405
REMOVAL — The moving of a dead human body from a home, hospital, or
other place of death to a licensed Funeral Establishment for the purpose of
preparing it for burial, cremation or other disposition.
SHIP — To convey a dead human body by train, boat, airplane, express or
motor freight, or other means of transportation, either within, into, or out
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts after said body has been prepared
for burial or cremation.
SOURCE INDIVIDUAL — Any individual, living or dead, whose blood or
other potentially infectious materials may be a source of occupational
exposure to an employee. Such individuals include, but are not limited to,
hospital or clinic patients, clients in institutions for the developmentally
disabled, trauma victims, clients of drug and alcohol rehabilitation facilities,
hospice and nursing home residents, individuals who donate or sell blood or
blood components, and human remains.
STERILIZE — A physical or chemical procedure intended to destroy all
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores.
TRANSPORT — To convey a dead human body in a closed hearse or other
vehicle registered as a hearse used exclusively for the purpose of
transporting dead human bodies or funeral equipment, either within, into
or out of Massachusetts for any purpose other than that referred to in the
definition of "removal" or "ship."
TYPE 3 FUNERAL DIRECTOR AND EMBALMER — A funeral director issued
a Type 3 registration by the Massachusetts Board of Embalming and
Funeral Directing pursuant to MGL c. 112, § 83 and licensed by a city or
town pursuant to MGL c. 114, § 49, who holds an ownership interest of at
least 10% in one or more licensed funeral establishments as set forth in 239
CMR 3.02(4)(a).
TYPE 6 FUNERAL DIRECTOR AND EMBALMER — A funeral director and
embalmer who does not hold a 10% ownership interest in a licensed funeral
establishment but has been issued a Type 6 registration by the
Massachusetts Board of Embalming and Funeral Directing pursuant to
MGL c. 112, § 83 and who meets the qualifications outlined in 239 CMR
3.02(2) and has been sworn in by the Massachusetts Board of Embalming
and Funeral Directing. Individuals holding this registration may practice
embalming, but may otherwise only practice funeral directing when holding
a license issued by a city or town pursuant to MGL c. 114, § 49 and working
as an employee in a licensed funeral establishment owned by one or more
Type 3 funeral directors and embalmers where, in said establishment,
the registrant shall conduct, direct, and keep up said establishment. A
Type 6 funeral director and embalmer who performs funeral services when
not so employed shall be considered acting outside the scope of his/her
licensure and shall face disciplinary action. Said registrants may not sign
death certificates and may only utilize stationery or other funeral-related
contracts or documents on behalf of an employing licensed funeral
establishment and Type 3 funeral director and embalmer. Type 6 funeral
directors and embalmers may only conduct pre-need funeral arrangements
pursuant to 239 CMR 3.04(5).
§ 300-123 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-123
1:406
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — An approach to infection control in which
all human blood and certain human body fluids are treated as if they are
known to be infectious.
VIRAL HEMORRHAGIC FEVER — A group of viruses that cause severe
multisystem syndromes. Effects include but are not limited to the damage
of the overall vascular system, an inability of the body to regulate itself, and
often hemorrhage. Some of the viruses can cause relatively mild illness and
others can cause severe, life-threatening disease.
§ 300-124. Registration requirements and examinations.
Any individual seeking to practice within the profession of funeral directing
and/or embalming shall complete the formal application process required
by the Massachusetts Board of Registration in Embalming and Funeral
Directing. After the application process is completed and the applicant is
licensed by the Massachusetts Board of Registration in Embalming and
Funeral Directing, the individual shall register with the South Hadley Board
of Health annually as a funeral director and embalmer wishing to practice
in the Town of South Hadley, Massachusetts.
§ 300-125. Apprentice embalmers.
A licensed funeral establishment may employ apprentice embalmers to
prepare or assist in the preparation of dead human bodies for burial,
cremation or other final disposition, provided that the apprentice embalmer
applicant and the funeral director/embalmer complete an application for
registration and comply with the requirements of the Massachusetts Board
of Registration in Embalming and Funeral Directing in 239 CMR 3.02
and 3.03, as well as register with the South Hadley Board of Health, by
providing a copy of registration of the apprentice embalmer to the South
Hadley Board of Health.
§ 300-126. Registered funeral home assistants.
A licensed funeral establishment may employ registered funeral assistants
to assist in the removal or transport of human remains, aid in general
handling of human remains, including casketing and dressing, and
participate in any other funeral-related tasks not requiring a license or
registration, provided that the registered funeral assistant is under personal
supervision or has received requisite permission from a funeral director to
do so. Employment of registered funeral assistants in the Town of South
Hadley is contingent on the condition that the funeral assistant applicant
and the funeral director/embalmer complete an application for registration
and comply with the requirements of the Massachusetts Board of
Registration in Embalming and Funeral Directing in 239 CMR 3.02 and
3.18, as well as register with the South Hadley Board of Health, by
providing a copy of registration of the funeral assistant to the South Hadley
Board of Health.
§ 300-127. Funeral establishment permit.
§ 300-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-127
1:407
§ 300-128. Inspections; powers and duties of investigators.
No person shall sell services or operate a funeral establishment within
the Town of South Hadley without first obtaining a funeral
establishment permit issued annually by the South Hadley Board of
Health, as well as registering annually with the South Hadley Board
of Health as a funeral director and embalmer wishing to practice in
the Town of South Hadley. Only owners of establishments with a
permanent, nonmobile location in South Hadley are eligible to apply for
a permit and sell funeral services or operate a funeral establishment at
the specified location in South Hadley.
A.
As a part of the funeral establishment permit application process, the
applicant will be provided with the South Hadley Board of Health
regulation. Each applicant is required to sign a statement declaring
that the applicant has read said regulation and that the applicant
is responsible for instructing any and all employees who will be
responsible for handling funeral services and operations of the funeral
establishment regarding federal, state and local laws regarding funeral
establishments and this regulation.
B.
Each applicant who sells funeral services or operates a funeral
establishment is required to provide proof of a current Type 3 funeral
director and embalmer license issued by the Massachusetts Board
of Registration in Embalming and Funeral Directing before a funeral
establishment permit can be issued by the South Hadley Board of
Health.
C.
The fee for a funeral establishment permit shall be determined by the
South Hadley Board of Health annually.
D.
A separate permit is required for each funeral establishment selling
funeral services or otherwise operating a funeral establishment.
E.
Each funeral establishment permit shall be displayed at the funeral
establishment in a conspicuous place.
F.
No funeral establishment holder shall allow any employee to sell
funeral services or perform operational tasks until such employee reads
this regulation and federal and state laws regarding funeral
establishments and signs a statement, a copy of which will be placed on
file in the office of the employer, that he or she has read the regulation
and applicable state and federal laws.
G.
A Funeral establishment permit is nontransferable. A new owner of a
funeral establishment that sells funeral services or operates the funeral
establishment shall apply for a new permit.
H.
Issuance of a funeral establishment permit will not be renewed if the
permit holder has failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to
appeal the fines has expired and/or the permit holder has not satisfied
any outstanding permit suspensions.
I.
§ 300-127 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-128
1:408
§ 300-129. Operating standards.
A Board investigator shall have the right to enter into and inspect
any licensed funeral establishment at any time during regular business
hours for the purpose of inspecting such records and conducting such
investigations as may reasonably be necessary to ensure that the
funeral establishment, and its agents or employees, are in compliance
with all applicable requirements.
A.
A Board investigator may visit any place where the operation of
embalming is being conducted or where a funeral is in process of being
directed; provided, however, that such visitation shall be made in a
respectful and decorous manner.
B.
A Board investigator shall in no way be connected with the work or
business of an embalmer or funeral director in any establishment.
C.
Interference with or obstruction of the Board or any investigator
authorized by the Board in the performance of their respective duties
by a registered person shall be considered sufficient cause for
suspension of operations or revocation of such registration.
D.
A Board investigator may request access to such records outlined in
§ 300-130 of this regulation. Such records shall be produced for the
Board in a timely fashion. Failure to produce the records may be
deemed to be interference with or obstruction of the inspection, and
may be considered sufficient cause for suspension of operations or
revocation of such registration.
E.
The Board may inspect annually on the premises of the funeral
establishment to ensure that the funeral establishment has met the
requirements set by the South Hadley Board of Health.
F.
Every licensed funeral establishment shall comply with all
requirements of 239 CMR 3.00 through 5.00, 248 CMR, 527 CMR, and
780 CMR as well as all applicable rules referred to in the respective
regulations. Failure to do so may result in the suspension of operations
or revocation of the permit issued by the South Hadley Board of Health
for the funeral establishment to operate within the Town of South
Hadley, Massachusetts, on the basis of failure to comply with South
Hadley Board of Health regulations.
A.
All licensed funeral establishments shall comply with all of the following
standards:
Funeral establishments shall include a preparation room equipped
with sanitary flooring, a flush-rim sink, floor drain and ventilation,
a reduced pressure backflow preventer or air gap separation at the
meter or property line, and the necessary equipment, instruments
and supplies for the preparation and embalming of dead human
bodies for burial and transportation. Such preparation room and
equipment shall comply with all applicable requirements of 239
(1)
B.
§ 300-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-129
1:409
§ 300-130. Recordkeeping.
CMR 3.07 and 239 CMR 3.12, and all applicable requirements of
other federal, state and local laws, including but not limited to
all applicable regulations of the United States Occupational Safety
and Health Administration.
Funeral establishments shall be equipped with toilets, lavatories
and other sanitary facilities for men and women as may be required
by applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.
(2)
Removals of dead human bodies into funeral establishments
established after December 1, 1949, shall be completely concealed
from public view.
(3)
The holder of the funeral establishment permit is responsible for
keeping written records pertaining to operations of the funeral
establishment. Funeral establishment permit holders shall keep records
of the following:
Information pertaining to the deceased, including but not limited
to the deceased who have been transported to the funeral
establishment for services, the final disposition of the corpses'
remains, when any services were conducted on the corpses, what
services were conducted on the corpses, all times of transport of
the corpses' bodies, and the locations of transport.
(1)
The identities of those personnel who have participated in any of
the following activities, including but not limited to those who have
received the corpses, transported the corpses, and those who have
performed services on the corpses. Records of the relevant licenses
of the employees, including professional and driving licenses, shall
also be kept as records.
(2)
Contaminated waste collected from caring for each corpse shall be
recorded, as well as the method of disposal for that waste. A waste
management plan that describes how each type of waste will be
handled, and names a designated waste management facility, shall
also be kept as records.
(3)
Any and all information relevant to the public health of South
Hadley Massachusetts, and the greater Commonwealth of
Massachusetts shall be kept as record as well. This includes but
is not limited to dangerous infectious diseases, such as Ebola, and
potential occupational exposure incidents.
(4)
Every deceased corpse must have some sort of identification
accompanying it at all times. Toe tags may be used. The cause of
death shall be stated on the identification.
(5)
A.
The South Hadley Board of Health has the ability to inspect such
records at a time the Board finds appropriate. The funeral
B.
§ 300-129 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-130
1:410
§ 300-131. Preparation rooms.
All preparation rooms shall meet the Massachusetts Board of Registration
and Embalming and Funeral Directing standards as listed below, but not
limited to federal, state and local code.
establishment permit holder shall provide the South Hadley Board of
Health any of these records when the Board makes a request to inspect
them, in a timely fashion.
Every licensed funeral establishment shall have at least one
preparation room for the preparation for burial or other disposition of
all dead human bodies. Preparation rooms shall be at least 12 feet by
14 feet in size, if constructed after January 1, 2008. Preparation rooms
shall be locked at all times.
A.
No person shall be allowed in the preparation room while a dead
human body is being prepared for burial or other final disposition
except persons duly registered or licensed by the Massachusetts Board
of Registration in Embalming and Funeral Directing pursuant to MGL
c. 112, §§ 82 through 87, public officials engaged in the discharge of
their official duties, students who are duly enrolled in a recognized
mortuary school, and members of the decedent's immediate family or
persons authorized by them in writing. The provisions of this subsection
shall be printed on a placard and conspicuously displayed or posted
on the exterior of each door to each preparation room in the funeral
establishment. Failure to do display such placards constitutes grounds
for disciplinary action by the Board, as well as the by the Massachusetts
Board of Registration in Embalming and Funeral Directing.
B.
Each preparation room in a funeral establishment shall be equipped
with a tile or cement floor. Rubber tile, rubber matting or linoleum may
be used, provided that it is not less than 3/16 inch thick, and that, if it is
used as a floor covering, it is laid over a floor constructed of cement or
other waterproof substance. Wooden floors overlaid with metal or other
waterproof materials may be accepted in lieu of cement floors.
C.
Each preparation room shall also contain the following: one standardtype
sanitary operating table; one flush-rim sink, one floor drain; one
reduced pressure or air gap separation backflow prevention device
located at the water meter or property line; one sanitary waste
receptacle which is opened by a foot pedal; and a standard-type
instrument sterilizer.
D.
Every preparation room shall comply with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, regulations and ordinances regarding ventilation and
shall be ventilated so as to ensure that no deleterious odors are allowed
to remain therein and that the odors therefrom are not permitted to
enter into any other part of the funeral establishment or any part of any
adjoining premises.
E.
§ 300-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-131
1:411
§ 300-132. Medical Examiner.
§ 300-133. Removal, preparation and transportation of bodies.
An embalmer's kit shall contain, at a minimum, all items which are
reasonably necessary for proper embalming and/or preparation of a
dead human body for burial, cremation or other final disposition in light
of currently accepted standards of professional practice.
F.
All equipment which is used to aspirate or remove blood or other
potentially infectious materials, or which comes into contact with blood
or other potentially infectious materials, as defined in 239 CMR 3.12,
shall be maintained and used in a manner which prevents conversion
of blood or other potentially infectious materials to aerosol or airborne
particles.
G.
Every embalmer and funeral director shall report to the Medical
Examiner all deaths which he, as an authorized public official, shall
investigate. Such deaths include all deaths believed to have been
caused by injury or trauma, all deaths believed to have been caused
by the action of chemical (i.e., drugs or poisons), thermal or electrical
agents, all deaths following abortions, all deaths believed to have
resulted from occupational injuries or infections, all sudden deaths
of persons not disabled by a recognizable disease, and all deaths of
persons found dead. Persons registered by the Massachusetts Board
of Registration in Embalming and Funeral Directing shall consult the
Medical Examiner of the district prior to making any removal when in
doubt.
A.
No embalming fluid or any preparation substitute therefor shall be
injected into the body of any person supposed to have died by violence
or under suspicious circumstances without prior authorization from the
Medical Examiner of the state in which the death occurs.
B.
In order to recognize the inherent dignity of the human body and
protect the public health, sufficient preservation and/or disinfection
and/or refrigeration shall be applied to each dead human body to
guarantee temporary protection against excessive decomposition.
A.
Removals shall not be made from any place of death unless a death
certificate or other appropriate death pronouncement form, signed by
a duly licensed physician, the Medical Examiner or another person
duly authorized by law, is in the possession of the funeral director.
In the absence of such a pronouncement, removal may take place
with the verbal approval by authorized/legally appropriate government
authorities unless otherwise prohibited MGL c. 114, § 45. Such
approval shall be documented, in writing thereafter, with the details of
said approval.
B.
No licensed funeral establishment, nor any agent or employee thereof,
shall handle, move or transport any dead human body except under
C.
§ 300-131 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-133
1:412
the supervision of, and with the personal attendance in the vehicle
of, a person registered by the Massachusetts Board of Registration
in Embalming and Funeral Directing and the South Hadley Board of
Health.
No person registered by Massachusetts Board of Registration in
Embalming and Funeral Directing or his agent or employee shall
remove, transport or otherwise convey a dead human body except
in a closed hearse or other vehicle used exclusively for the purpose
of transporting dead human bodies within the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. Said vehicles shall be designed or equipped in such a
manner as to ensure that any dead human body transported therein
is concealed from public view. Said vehicles shall be registered and
designated as hearses by the Registry of Motor Vehicles. A person duly
registered by the Massachusetts Board of Registration in Embalming
and Funeral Directing shall be in personal attendance in the vehicle
during any removal, transportation or conveyance of a dead human
body.
D.
Vehicles registered and equipped as hearses and bearing hearse plates
may be used only for removal or transportation of dead human bodies,
transportation of flowers, transportation of funeral equipment,
transportation of a clergyperson or other funeral service officiant if
such is the custom of the deceased, and/or transportation of other
funeral establishment personnel.
E.
If a body has not been embalmed, and the body is to be buried or
cremated within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts within 50 hours
after death, said body shall be prepared by a registered embalmer.
Said embalmer shall thoroughly wash, disinfect and sanitize said body;
close all orifices with treated absorbent cotton; envelop the entire
body with clean sheeting or with provided clothing; and take any other
appropriate steps necessary to ensure that there will be no offensive
leakage or odors from the body prior to burial, cremation or other final
disposition. If a body has not been embalmed, and said body is to be
buried or cremated within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, but
said burial or cremation will not occur within 50 hours after death,
said body shall be prepared by a registered embalmer as required
by 239 CMR 3.10(7), and shall also be placed in a refrigeration unit
designed to accept dead human bodies and retard decomposition by
maintaining temperatures between 34° F. and 39° F. Should the family
of the deceased require a period of time extending 50 hours after the
death of the deceased before the burial or cremation of the corpse for
religious or spiritual purposes, accommodations may be made.
F.
A body, once interred or placed in a cemetery receiving vault, shall not
be transported or shipped from the cemetery where it lies unless it is
encased in a hermetically sealed or air-tight casket, box or container.
A body embalmed by a registered embalmer and placed in a receiving
vault for not over 30 days shall be excepted from 239 CMR 3.10.
G.
§ 300-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-133
1:413
§ 300-134. Precautions against bloodborne and other pathogens.
As part of their function of being "health care responsible," every embalmer
or funeral director shall adopt all proper means to safeguard the public
health, including but not limited to the use of "universal precautions" during
the embalming or preparation of a body, as set forth in 239 CMR 3.00
through 5.00, Occupational Safety and Health Standards 1910.1030, and
this regulation.
In all cases of cremation, a suitable casket or alternative container shall
be used. If a casket is used, that casket may later be re-used as long as
the following criteria are met:
(1) The casket is equipped with a removable liner or insert;
The removable liner or insert is completely removed and replaced
with a new liner or insert after each use;
(2)
No such casket is used or re-used after any nonremovable portion
of that casket has been soiled, stained or otherwise contaminated
by or from any human remains placed therein, or has been placed
within a rental casket insert;
(3)
The customer who rents or re-uses that casket has been informed,
in writing, that the casket may have been used previously and that
it will be reclaimed by the funeral establishment from which he or
she has rented or obtained it immediately prior to final disposition
of the deceased;
(4)
The customer who rents or re-uses that casket has signed a written
disclosure or authorization form verifying that he or she has
received all of the information required by 239 CMR 3.10(10) in
writing and that he or she authorizes the funeral establishment to
use the removable liner or insert selected by him or her for the final
disposition of the deceased.
(5)
H.
Every person, while engaged in removal of a dead human body from
the place of death to a licensed funeral establishment, shall be provided
with and shall use the following personal protective clothing and
equipment to protect against exposure to bloodborne pathogens:
Disposable OSHA-approved gloves shall be worn for barrier
protection against contact with blood or other potentially infectious
materials. Nondisposable autopsy, Kevlar® or rubber gloves shall
be worn for additional protection if warranted. Nondisposable
gloves shall be cleaned and carefully inspected for punctures, tears
or other damage after each use. Damaged gloves, whether
disposable or nondisposable, shall be replaced immediately. Other
soiled clothing shall be removed before the removal of gloves.
Gloves shall be carefully removed to avoid skin contact with the
exterior of the gloves.
(1)
A.
§ 300-133 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-134
1:414
The body being removed shall be enclosed in a body bag or other
suitable, sealed container which will prevent leakage or escape of
blood or other potentially infectious materials during removal from
the place of death to the licensed funeral establishment accepting
responsibility for the care and preparation of said body.
(2)
Every person, while engaged in actually preparing a dead human body
for burial or cremation, shall be provided with and shall use the
following personal protective clothing and equipment to protect against
exposure to bloodborne pathogens:
Disposable OSHA-approved gloves shall be worn for barrier
protection against contact with blood or other potentially infectious
materials. Other soiled clothing or equipment shall be removed
before the removal of gloves. Gloves shall be carefully removed to
avoid skin contact with the exterior of the gloves.
(1)
Nondisposable autopsy, Kevlar® or rubber gloves shall be worn
for additional protection if warranted. If nondisposable gloves are
used, they shall be cleaned and carefully inspected for punctures,
tears or other damage after each use. Damaged gloves shall be
replaced immediately. Other soiled clothing or equipment shall be
removed before the removal of gloves. Gloves shall be carefully
removed to avoid skin contact with the exterior of the gloves.
(2)
Disposable face masks shall be worn for barrier protection against
sprays of blood or other potentially infectious materials to the
mouth or nose. Soiled masks shall be replaced immediately.
(3)
Goggles shall be worn for barrier protection against sprays of blood
or other potentially infectious materials to the eyes and for vapor
protection against exposure to formaldehyde.
(4)
Face shields shall be worn for barrier protection against sprays of
blood or other potentially infectious materials to the face.
(5)
Gowns which are impervious to moisture, are washable or
disposable, and are long-sleeved shall be worn for barrier
protection against skin contact with chemicals, blood or other
potentially infectious materials. Soiled gowns shall be replaced
immediately.
(6)
Disposable head and shoe covers shall be worn for barrier
protection against blood or other potentially infectious materials.
(7)
B.
All instruments, appliances and equipment used in the preparation of
a dead human body shall be used and maintained in a manner which
prevents, insofar as is reasonably possible, conversion of blood or other
potentially infectious bodily fluids or materials into aerosols or airborne
particles.
C.
§ 300-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-134
1:415
Every funeral establishment shall ensure proper disposal of personal
protective clothing and equipment. Disposable items contaminated with
blood or other potentially infectious materials shall be placed
immediately in an appropriately labeled disposal container and
removed in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations governing hazardous waste disposal. Nondisposable items
contaminated with blood or other potentially infectious materials shall
be placed immediately in an appropriately labeled laundry container.
D.
No sheets or linens which have come in contact with a dead human
body shall be reused unless they have first been thoroughly laundered
and disinfected. No other materials or supplies of any kind which have
come in contact with a dead human body shall be used more than
once. Contaminated laundry shall be handled as little as possible with a
minimum of agitation, shall be bagged or containerized at the location
where it was used, and shall not be sorted or rinsed at the location
of use. Contaminated laundry shall be placed and transported in bags
or containers which are labeled or color-coded in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the United States Occupational Safety and
Health Administration.
E.
All instruments, appliances and equipment used in the preparation
of a dead human body shall be thoroughly cleansed and sterilized in
accordance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations,
including but not limited to all applicable regulations of the United
States Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health, immediately at the
conclusion of each individual case.
F.
Each preparation room in a funeral establishment shall be equipped
with proper and convenient receptacles for refuse, bandages, cotton
and other waste materials and supplies, and all such refuse, bandages,
cotton and other waste materials shall be disposed of in accordance
with all applicable federal, state and local laws governing disposal of
hazardous waste.
G.
Whenever a dead human body is transported within, into or out of
Massachusetts prior to being embalmed or otherwise prepared for
burial or cremation, all persons engaged in the transportation of said
body or who may come into physical contact with that body during
transportation shall follow the precautions required by 239 CMR
3.12(3).
H.
Whenever a dead human body is transported or shipped within, into
or out of Massachusetts after being embalmed or otherwise prepared
for burial or cremation, the use of disposable gloves shall be required
only for persons who come into actual physical contact with the body
itself. Said body shall be transported or shipped in a sealed casket, body
bag or other appropriate sealed container which will prevent leakage
or escape of blood or other potentially infectious materials during such
shipment or transportation.
I.
§ 300-134 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-134
1:416
§ 300-135. Violations and penalties; noncriminal disposition.
Notwithstanding the provisions of 239 CMR 3.12(1) through (11),
where a body is dead of a disease which has been identified by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health or the Centers for Disease
Control as one which requires precautions above and beyond those
required by 239 CMR 3.12(1) through (11), a licensed funeral
establishment and its agents and employees shall follow such additional
precautions as may be required or recommended by the Centers for
Disease Control with respect to said body.
When handling the bagged remains of a person who passed away
from the Ebola virus, the remains shall be handled with special
precautions.
When handling the bagged remains of a person who passed
away from the Ebola virus, workers handling the bagged
remains shall wear PPE recommended by the CDC, including
but not limited to a surgical scrub suit, surgical cap,
impervious gown with full sleeve coverage, eye protection
(face shield, goggles, etc.), face mask, shoe covers, and double
surgical gloves.
(a)
Do not perform embalming on a deceased person who passed
away from the Ebola virus.
(b)
(c) Do not open the body bags.
Do not remove the remains from the body bags. Bagged bodies
shall be placed directly into a hermetically sealed casket.
(d)
In the event of leakage of fluids from the body bag, thoroughly
clean and decontaminate areas of the environment with EPAregistered
disinfectants that can kill a broad range of viruses in
accordance with label instructions. Reusable equipment shall
be cleaned and disinfected according to standard procedures.
(e)
Remains shall be cremated or buried promptly in a
hermetically sealed casket.
(f)
(1)
J.
In accordance with the regulations of the United States Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (29 CFR 1910.1030), every embalmer
or funeral director shall inform all workers performing tasks in and
for any funeral establishment, including any trade embalmers or other
workers who are not directly employed by that establishment, about
bloodborne pathogen exposure risks associated with specific tasks, how
to protect themselves and others from exposure, and the actions to be
taken in the event of an exposure incident.
K.
A list of precautions shall be visibly posted outside of the preparation
room and on all disposal containers.
L.
§ 300-134 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-135
1:417
§ 300-136. Enforcement.
§ 300-137. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations is declared invalid or unenforceable,
the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full
force and effect.
§ 300-138. Effective date.
This regulation shall take effect on September 2, 2015.
It shall be the responsibility of the funeral establishment permit holders
to comply with all sections of this regulation. The violator may receive
a fine not greater than $1,000.
A.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by
the noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D
or by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue.
B.
C. Each day any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the South Hadley Board of
Health or its designated agent(s).
A.
Any resident who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the
regulation may do so by contacting the South Hadley Board of Health
or its designated agent(s) and the Board shall investigate.
B.
§ 300-135 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-138
1:418
ARTICLE XVI
Dumpsters
[Adopted 6-1-2016, effective 9-1-2016]
§ 300-139. Authority and adoption.
The Board of Health, Town of South Hadley, Massachusetts, in accordance
with and under the authority granted by MGL c. 111, §§ 30, 31A and 31B,
hereby adopted the following rules and regulations at the meeting of June
1, 2016. This regulation shall take effect September 1, 2016.
§ 300-140. Applicability.
These regulations apply to all existing and future dumpsters in the Town of
South Hadley, whether for residential, commercial or industrial uses.
§ 300-141. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The South Hadley Board of Health.
DSC — The disposal service contractor who owns and/or provides the
dumpster.
DUMPSTER — Any container other than a conventional trash can with lid
intended for the temporary outdoor storage of rubbish, garbage, recyclable
materials, putrescible solid waste or refuse of any sort.
PERSON — Any individual, business, firm, contractor, corporation,
applicant, property owner or agent.
TEMPORARY DUMPSTER — A dumpster that is used in connection with
construction, demolition, fairs or for similar temporary needs, a permit for
which shall be issued for no more than 30 days, renewable for additional
thirty-day periods upon application, not to exceed a total period of 12
months.
§ 300-142. Permit and installation requirements.
No person shall maintain or operate a trash or refuse dumpster without
first obtaining a permit from the South Hadley Board of Health at least
three days prior to installation.
A.
The permit fee shall be in accordance with the current Board of Health
fee schedule, per establishment per calendar year; temporary
dumpsters per thirty-day period. The appropriate fee shall be
accompanied by a completed application, including site-specific criteria
(e.g., photos, sketches) on a form supplied by the Board of Health.
B.
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-142
1:419
§ 300-143. Contractor responsibilities.
Dumpster permits may be suspended or revoked by the Board of Health
for failure of the DSC to comply with the requirements of these
regulations.
C.
No DSC shall provide or service a dumpster in the Town of South
Hadley, for the purpose of storage, removal or transportation of
garbage, rubbish, or other offensive substances, without first obtaining
a hauler's permit from the Board of Health. All hauler licenses shall
expire at the end of the calendar year in which they are issued, but may
be renewed annually upon application as herein provided. There shall
be a renewal fee according to the current fee schedule for said hauler's
permit. The fee is per truck.
D.
These regulations apply to dumpsters in the Town of South Hadley. An
inspection and sanitary survey of the dumpster and surrounding area
may be conducted by the Board of Health and/or its agent(s) to verify
compliance with Board of Health standards.
E.
All dumpsters shall be rodentproof. For those dumpsters that have a
hole located in the lower area of the dumpster near the rear wall
of the container, a permanent seal secured with sheet metal or wire
mesh strong enough to prevent rodents from entering the dumpster
is required. All holes in any dumpster shall be less than 1/4 inch in
diameter, with the exception of those designed by the manufacturer
with a drain flange not more than 1 1/2 inches in diameter. Holes
built into the dumpster for the purpose of applying fire-fighting water
shall be capped, but not permanently secured so as to render them
inoperable.
F.
The Board of Health may attach any condition to the permit of the
person whose property the dumpster is on to assure the health, safety,
welfare or quality of life of the citizens of the Town of South Hadley.
G.
No dumpster is to be placed on Town property without first obtaining
permission from the Town and or its agent(s).
H.
The DSC shall have the dumpster(s) deodorized, washed or sanitized as
necessary at the time of emptying, or as directed by order of the Board
of Health.
A.
The emptying of the contents of the dumpster(s) by the contractor shall
not commence before 7:00 a.m. and not continue after 9:00 p.m. The
Board of Health may modify these hours if, in its reasonable judgment,
it is convinced that the public health and safety or public welfare would
be better served and a nuisance would not be created. The Board of
Health shall be guided in this regard by the location, proximity to
residential property, frequency of emptying, resulting noise and other
factors deemed appropriate.
B.
§ 300-142 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-143
1:420
§ 300-144. Authorized agent/property owner responsibilities.
§ 300-145. Temporary dumpsters; emergency waivers.
The DSC shall have his/her name and business telephone number
conspicuously displayed on each dumpster.
C.
No truck that hauls dumpster contents shall be used to transport
hazardous or biomaterials waste.
D.
The Board of Health may attach any conditions to the license of a
removal contractor that it deems would serve the interest of the health,
safety, welfare or quality of life of the citizens of the Town.
E.
Each dumpster shall be located at an approved distance from the lot
line so as not to interfere with the safety, convenience or health of an
abutter. The location of the dumpster shall be approved by the Board of
Health. Each dumpster shall be located a minimum of 20 feet from any
industrial, commercial or residential building.
A.
All permanent dumpsters shall be located on material impervious to
water (asphalt, concrete, etc.) unless otherwise approved by the Board
of Health.
B.
The Board of Health, when deemed necessary, may require that a
dumpster site be enclosed or screened by the property owner or
authorized agent.
C.
It shall be the responsibility of the person whose property is being
serviced to maintain the dumpster area free from odors, scattered or
windblown debris, overflow and all other nuisances, including but not
limited to rodents.
D.
Each dumpster must be of sufficient size and capacity to eliminate
overflowing and allow lids to close. It is the responsibility of the
property owner to schedule the emptying frequency of the dumpster to
prevent overflowing.
E.
It shall also be the responsibility of the person whose property is
being serviced by the dumpster(s) to maintain the lid(s) in a closed
condition at all times except when actually in the process of placing in
or removing refuse from the dumpster(s).
F.
Dumpsters are to be used only by those individuals who are authorized
by the person whose property is being serviced.
G.
No dumpster shall be used to dispose of hazardous or biomaterials
waste as defined by local, state or federal regulations.
H.
Dumpsters are not to be filled after 9:00 p.m. or before 7:00 a.m.
for residential property or after the close of the business day for
commercial property or industrial use, at which time the lids are to be
locked.
I.
§ 300-143 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-145
1:421
§ 300-146. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 300-147. Waivers.
No person shall maintain or operate a temporary dumpster without
first obtaining a thirty-day temporary dumpster permit from the Board
of Health at least three days prior to installation. Said permit may
be renewed for an additional 30 days upon receipt of a written
reapplication. The person shall comply with all the provisions of these
regulations which are applicable to the operation of a dumpster,
including all temporary dumpsters for on-site use by construction,
renovation or repair firms.
A.
The fee for each temporary dumpster permit shall be set by the Board
of Health on the approved fee schedule.
B.
An emergency waiver will be issued for the immediate placement of
a dumpster on any given property, in a safe and reasonable location,
for the purpose of mitigating the effects following a fire, water leak,
flood (basement, etc.) or other emergent issue which would require the
immediate disposal of items or materials within a building or property
for the purposes of general safety, health or structural stability. A
permit for a dumpster shall then be obtained within a reasonable time
in light of the nature of the emergency.
C.
Subject to the laws of the commonwealth, random inspections and
sanitary surveys of in-place dumpsters/temporary dumpsters and
surrounding areas may be conducted by the Board of Health and/or its
agent(s) to verify compliance with Board of Health standards.
A.
All violations of state and local regulations shall be corrected in
accordance with said regulations and within the time frame as
determined by the Board of Health and/or its agent(s).
B.
If corrective action as ordered by the Board of Health and/or its
agent(s) is not taken by the person whose property is being serviced,
or the DSC within the time limit set forth by such order, the Board may
suspend or revoke the dumpster permit or take such legal action as
necessary to correct the violation.
C.
The Board of Health, at its discretion, may levy fines upon any person
or DSC found in violation of these regulations in accordance with MGL
c. 40, § 21D. Fines will be $50 per violation. Each day that the violation
remains uncorrected constitutes a separate violation.
D.
The Board of Health and/or its agent(s) shall enforce these regulations
and/or any violations thereof on any container and/or dumpster if it is
deemed by the Board of Health and/or its agent(s) to be a public health
hazard or a nuisance.
E.
The Board of Health and/or its agent(s) may, in its sole discretion,
grant a waiver and/or add conditions to a dumpster permit, or to an
A.
§ 300-145 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-147
1:422
§ 300-148. Severability.
If any provision of this regulation is declared invalid or unenforceable, it
shall not affect any other provision or the administration thereof but shall
continue in full force and effect.
§ 300-149. Effective date.
These regulations were adopted by the South Hadley Board of Health on
June 1, 2016, and will take effect on September 1, 2016.
existing dumpster permit currently in effect. Waivers shall be granted
only when, in the opinion of the Board of Health and/or its agent(s):
The person requesting a waiver has established that enforcement
of the regulations from which a waiver is sought would be
manifestly unjust, considering all the relevant facts and
circumstances of the individual case; and
(1)
The person requesting a waiver has established that a level of
environmental protection, public health hazard and nuisance
control is at least equivalent to that provided within this dumpster
regulation.
(2)
New construction projects, as determined by the Board of Health and/
or its agent(s), will not be granted a waiver to the dumpster regulations.
B.
A waiver request shall be in writing accompanied by any sketches,
pictures or other information for Board of Health and/or its agent(s)
consideration.
C.
The applicant shall make reference to the specific section of the
dumpster regulations for which a waiver is sought, and a statement in
compliance with Subsection A.
D.
Any waiver granted by the Board of Health and/or its agent(s) shall
be in writing. Any denial of a waiver shall also be in writing and shall
contain a brief statement of the reasons for the denial.
E.
§ 300-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-149
1:423

ARTICLE XVII
Private Wells
[Adopted 1-23-2017]
§ 300-150. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to provide for the protection of the public
health, safety, welfare and the environment by, among other things,
requiring the proper siting, construction and testing of private wells.
§ 300-151. Authority.
These regulations are adopted by the South Hadley Board of Health,
pursuant to its authority under MGL c. 111, § 31. These regulations
supersede all previous regulations for private wells adopted by the South
Hadley Board of Health.
§ 300-152. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — Any person designated and authorized by the Board to implement
these regulations in whole or part. To the extent provided by the Board,
the agent shall have all the authority of the Board and shall be directly
responsible to the Board and under its direction and control.
APPLICANT — Any person who applies to have a private well constructed.
AQUIFER — A water-bearing geologic formation, group of formations, or
part of a formation that contains sufficient saturated permeable material to
yield significant quantities of water to wells and springs.
BENTONITE GROUT — A mixture of bentonite (API Standard 13A) and
water in a ratio of not less than one pound of bentonite per gallon of water.
BOARD — The Board of Health of South Hadley, Massachusetts or its
authorized agent.
BUSINESS OF DIGGING OR DRILLING — A person who charges a fee for
digging or drilling a well, or a person who advertises for hire to dig or drill
wells within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
CASING — Impervious durable pipe placed in a boring to prevent the walls
from caving and to serve as a vertical conduit for water in a well.
CERTIFIED LABORATORY — A laboratory certified by the Department of
Environmental Protection for the analysis of drinking water and required
water quality analytes. Provisional certification is acceptable.
CERTIFIED WELL DRILLER — Any person certified with the Department of
Environmental Protection Well Driller Program to dig or drill wells in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 300-150 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-152
1:425
CONCRETE — A mixture consisting of Portland cement (ASTM Standard
C150, Type 1 or API Standard 10, Class A), sand, gravel, and water in
a proportion of not more than five parts of sand plus gravel to one part
cement, by volume, and not more than six gallons of water. One part
cement, two parts sand, and three parts gravel are commonly used with up
to six gallons of water.
IRRIGATION WELL — Well used for the sole purpose of watering or
irrigation. The well shall not be connected at any time to a dwelling or a
building unless it meets the requirements of a private drinking water well
and has the Board's/agent's written approval.
MassDEP — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
NEAT CEMENT GROUT — A mixture consisting of one bag (94 pounds) of
Portland cement (ASTM Standard C 150, Type I or API Standard 10, Class
A) to not more than six gallons of clean water. Bentonite (API Standard
13A), up to 2% by weight of cement, shall be added to reduce shrinkage.
Other additives, as described in ASTM Standard C494, may be used to
increase fluidity and/or control setting time.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, company, association, trust, or
partnership.
PRIVATE DRINKING WATER WELL — Any dug, driven, or drilled hole, with
a depth greater than its largest surface diameter, constructed or used to
supply water for human consumption that is not regulated by 310 CMR
22.00.
PUMPING (AQUIFER) TEST — A procedure used to determine the
characteristics of a well and adjacent aquifer by installing and operating a
pump.
SAND CEMENT GROUT — A mixture consisting of Portland cement (ASTM
Standard C150, Type I or API Standard 10, Class A), sand, and water in the
proportion of one part cement to three or four parts sand, by volume, and
not more than six gallons of water per bag (94 pounds) of cement. Up to
5%, by weight, of bentonite (API Standard 13A) shall be added to reduce
shrinkage.
STATIC WATER LEVEL — The level of water in a well under non-pumping
conditions.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to
give support or shelter, such as a building, framework, retaining wall, fence,
or the like.
§ 300-153. Well construction permit.
A Massachusetts certified well driller shall obtain a permit from the
Board/agent prior to the commencement of construction of a private
well.
A.
B. Each permit application to construct a well shall include the following:
§ 300-152 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-153
1:426
§ 300-154. Water supply certificate.
(1) The property owner's name and address.
The well driller's name and proof of valid Massachusetts
certification.
(2)
A plan with a specified scale, signed by a registered surveyor or
engineer, showing the location of the proposed well in relation to
existing or proposed above- or below-ground structures.
(3)
A description of prior and current land uses within 200 feet of
the proposed well location, which represent a potential source of
contamination, including but not limited to the following:
(a) Existing and proposed structures.
(b) Subsurface sewage disposal system.
(c) Subsurface fuel storage tanks.
(d) Public and private ways.
(e) Utility rights-of-way.
(f) Any other potential sources of pollution.
(4)
Proof that the owner of any property abutting the applicant's
property has been notified of the applicant's intention to install a
well.
(5)
(6) A permit fee of $100.
The permit shall be on site at all times that work is taking place. Each
permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance unless revoked
for cause, or extended. Permits may be extended for one additional sixmonth
period, provided that a written explanation for the request is
received by the Board/agent prior to the one-year expiration date.
C.
D. Well construction permits are not transferable.
The issuance of a water supply certificate by the Board/agent shall
certify that the private well may be used as a drinking water supply.
A water supply certificate must be issued for the use of a private well
prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for an existing structure
or prior to the issuance of a building permit for new construction which
is to be served by the well.
A.
The following shall be submitted to the Board/agent to obtain a water
supply certificate:
(1) A well construction permit.
A copy of the water well completion report as required by MassDEP
Well Driller Program regulations (310 CMR 46).
(2)
B.
§ 300-153 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-154
1:427
§ 300-155. Well location.
A copy of the pumping test report required pursuant to § 300-156
of these regulations.
(3)
A copy of the water quality report required pursuant to § 300-157
of these regulations.
(4)
Upon the receipt and review of the above documents, the Board/agent
shall make a final decision on the application for a water supply
certificate. A final decision shall be in writing and shall comprise one of
the following actions:
(1) Issue a water supply certificate.
Deny the applicant a water supply certificate and specify the
reasons for the denial.
(2)
Issue a conditional water supply certificate with those conditions,
which the Board/agent deems necessary to ensure fitness, purity
and quantity of the water, derived from that private well. These
conditions may include, but not be limited to, requiring treatment
and/or additional testing of the water.
(3)
C.
In locating a well, the applicant shall identify on a plan all potential
sources of contamination which exist or are proposed within 200 feet
of the site. When possible, the well shall be located upgradient of
all potential sources of contamination and shall be as far away from
potential sources of contamination as possible, given the layout of the
property.
A.
No well shall be permitted for use as a potable water source unless it
meets the following setback requirements:
Setback
(feet) From
15 Property line
25 Public or private roadway
15 Right-of-way
50 Building sewer line or septic tank
100 Leaching field or dry well
100 Stable, barnyard, manure storage
15 Power line or overhead
distribution line
50 Any surface water, including but
not limited to wetlands
B.
§ 300-154 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-155
1:428
§ 300-156. Water quantity and pumping test.
The Board/agent reserves the right to impose minimum setback
requirements from other potential sources of contamination not listed
above. All such additional setback requirements shall be listed, in
writing, as a condition of the well construction permit.
C.
Each private well shall be located so that it is accessible for repair,
maintenance, testing, and inspection. The well shall be completed in a
water-bearing formation that will produce the required volume of water
under normal operating conditions.
D.
Water supply lines shall be installed at least 10 feet from and 18 inches
above any sewer line. Whenever water supply lines must cross sewer
lines, both lines shall be constructed of Class 150 pressure pipe and
shall be pressure tested to assure watertightness.
E.
No private well, or its associated distribution system, shall be
connected to either the distribution system of a public water supply
system or any type of waste distribution system.
F.
The applicant shall submit to the Board/agent for review and approval
a pumping test report. The pumping test report shall include, at a
minimum: the name and address of the well owner, well location
referenced to at least two permanent structures or landmarks, date
the pumping test was performed, depth at which the pump was set for
the test, location for the discharge line, static water level immediately
before pumping commenced, discharge rate and, if applicable, the
time the discharge rate changed, pumping water levels and respective
times after pumping commenced, maximum drawdown during the test,
duration of the test, including both the pumping time and the recovery
time during which measurements were taken, recovery water levels
and respective times after cessation of pumping, and reference point
used for all measurements.
A.
In order to demonstrate that the well capacity can provide the required
volume of water, a pumping test shall be conducted in the following
manner:
The volume of water necessary to support the household's daily
need shall be determined using the following equation: (number of
bedrooms plus one bedroom) x (110 gallons per bedroom) x (safety
factor of 2) = number of gallons needed daily.
(1)
The storage capacity of the well shall be determined using the
measured static water level and the depth and radius of the
drillhole or casing.
(2)
The required volume shall be calculated by adding the volumes of
water in (1) and (2) above. It is this volume of water that must be
pumped from the well within a twenty-four-hour period.
(3)
B.
§ 300-155 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-156
1:429
§ 300-157. Water quality testing.
The pumping test may be performed at whatever rate is desired.
Following the pumping test, the water level in the well must be shown
to recover to within 85% of the pre-pumped static water level within a
twenty-four-hour period.
Example 1: a one-bedroom house with a well six inches in diameter
containing 200 feet of standing water:
1) 1 bedroom + 1 bedroom = (2 bedrooms) x (110 gallons per
bedroom) x (safety factor of 2) = 440 gallons needed daily.
2) The volume of a six-inch well is 1.5 gallons for every foot of
water column length. Therefore: (200 feet of standing water) x
(1.5 gal./feet) = 300 gallons.
3) 440 gallons + 300 gallons = 740 gallons that must be pumped
from the well in 24 hours or less to demonstrate suitable
capacity. Recovery to at least 85% of the static water level
must also occur within 24 hours after cessation of pumping.
Example 2: For a four-bedroom house with a well that is six inches in
diameter containing 100 feet of standing water:
1) 4 bedrooms + 1 bedroom = (5 bedrooms) x (110 gallons per
bedroom) x (safety factor of 2) = 1,100 gallons needed daily.
2) The volume of a six-inch well is 1.5 gallons for every foot of
water volume length. Therefore: (100 feet of standing water) x
(1.5 gal./feet) = 150 gallons.
3) 1,100 gallons + 150 gallons = 1,250 gallons that must be
pumped from the well in 24 hours or less to demonstrate
suitable capacity. Recovery to at least 85% of the static water
level must also occur within 24 hours after cessation of
pumping.
C.
After the construction of the well has been completed and disinfected,
and prior to using it as a private drinking water well, baseline water
quality testing shall be conducted.
A.
A water sample shall be collected either after purging three well
volumes or following the stabilization of the pH, temperature and
specific conductance in the pumped well. The water sample to be tested
shall be collected at the pump discharge or from a disinfected tap in
the pump discharge line. In no event shall a water treatment device be
installed prior to sampling.
B.
Water quality testing, utilizing the applicable USEPA-approved method
for drinking water testing, shall be conducted by a Massachusetts
certified laboratory and shall include analysis for the following
parameters:
(1) Arsenic.
C.
§ 300-156 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-157
1:430
(2) Chloride.
(3) Copper.
(4) Fluoride.
(5) Hardness.
(6) Iron.
(7) Lead.
(8) Manganese.
(9) pH.
(10)Sodium.
(11)Total coliform bacteria.
(12)E. coli bacteria.
(13)Nitrate/Nitrite.
In wells drilled into bedrock, the Board/agent requires that in addition
to the parameters listed above, a gross alpha screen and radon test
be performed. If the gross alpha screen detects radiation of 15 pci/
l or more, then the water must be analyzed for radium and uranium
concentrations.
D.
The owner of every well used for drinking water, including those
serving a property which is rented or leased, shall have its water tested
at a Massachusetts certified laboratory for the following chemical and
bacteriological parameters at a minimum of once a year: total coliform
bacteria, E. coli bacteria, nitrate, nitrite, pH, conductivity, sodium,
and iron. All other required chemical parameters should be tested
at a minimum of every 10 years. The Board/agent may require more
frequent testing, or testing for additional parameters, where other
water quality problems are known or suspected to exist.
E.
The owner of a rental property shall make results of all water quality
tests available to all tenants of the property and the Board/agent. In
cases where the well water does not meet the water quality standards
outlined above, the Board/agent may require the property owner to
provide an alternative approved source of drinking water for the
tenants.
F.
Prior to selling, conveying, or transferring title to real property, the
owner shall have tested the water of every private drinking water well
serving that property. A water sample from each well shall be submitted
to a Massachusetts certified laboratory for testing for the parameters
listed in the water quality section of this article. This water quality
testing shall have been performed not more than one year prior to
G.
§ 300-157 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-157
1:431
§ 300-158. Well construction.
transfer of the property. Results of the water quality testing shall be
submitted to the Board/agent prior to property transfer.
In addition, the owner shall give copies of all available water quality
test results of which he/she has knowledge (regardless of age of results)
for the private well in question to any buyer and/or broker involved in
the transfer. In the event that there is no buyer at the time the water
is tested, a copy of all water test results must be given by the owner to
the buyer before the property is put under agreement.
H.
For irrigation wells, the Board/agent requires annual testing for E. coli
bacteria and nitrate/nitrite, as accidental consumption could result in
acute exposure.
I.
The Board/agent reserves the right to require retesting of the above
parameters, or testing for additional parameters, when, in the opinion
of the Board/agent, it is necessary due to local conditions or for the
protection of public health, safety, welfare and the environment. All
costs and laboratory arrangements for the water testing are the
responsibility of the applicant.
J.
Following a receipt of the water quality test results, the well owner
shall submit a water quality report to the Board/agent which includes:
(1) A copy of the certified laboratory's test results.
The name and contact information of the individual who performed
the sampling.
(2)
(3) Where in the system the water sample was obtained.
K.
This regulation requires that private drinking water wells meet all
current Massachusetts primary and secondary drinking water
standards and guidelines adopted by the MassDEP Office of Research
and Standards (ORS). In any case where a private drinking water well
does not meet such standards or guidelines, as it deems necessary for
the protection of public health, safety or welfare, the Board/agent may
take action including, but not limited to, requiring the property owner
to provide an alternative source of drinking water.
L.
General.
Pursuant to 310 CMR 46.02(1), no person in the business of digging
or drilling shall construct a well unless certified by the MassDEP
Well Drillers Program.
(1)
Any work involving the connection of the private well to the
distribution system of the residence must conform to the local
plumbing code. All electrical connections between the well and the
pump controls and all piping between the well and the storage and/
or pressure tank in the house must be made by a pump installer
(2)
A.
§ 300-157 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-158
1:432
or certified well driller, including the installation of the pump and
appurtenance(s) in the well or house.
A physical connection is not permitted between a water supply
which satisfies the requirements of these regulations and another
water supply that does not meet the requirements of these
regulations without prior approval of the Board/agent.
(3)
General well design and construction.
All private wells shall be designed and constructed such that:
The materials used for the permanent construction are durable
in the specific hydrogeologic environment that occurs at the
well site.
(a)
No unsealed opening is be left around the well that could
conduct surface water or contaminated groundwater vertically
to the intake portion of the well or transfer water from one
formation to another.
(b)
(1)
Permanent construction materials shall not leach or contribute
toxic substances, taste, odors, or bacterial contamination to the
water in the well.
(2)
The driller shall operate all equipment according to generally
accepted standards in the industry and shall take appropriate
precautions to prevent damage, injury or other loss to persons and
property at the drilling site.
(3)
Well construction design shall ensure that surface water does not
enter the well through the opening or by seepage through the
ground surface. Construction site waste and materials shall be
disposed of in such a way as to avoid contamination of the well,
any surface water or the aquifer. During any time that the well is
unattended, the contractor shall secure the well in a way so as to
prevent either tampering with the well and/or the introduction of
foreign material into the well.
(4)
All water used for drilling, well development, or to mix a drilling
fluid shall be obtained from a source which will not result in
contamination of the well or the water-bearing zones penetrated
by the well. Water from wetlands, swamps, ponds and other similar
surface features shall not be used. Water shall be conveyed in clear,
sanitary containers or water lines and shall be chlorinated to an
initial concentration between 50 mg/l and 100 mg/l. All drilling
equipment, including pumps and down hole tools, shall be cleaned
and disinfected prior to drilling each new well or test hole.
(5)
All drilling fluids shall be nontoxic. Drilling fluid additives shall be
stored in clean containers and shall be free of material that may
adversely affect the well, the aquifer, or the quality of the water
(6)
B.
§ 300-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-158
1:433
to be pumped from the well. Surfactants shall be biodegradable.
The use of biodegradable organic polymers shall, when possible, be
avoided.
All wells, including those that have been hydrofractured, shall be
developed in order to remove fine materials introduced into the
pore spaces or fractures during construction. One or more of the
following methods shall be used for development: overpumping,
backwashing, surging, jetting, air-lift pumping.
(7)
The completed well shall be sufficiently straight so that there will
be no interference with installation, alignment, operation or future
removal of the permanent well pump.
(8)
Well casing.
Private water supply wells shall be constructed using either steel or
thermoplastic well casing. The casing shall be of adequate strength
and durability to withstand anticipated formation and hydrostatic
pressures, the forces imposed on it during installation, and the
corrosive effects of the local hydrogeologic environment.
(1)
All casing used in the construction of private wells shall be free
of pits, breaks, gouges, deep scratches and other defects. If
previously used casing is installed, it shall be decontaminated and
disinfected prior to installation.
(2)
Installation of water well casing shall be done in a manner that
does not alter the shape, size, or strength of the casing and does
not damage any of the joints or couplings connecting sections of
the casing. A standard drive shoe shall be used when casing is
installed. The drive shoe shall be either welded or threaded to the
lower end of the string of casing and shall have a beveled metal
cutting edge forged, cast, or fabricated for this specific purpose.
(3)
Upon completion of the installation procedure, the entire length of
the casing above the intake shall be watertight.
(4)
Well casing shall not be cut off below the land surface unless
a pitless adapter or a pitless unit is installed or an abandoned
well is being permanently plugged. Well casing terminating above
grade shall extend at least 12 inches above the predetermined
ground surface at the wellhead except when the well is located
in a floodplain. When a well is located in a floodplain, the well
casing shall extend at least two feet above the level of the highest
recorded flood. The top of the well casing shall be reasonably
smooth and level.
(5)
C.
Well screen. A well screen is required for all drilled wells that are
completed in unconsolidated formations. All well screens shall be of
Grade 304 stainless steel. Wells completed in bedrock do not require
a screen unless the bedrock formation is brittle in nature or has a
D.
§ 300-158 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-158
1:434
potential for collapse. The well screen aperture openings, screen
length, and diameter shall be selected so as not to limit the aquifer's
water-yielding characteristics while preventing access of soil particles
that would detract from well efficiency and yield.
Grouting and sealing.
Private wells drilled in bedrock shall be grouted from the ground
surface or to the bottom of the pitless adaptor (if present) to 15 feet
into competent bedrock. Neat cement grout, sand cement grout,
or Bentonite grout shall be used. It shall have a permeability of at
least 1 x 10-7 and be emplaced using standard grouting techniques
as described in the MassDEP Private Well Guidelines, as amended.
(1)
All wells completed with the casing extending above grade shall
have a surface seal designed to eliminate the possibility of surface
water flowing down the annular space between the well casing and
the surrounding backfilled materials. The surface seal shall extend
to a depth below the local frost line.
(2)
E.
Wellhead completion.
All wells shall be equipped with a sanitary seal or watertight cap
designed to prevent surface water and foreign matter from
entering the well.
(1)
All wells except flowing artesian and dug wells shall be vented. The
opening of the vent pipe shall be covered with a 24 mesh corrosionresistant
screen and shall be large enough to prevent water from
being drawn into the well through electrical conduits or leaks in
the seal around the pump when the pump is turned on. The vent
pipe shall terminate in a downward position at or above the top of
the casing.
(2)
All connections to a well casing made below ground shall be
protected by either a pitless adapter or a pitless unit that complies
with the most recent revision of National Sanitation Foundation
Standard Number 56, entitled "Pitless Well Adapters."
(3)
Above-grade connections into the top or side of a well casing shall
be at least 12 inches above the established ground surface or
two feet above the level of the highest known flood, whichever is
higher. Above-grade connections shall be sealed so that they are
watertight.
(4)
The ground immediately surrounding the well casing shall be
sloped downward and away from the well in all directions to
eliminate the possibility of surface water ponding.
(5)
F.
G. Disinfection.
§ 300-158 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-158
1:435
§ 300-159. Decommissioning.
Upon completion of well construction, the well driller shall
disinfect the well. If a pump is to be installed immediately upon
completion of the well, the pump installer shall disinfect the well
and the pumping equipment after the pump has been installed.
(1)
If the pump is not installed upon completion of the well, the pump
installer shall, upon installation, disinfect the well and the pumping
equipment. The pump installer shall also disinfect the entire water
supply system immediately after any maintenance or repair work is
done on the pump.
(2)
When a well is disinfected, the initial chlorine concentration shall
be 100 mg/l throughout the entire water column.
(3)
For newly constructed or altered wells in which the pump is not
immediately installed, the chlorine concentration used to disinfect
the well shall be 100 mg/l. Upon installation of the pump, the well,
the pumping equipment, and the distribution system, if connected,
shall be disinfected with a chlorine concentration of 100 mg/l.
(4)
The disinfectant solution shall remain undisturbed in the well for
a minimum of two hours. After all the chlorine has been flushed
from the water supply system, a water sample shall be collected
and submitted to a Massachusetts certified laboratory. For new
wells, the sample shall be tested pursuant to § 300-156 of these
regulations.
(5)
Only certified well drillers are authorized to physically alter or
repair a well. For wells that have undergone repair, a sample shall
be tested for total coliform bacteria and any other parameters
deemed appropriate by the Board/agent, prior to being put back in
use.
(6)
Abandoned wells, test holes, and borings shall be decommissioned so
as to prevent the well, including the annular space outside the casing,
from being a channel allowing the vertical movement of water.
A.
The owner of a private well shall decommission the well if any of the
following criteria are met:
Construction of the well is terminated prior to completion of the
well.
(1)
The well owner notifies the Board/agent that the use of the well is
to be permanently discontinued.
(2)
(3) The well has been out of service for at least three years.
The well is a potential hazard to public health or safety and the
situation cannot be corrected.
(4)
B.
§ 300-158 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-159
1:436
§ 300-160. Enforcement.
The well is in such a state of disrepair that its continued use is
impractical or unsafe.
(5)
The well has the potential for transmitting contaminants from the
land surface into an aquifer or from one aquifer to another and the
situation cannot be corrected.
(6)
The property owner shall ensure that all abandoned wells and test holes
or borings associated with the well installation are properly plugged
before work at the site is completed. Only certified well drillers may
plug abandoned wells, test holes, and borings.
C.
Abandoned overburden wells or borings shall be completely filled with
a low-permeability grout, which cures with a final permeability of less
than 1 x 10-7 cm/sec. Wells shall be plugged with neat cement grout,
sand cement grout, concrete, or bentonite grout.
D.
Regardless of the type used, the grout used for plugging shall:
Be sufficiently fluid so that it can be applied through a tremie pipe
from the bottom of the well upward.
(1)
Remain as a homogeneous fluid when applied to the subsurface
rather than disaggregating by gravity into a two-phase substance.
(2)
(3) Be resistant to chemical or physical deterioration.
Not leach chemicals, either organic or inorganic, that will affect the
quality of the groundwater where it is applied.
(4)
E.
The plugging materials shall be introduced at the bottom of the well or
boring and placed progressively upward to a level approximately four
feet below the ground surface. Sealing materials shall not be poured
from the land surface into the well, borehole, or annular space being
sealed.
F.
The well driller shall install a surface seal after the well or boring has
been plugged. Before the surface seal is placed, casing remaining in
the hole shall be cut off. The remaining four feet at the top of the well
or boring shall then be filled with concrete. The top of the seal shall
comprise a concrete slab above the top of the plugged well or boring.
This concrete slab shall be at least six inches thick and shall be at least
two feet greater in diameter than the well casing or borehole wall.
G.
The Board/agent has authority to investigate suspected or known
violations of these regulations and/or violations of any water supply
certificate conditions. The Board/agent may take actions, as it deems
appropriate, within its authority for the protection of public health,
safety, welfare, or the environment, and to enforce any of the provisions
of this regulation.
A.
§ 300-159 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-160
1:437
§ 300-161. Hearing on order.
If any investigation reveals a violation of these regulations or the water
supply certificate conditions, the Board/agent may order the private
well owner to comply with the violated provision(s), and/or take other
action within its authority as the Board/agent deems appropriate.
B.
Any order the Board/agent issues shall be in writing and served in the
following manner:
(1) Personally, by any person authorized to serve civil process;
By any person authorized to serve civil process by leaving a copy of
the order at the property owner's address;
(2)
By sending the property owner a copy of the order by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested; or
(3)
By posting a copy of the order in a conspicuous place on or about
the premises and by advertising it for at least three out of five
consecutive days in one or more newspapers of general circulation
within the municipality where the private well is located, if the
property owner's last and usual place of residence is unknown or
outside the commonwealth.
(4)
C.
Any person to whom the Board/agent issues an order may request a
hearing before the Board/agent by filing with the Board/agent within
seven days after the day the order was served a written request for a
hearing. Upon receipt of a hearing request, the Board/agent shall set
a time and place for the hearing and shall inform the well owner in
writing. The hearing shall commence within 30 days from the day on
which the written request was made, unless a later time is agreed to
in writing by the Board/agent and the person requesting the hearing.
At the hearing, the person requesting the hearing shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and show why the order should be modified or
withdrawn. After the close of the hearing, the Board/agent shall issue
a written decision to sustain, modify, or withdraw the order and shall
mail a copy of the decision, by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to the person who requested the hearing. If the Board/agent sustains or
modifies the order, it shall be carried out within the time period allotted
in the original order or in the modification.
A.
Every notice, order, or other record prepared by the Board/agent in
connection with the hearing shall be entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Clerk of the city or Town, or in the office of
the Board/agent.
B.
If a request for a hearing is not filed with the Board/agent within seven
days after the day an order has been served or if, after a hearing, the
order has been sustained in whole or any part, each day's failure to
comply with the order as issued or sustained shall constitute a separate
violation.
C.
§ 300-160 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-162
1:438
§ 300-162. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the final order, variance, well construction permit,
or certificate of water supply determination of the Board/agent may appeal
to any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of the
commonwealth.
§ 300-163. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of these regulations, or who fails
to comply with any final order of the Board/agent, for which a penalty is
not otherwise provided in any of the Massachusetts General Laws, shall
upon conviction be fined not less than $10 nor more than $500. Each day's
failure to comply with a final order or any provision of this regulation shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 300-164. Variances.
The Board/agent may grant a variance to any provision of this
regulation when, in its opinion, the enforcement would result in
manifest injustice, and the applicant has demonstrated that the
equivalent degree of protection will be provided without strict
application of the particular provision(s) sought to be varied.
A.
Every request for a variance shall be in writing shall state the specific
provision of this regulation from which variance is sought, the reasons
for seeking the variance and proof of the notice required below. The
request shall also contain the information to establish manifest injustice
and an equivalent degree of protection. At least 10 days prior to
submission of the application to the Board/agent, the applicant shall
provide notice of its intent to the request a variance as follows: 1) by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to all abutters of the property
upon which the private well will be or is located and 2) publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the town or city in which the
private well will be or is located. The notice shall include, at a minimum:
the name and address of the applicant, a statement of the provision(s)
of this regulation from which a variance is sought, and the reason for
seeking the variance. Any grant or denial of a variance shall be in
writing and shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for approving
or denying the variance. A copy of each variance shall be conspicuously
posted for 30 days following its issuance and shall be available to the
public at all reasonable hours in the office of the Town Clerk or office
of the Board of Health. No work shall be done under any variance until
30 days elapse from its issuance, unless the Board/agent certifies in
writing that an emergency exists.
B.
The Board/agent may issue a variance subject to such conditions as it
deems necessary to public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
Any such conditions shall be stated in writing in the Board's/agent's
grant of the variance. The Board/agent may revoke, modify or suspend,
in whole or in part, a variance after the property owner has been
C.
§ 300-162 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-164
1:439
§ 300-165. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations or the application thereof is held to be
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall be limited to
said provision(s) and the remainder of these regulations shall remain valid
and effective. Any part of these regulations subsequently invalidated by a
new state law or modification of an existing state law shall automatically be
brought into conformity with the new or amended law and shall be deemed
to be effective immediately, without recourse to a public hearing and the
customary procedures for amendment or repeal of such regulation.
§ 300-166. Effective date; amendments.
§ 300-167. Disclaimer.
The issuance of a well permit shall not be construed as a guarantee or
certification by the Board or its agents that the water system will function
satisfactorily or that the water supply will be of sufficient quality or quantity
for its intended use.
notified in writing and is afforded an opportunity to be heard, pursuant
to § 300-161 of these regulations.
These regulations were adopted by vote of the South Hadley Board of
Health, on January 23, 2017, and are to be in full force and effect on
January 23, 2017.
A.
These regulations or any portions thereof may be amended,
supplemented or repealed from time to time by the Board, as provided
by law and applicable regulations.
B.
§ 300-164 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 300-167
1:440
Chapter 305
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 200.
Wetlands — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 360.
Criteria for land acquisition or
acceptance — See Ch. 403.
§ 300-167 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-167
1:441

Part 1
Cons[eArdvaotpitoend L1a1n-d1 7R-e2g0u1l0a]tions
§ 305-1. Authority; applicability.
These regulations are promulgated by the South Hadley Conservation
Commission pursuant to the authority granted to it under the Conservation
Commission Act (MGL c. 40, § 8C). These regulations apply to conservation
land.
§ 305-2. Motor vehicles.
No unauthorized motorized vehicles are allowed.
§ 305-3. Alcoholic beverages and glass bottles.
Alcoholic beverages and glass bottles are prohibited.
§ 305-4. Disposal of waste materials.
Conservation lands are "pack-in, pack-out." Do not litter on conservation
lands.
§ 305-5. Open burning.
No open fires are permitted on conservation lands.
§ 305-6. Hours of operation.
Conservation areas are open from dawn to dusk.
§ 305-7. Activities near water.
All passive outdoor activities that take place within 100 feet of wetlands or
water shall be confined to existing trails.
§ 305-8. Horseback riding and biking.
All horseback riding and mountain bikes shall be restricted to existing trails.
§ 305-9. Vegetation.
Plants may not be cut or removed other than for scientific purposes and as
specifically authorized by the Conservation Commission.
§ 305-10. Dogs.
Dogs must be leashed or under voice control at all times. Please pick up
after your dog.
§ 305-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-11
1:443
§ 305-11. Fishing.
Fishing is allowed and must comply with all Massachusetts laws.
§ 305-11 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-11
1:444
Part 2
W[eAtdlaonpdtesd R4e-g6u-2la0t1io1n]s
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 305-12. Authority; severability.
§ 305-13. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to complement and clarify the provisions
of the bylaw and to create a uniformity of process for its administration.
§ 305-14. Revisions.
The regulations may be revised as needed by the Commission after public
notice and hearing as required by the bylaw.
§ 305-15. Jurisdiction.
These rules and regulations are promulgated by the Town of South
Hadley Conservation Commission (hereafter referred to as the
"Commission") under the authority of Chapter 240, Wetlands, of the
Town of South Hadley's General Bylaws (hereafter referred to as "the
bylaw"), and shall have the force of law upon the effective date.
A.
The failure of these regulations to address all aspects of the bylaw, or
a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law, shall not act to
suspend or invalidate the effect of the bylaw. Moreover, to the extent
that any provision or section of these regulations are deemed invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions of said
regulations shall remain in full force and effect to the extent permitted
by the law.
B.
Areas subject to protection under the bylaw include resource areas
not protected by the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c.
131, § 40 (hereafter referred to as the "WPA"). Wetland resource areas
protected by the bylaw include:
Freshwater wetlands, bordering or isolated, including marshes,
wet meadows, bogs, and swamps;
(1)
(2) Vernal pools (certified or uncertified);
(3) Banks;
The water columns of and the land under lakes, ponds, reservoirs,
creeks, rivers and streams;
(4)
(5) Intermittent streams;
Land within 100 feet of the aforesaid resource areas (the buffer
zone);
(6)
A.
§ 305-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-15
1:445
Isolated land subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or
surface water;
(7)
Bordering land subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or
surface water;
(8)
(9) The two-hundred-foot riverfront areas.
Freshwater wetlands, ponds and vernal pools are protected whether
or not they border surface waters, are located within another resource
area, or meet state size requirements, as long as they meet definitions
in the bylaw and these regulations.
B.
The following streams in South Hadley have been identified by the
Commission as perennial streams having two-hundred-foot riverfront
areas, based on their designation on the USGS topographic maps: the
Connecticut River, Bachelor Brook, Buttery Brook, Dry Brook, Elmer
Brook, Judd Brook, Leaping Well Brook, Stony Brook and White Brook.
Streams not listed above may still have a riverfront area associated
with them if they meet the definition of "perennial stream" in 310 CMR
10.58, or alternative criteria the Commission may establish in these
regulations. Intermittent streams protected by the bylaw shall include
only those identified on the Streams and Rivers Map in Appendix E.51
C.
51.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-15 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-15
1:446
ARTICLE II
Definitions and Abbreviations
§ 305-16. Terms defined.
The definitions provided in the WPA regulations promulgated by the
Department of Environmental Protection under 310 CMR 10.00 shall apply
to the bylaw and regulations except as explicitly modified in the bylaw or in
the regulations below:
ACTIVITY — Any form of draining, dumping, dredging, damming,
discharging, excavation, filling or grading; the erection, reconstruction,
or expansion of any buildings or structures; the driving of pilings; the
construction or improvement of roads and other ways; the changing of
runoff characteristics; the intercepting or diverting of surface water; the
installation of drainage, sewage and water systems; the discharging of
pollutants and the destruction of plant life.
APPLICATION — The form(s) required by these regulations, together with
all plans or other documents provided by the person seeking a
determination or permit for activity subject to the bylaw.
BANK — Defined in the WPA regulations (310 CMR 10.54) as the portion of
the land surface which normally abuts and confines a water body. It occurs
between a water body and an upland. It may be partially or fully vegetated
or exposed soil, gravel or stone.
BORDERING LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING — Defined in the WPA
regulations (310 CMR 10.57) as an area which floods from a rise in a
bordering waterway or water body. Such areas are likely to be significant to
flood control and storm damage prevention. The boundary is the estimated
maximum lateral extent of floodwater for the one-hundred-year-frequency
storm. This boundary is determined by the flood profile data prepared by
the National Flood Insurance Program.
BORDERING VEGETATED WETLANDS — Defined in the WPA regulations
(310 CMR 10.55) as freshwater wetlands which border on creeks, rivers,
streams, ponds and lakes. They include wetlands referred to as wet
meadows, marshes, swamps and bogs.
BUFFER ZONE — Includes all land within the area measured 100 feet
horizontally from the boundary of any wetland resource area as defined by
the WPA and from any wetland resource area, including isolated wetlands,
vernal pools and intermittent streams as defined in the bylaw and these
regulations. The only exceptions are riverfront areas, bordering lands
subject to flooding and isolated lands subject to flooding when not a vernal
pool. These are the only resource areas that do not have a protected onehundred-
foot buffer zone.
BYLAW — Chapter 240, Wetlands, of the General Bylaws of the Town of
South Hadley.
CERTIFIABLE — The vernal pool meets the criteria for certification
described in these regulations, but has not been certified by the Natural
§ 305-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-16
1:447
Heritage and Endangered Species Program of the MA Division of Fisheries
and Wildlife.
CONSERVATION ZONE — The protected fifty-foot-wide strip of land
adjacent to any freshwater wetland, bank, or water body as described
in the bylaw and these regulations. Bordering Lands subject to flooding,
isolated lands subject to flooding that are not vernal pools, and the twohundred-
foot riverfront area do not have a fifty-foot conservation zone.
Vernal pools have a conservation Zone of 25 feet to 50 feet depending on the
size of the pool. No activity or disturbance that would have a detrimental
effect on the conservation zone or wetland resource area is allowed in
this zone, including but not limited to grading, landscaping, vegetation
removal, dumping of landscaping materials, filling, excavating, roadway or
driveway construction, or construction of any kind, including foundations,
buildings, porches, decks, pools, septic systems, and sheds. Stormwater
management structures such as detention basins and retention ponds that
are regularly maintained as such, artificially lined ponds, and constructed
wastewater treatment lagoons are not protected resource areas under the
bylaw and do not have a conservation zone. Construction of new stormwater
structures is required to be placed outside the fifty-foot conservation zone
from wetland resource areas. Minor activities allowed in the conservation
zone include mowing, gardening, and pruning within existing lawn, garden,
or landscaped areas.
DETERMINATION — A formal opinion rendered by the Commission as to
whether or not the bylaw applies to an area or activity.
FACULTATIVE INDICATOR SPECIES — Particular vertebrate species
identified by NHESP as frequently using vernal pools for all or a portion of
their life cycle, but that are able to successfully complete their life cycle in
other types of wetlands as well. Evidence of their presence can be used to
certify a vernal pool (NHESP Guidelines for the Certification of Vernal Pool
Habitat, 2010).
FOOTPRINT OF A BUILDING — The extent of the building as viewed from
overhead.
FRESHWATER WETLANDS — Any area where the topography is low and
flat, where soils are annually saturated or flooded, as demonstrated by the
presence of hydric soils, or where the vegetation community is composed
of species adapted to or characteristic of saturated or ponded conditions.
The presence of hydric soils or wetlands vegetation can be used to define
an area. The Commission recognizes that soils can be slow to respond to
changes in hydrologic conditions and will allow a wetland delineation to be
made without the presence of hydric soils in some instances. Freshwater
wetlands may include bordering and isolated vegetated wetlands.
GROWING SEASON — The portion of the year when the soil temperature
is at or above biological zero at a depth of 50 cm (19.7 inches) below the
soil surface (NRCS Hydric Soil Criteria as posted on http://soils.usda.gov/
use/hydric/criteria.html). For the purposes of the bylaw, this period is from
March 15 to October 15.
§ 305-16 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-16
1:448
HYDRIC SOILS — Soils that formed under conditions of saturation, flooding,
or ponding long enough during the growing season to develop anaerobic
conditions in the upper part (Field Indicators for Identifying Hydric Soils in
New England). Hydric soils shall be determined under the bylaw through
use of the Field Indicators for Identifying Hydric Soils in New England
Manual.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACES — Includes areas covered by man-made
improvements that inhibit the infiltration of precipitation and surface water
to the ground, including buildings, hard structures, macadam, stone and
other similar materials.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A section of a body of running water, such
as a brook or creek, which moves in a definite channel in the ground due
to hydraulic gradient, but experiences naturally occurring interruptions of
flow. These interruptions of flow must be adequately documented at least
once per day over four consecutive days in any consecutive twelve-month
period during non-drought conditions in areas not significantly impacted by
beaver or other impoundments.
ISOLATED LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING — Defined in the bylaw as an
isolated depression or closed basin at least 500 square feet in size, which
serves as a ponding area for run-off or high groundwater which has risen
above the ground surface.
ISOLATED VEGETATED WETLANDS — Vegetated wetlands that do not
border on rivers, streams, ponds or lakes. They may include wet meadows,
marshes, swamps, bogs or vernal pools. In order to be protected under the
bylaw they must have at least 500 square feet of surface area.
NORMAL MAINTENANCE OF LAND IN AGRICULTURAL USE — Defined
under these regulations the same as it is in the WPA regulations, 310 CMR
10.04 [Agriculture, (b)].
OBLIGATE INDICATOR SPECIES — Particular vertebrate and invertebrate
species identified by NHESP as requiring vernal pools for all or a portion of
their life cycle and that are unable to successfully complete their life cycle
without vernal pools. Evidence of their presence can be used to certify a
vernal pool (NHESP Guidelines for the Certification of Vernal Pool Habitat,
2010).
PERMIT — Any of the following written authorizations issued by the
Conservation Commission under the bylaw and regulations: order of
conditions, order of resource area delineation, enforcement order, extension
of or amendment to an order of conditions. A permit is granted or denied
after an application is submitted, a public hearing or meeting is held to
discuss the proposed project, and the Commission makes a decision as to
the effect of the project upon wetland values protected by the bylaw.
POND —
Any open body of fresh water with a surface area of at least 500 square
feet, under non-drought conditions. Ponds may be either naturally
occurring or man-made by impoundment, excavation or other methods.
A.
§ 305-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-16
1:449
RESOURCE AREA — Includes all wetland areas subject to protection under
the Massachusetts Wetland Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and the
South Hadley Non-Zoning Wetlands Bylaw and Regulations, including the
one-hundred-foot buffer zone to vegetated wetlands, vernal pools and
intermittent streams.
RIVER — Any natural flowing body of water that empties into any ocean,
lake, pond or other river. Rivers include streams that are perennial because
surface water flows within them throughout the year. Rivers have a twohundred-
foot riverfront area associated with them. The location of these
water bodies is shown on the Streams and Rivers Map in Appendix E.52
RIVERFRONT AREA — The area of land between a river's mean annual high
water line measured horizontally outward from the river and a parallel line
located 200 feet away. The riverfront area may include or overlap other
resource areas, including wetlands adjacent to the river, and their buffer
zones.
STREAM — A body of flowing water, including brooks and creeks, which
moves in a channel in the ground due to a hydraulic gradient, and which
flows within, into or out of an area subject to protection under the Wetlands
Protection Act or the bylaw. A portion of a stream may flow through a
culvert or beneath a bridge. Such a body of running water that does not flow
throughout the year (i.e., that is intermittent) is also considered a stream
even if it is upgradient of, and more than 100 feet from, all bogs, swamps,
wet meadows, and marshes.
STRUCTURES — Include, but are not limited to, buildings, foundations
and footings associated with buildings, pilings, impervious pads, sonotubes
associated with porches, patios, decks, house additions and sheds. The
Ponds shall contain standing water except for periods of extended
drought. Periods of extended drought for purposes of this regulation
shall be those periods, in those specifically identified geographic
locations, determined to be at the "Advisory" or more severe drought
level by the Massachusetts Drought Management Task Force, as
established by the Executive Office of Energy and Environmental
Affairs and the Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency in
2001, in accordance with the Massachusetts Drought Management Plan
(MDMP).
Notwithstanding the above, the following man-made bodies of open
water shall not be considered ponds and protected under the bylaw:
(1) Basins or lagoons that are part of wastewater treatment plants;
(2) Swimming pools or other basins with impervious linings; and
Man-made retention ponds and detention basins that are part of a
stormwater management system and have been maintained as such
at the time of the issuance of these regulations.
(3)
B.
52.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-16 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-16
1:450
term also includes pools, permanent fencing, walls, new pavement and
impervious surface.
UNDISTURBED VEGETATION — As it applies to the conservation zone,
includes any land not covered by impervious surfaces and supporting the
growth of a plant community, except areas that are actively maintained as
lawns or gardens. An area that was previously cleared or landscaped, but
which is in a process of succession back to a natural plant community, shall
be deemed undisturbed vegetation regardless of the presence of invasive or
nonnative species.
VALUES — The resource area values protected by the bylaw. These include:
protection of public or private water supply, protection of groundwater,
flood control, erosion and sedimentation control, storm damage prevention,
prevention of water pollution, protection of fisheries and wildlife habitat,
and rare species habitat, including rare plant species, recreation and
agriculture.
VEGETATED WETLANDS — Areas where the soils are annually saturated
and/or at least 50% of the plant community consists of obligate or
facultative wetland plant species. Vegetated wetlands include bogs,
marshes, wet meadows and swamps.
VERNAL POOL — Defined in the bylaw and includes any confined basin
or depression not occurring in existing lawns, gardens, landscaped areas,
or driveways which, in at least most years, holds water for a minimum of
two continuous months during the spring and/or summer, is at least 500
square feet in size at some time during most years, is free of established
reproducing fish populations, and provides essential breeding and rearing
habitat functions for amphibian, reptile, or other vernal pool community
species, regardless of whether the site has been certified by the NHESP.
Under the bylaw, only certified vernal pools and potentially certifiable
vernal pools as shown on a map created for the regulations shall be
protected.
VERNAL POOL HABITAT — Includes all wetland resource areas and
adjacent upland resource areas within 100 feet of a vernal pool that have
natural features suitable for nesting, feeding, overland dispersal, movement
to breeding ponds, basking, cover and/or aestivation by reptiles,
amphibians or mammals that depend on vernal pools for a portion of their
life cycle.
WATER COLUMN — The water in a lake, pond or stream which extends
from the bottom sediments to the water surface.
WETLAND INDICATOR PLANTS — Those species listed as occurring in
bogs, marshes, swamps, or wet meadows in the WPA, as well as any plant
species known to occur primarily in wetlands, including all species
classified as Obligate, Facultative Wetland, or Facultative+ or Facultative
according to the most recent edition of the National List of Wetland
Indicators published by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Obligate wetland plants are estimated to occur in wetlands under natural
conditions 99% of the time; Facultative wetland plants 67% to 99%; and
§ 305-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-16
1:451
Facultative indicates plants estimated to occur in wetlands 34% to 66% of
the time. A plus (+) or minus (-) indicates an emphasis on the higher end
or lower end of the range of percentage of occurrence. Only Facultative+
and Facultative plants are considered wetland indicator plants, while all
Facultative Wetland and Obligate plants are included as wetland indicator
plants.
WILDLIFE HABITAT — Those areas subject to the bylaw which, due to their
plant community composition and structure, hydrologic regime or other
characteristics, provide food, shelter, migratory or over-wintering areas or
breeding areas for wildlife.
§ 305-17. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations are used in these regulations:
ACP Application for conservation permit
ANRAD Abbreviated notice of resource area delineation
BVW Bordering vegetated wetland
Ch. and sec. Chapter and section
COC Certificate of compliance
CMR Code of Massachusetts Regulations
DEP Department of Environmental Protection
DOA Determination of applicability
EOEEA Executive Office of Energy and Environmental Affairs
LUW Land under water
MGL Massachusetts General Laws
NHESP MA Natural Heritage and Endangered Species Program
NOI Notice of intent
OOC Order of conditions
ORAD Order of resource area delineation
RFD Request for determination
WPA Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40
§ 305-16 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-17
1:452
ARTICLE III
Application Procedures
§ 305-18. Application forms; consolidated hearings.
§ 305-19. Timing requirements.
Applicants filing a request for determination of applicability (DOA)
under the bylaw shall use the latest form bearing the same title
provided for use with the WPA and regulations (310 CMR 10.00) and
currently known as "Form 1." In addition, they shall file simultaneously
with these forms an application for conservation permit (ACP) with the
Commission. If requesting a waiver, a request for waiver form shall also
be filed.
A.
Applicants filing a permit application under the bylaw for an order
of conditions (OOC), order of resource area delineation (ORAD) or
an amendment to an existing OOC shall use the latest form entitled
"Notice of Intent" (NOI) or "Abbreviated Notice of Intent" or
"Abbreviated Notice of Resource Area Delineation" as provided for use
with the WPA and regulations (310 CMR 10.00) and currently known as
"Form 3," "Form 4" and "Form 4A" respectively. In addition, they shall
file an ACP with the Commission. If requesting a waiver, a request for
waiver form shall also be filed.
B.
Requests for extensions to an OOC shall be written in compliance with
the WPA and bylaw regulations. Requests for a certificate of compliance
(COC) shall use the latest form entitled "Request for Certificate of
Compliance" as provided for use with the WPA and regulations (310
CMR 10.00) and currently known as "Form 8A."
C.
Application forms can be obtained from the Commission office, Room
205 in the Town Hall at 116 Main Street, South Hadley, MA 01075, or
online from the DEP's website for the state forms and the Town of South
Hadley website for the Town forms.
D.
Pursuant to § 240-6 of the bylaw, the Commission may, at its discretion,
consolidate the hearing under the WPA with the hearing under the
bylaw.
E.
The date of filing of the application shall be the date when all required
information, fees and notices have been received and deemed complete
by the DEP and Commission. All time periods set forth under the bylaw
shall commence from this date.
A.
The Commission will schedule a public hearing on a notice of intent
(NOI) or abbreviated notice of resource area delineation (ANRAD)
within three weeks of acceptance of the permit application and
issuance of a file number by DEP. The Commission will schedule a
public meeting within three weeks of acceptance of a request for a
determination of applicability (DOA).
B.
§ 305-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-19
1:453
§ 305-20. Plans and information.
§ 305-21. Notice to abutters.
Any person requesting a determination or making written application to
perform work or certify resource boundaries regulated by the bylaw shall
at the same time give written notice thereof, by mailing by certified mail
with return receipt requested, certified mailing list, or by hand delivery, to
all abutters within 100 feet of the property under consideration, according
to the most recent records of the Board of Assessors, including those
across a traveled way, or across a body of water if less than 100 feet
across. The abutter notice shall include a copy of the permit application or
request, with plans, or shall state where copies may be examined. If the
person filing a request for determination of applicability or other application
is not the owner of the area subject to the request or application, the
applicant shall also give written notice of the request or application with
hearing date and time to the owner of the parcel. The person providing
such notices to abutters or property owners by hand delivery shall file an
affidavit affirming that notification was done, with a copy of the notice,
All documentation to be considered as a part of a request for DOA,
request for amendment to an OOC, or request for a COC must be
submitted to the Commission no later than 10 business days prior to the
scheduled public meeting date. If additional information is requested
as part of a continuance of a public meeting or hearing, the applicant
must submit said information no later than five business days prior
to the continued public meeting or hearing. This is the minimum time
needed to allow the Commission and staff to properly review, analyze,
and check the information provided. Documentation submitted with
fewer than the minimum business days for review may be excluded
from consideration at the scheduled meeting or hearing and held for
discussion at a subsequently scheduled meeting.
C.
Plans and information shall be submitted that completely and
accurately describe the proposed activity and its effect on the resource
areas and values protected by the bylaw.
A.
Each plan, drawing, sketch or set of calculations shall be titled, dated
and signed by the person responsible for its preparation. Plans or
information involving the practice of professional engineering or
surveying must be stamped and signed by the appropriate design
professional, who must be registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
B.
Appendix B provides a detailed checklist of information that is required
by the Commission to deem a filing complete.53 The Commission may
waive any of the submission requirements if it determines that such
information is not necessary for an informed decision on the
application.
C.
53.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-19 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-21
1:454
with the Commission. Evidence of proper notification shall be given to the
Conservation Commission before or by the commencement of the public
hearing. Failure to do so may require postponement of the meeting or
hearing until the information is received.
§ 305-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-21
1:455

ARTICLE IV
Performance Standards
§ 305-22. General.
§ 305-23. No net loss policy.
As expressed in § 240-1 of the bylaw, the Commission seeks to establish
measures to protect the Town's wetlands and ensure that their values, as
listed in the bylaw, are maintained. The following measures are required to
prevent a net loss of wetlands and their values.
Applicants proposing alteration of 100 square feet or more of any area
subject to the jurisdiction of the bylaw may be required to replace
not only the function of the area to be disturbed, but also its physical
properties, characteristics, and vegetative cover. Inability to do so may
be cause for denial. Areas subject to the jurisdiction of the bylaw are
presumed to be significant to the values protected by the bylaw until it
is demonstrated otherwise by a preponderance of credible evidence to
the contrary.
A.
The introduction, purpose and performance standards stated in the
WPA regulations, 310 CMR 10.51 through 10.60, shall apply except as
stated below.
B.
Rationale for no net loss policy. Natural wetlands perform many
functions and it is not possible to replicate all of them. Furthermore,
it is difficult even to determine which functions are most probably
or exclusively being performed in a given wetland area. Therefore,
destruction or alteration of wetlands should only be undertaken most
cautiously and only as a last resort. Applicants are advised that the
Commission will require wetland replication based on the latest
available scientific information and practices and will require
replication on at least a 2:1 basis in order to increase the likelihood of
success of the replication effort. Design of replacement wetlands should
be based upon a quantitative showing of the functions operating in the
natural wetland.
A.
Sequence to prevent wetland loss. The applicant shall submit an
analysis of alternatives, with the following "sequencing" approach used
to evaluate any proposed wetland loss:
Avoidance. A permit will be issued only for the least
environmentally damaging practicable alternative. It is the
obligation of the proponent to present this alternative for any
non-water-dependent activity. Compensatory mitigation or wetland
replication will not qualify as avoidance.
(1)
Minimization. Once the test of avoidance has been met, a proposal
should minimize its adverse impacts through project modifications.
(2)
B.
§ 305-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-23
1:457
§ 305-24. Limited projects.
The Commission, at its sole and reasonable discretion, may issue a permit
for the limited projects identified in the WPA regulations, 310 CMR
10.53(3), with the same or additional performance standards, such as limits
on road width, location or number of driveway crossings. The Commission
has the discretion to permit with conditions as needed to ensure that the
interests of the bylaw are protected.
§ 305-25. Freshwater wetlands.
It is the burden of the applicant to take all appropriate and
practicable steps to minimize the impacts.
Mitigation. After the avoidance and minimization tests have been
met, all lost wetlands and resource areas shall be restored or
replicated to previous natural vegetated conditions or better on
at least a 2:1 basis, with the focus being on replacement or
restoration of function and acreage. All mitigation shall be
performed in South Hadley.
(3)
Definition; critical characteristics.
Freshwater wetlands shall include both bordering and isolated
vegetated wetlands. Isolated vegetated wetlands are areas that
meet the definition and critical characteristics of bordering
vegetated wetlands as described in WPA regulations, 310 CMR
10.55, but do not border on a creek, river, stream, pond or lake.
They exist as "pockets" of wetland vegetation that are supported by
hydric soils and/or hydrologic conditions.
(1)
Isolated vegetated wetlands protected under the bylaw must be
at least 500 square feet in area. In addition to the minimum size
requirement, isolated vegetated wetlands must also meet at least
two of the following three criteria:
The vegetation community consists of at least 50% or more
wetland indicator plants as listed in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service's National Wetlands Inventory Plant List for
Massachusetts. Wetland indicator plants are classified by the
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service into the following categories:
Facultative, Facultative Wetland, or Obligate Wetland based on
the estimated percentage of the time they occur in wetlands
under natural conditions.
(a)
Presence of indicators of hydrology such as, but not limited
to: site inundation or saturation, water marks, drift lines,
sediment deposits, oxidized rhizospheres, water-stained
leaves, shallow root systems, buttressed tree trunks, or
recorded hydrogeologic data (stream gauge, aerial photo, or
other).
(b)
(2)
A.
§ 305-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-25
1:458
Presence of hydric soils, as determined by National Resource
Conservation Service hydric soil list and the manual Field
Indicators for Identifying Hydric Soils in New England.
(c)
Freshwater wetlands are likely to be significant to the following
interests: protection of public or private water supply, protection
of groundwater, flood control, erosion and sedimentation control,
storm damage prevention, prevention of water pollution, protection
of fisheries and wildlife habitat, and rare species habitat, including
rare plant species, and recreation and agriculture values.
(3)
Freshwater wetlands are South Hadley's most important habitat for
wildlife. The hydrologic regime, plant community composition and
structure, soil composition and structure, topography and water
chemistry of freshwater wetlands provide important food, shelter,
migratory and overwintering areas, and breeding areas for many
birds, mammals, amphibians, and reptiles. A wide variety of
vegetative wetland plants, the nature of which are determined in
large part by the depth and duration of water, as well as soil
and water composition, are utilized by varied species as important
areas for mating, nesting, brood rearing, shelter, and (directly and
indirectly) food. The diversity and interspersion of the vegetative
structure is also important in determining its nature and use for
wildlife habitat.
(4)
Presumption of significance. Where a proposed activity involves the
removing, filling, dredging, or altering of a freshwater wetland, the
Commission shall presume that such an area is significant to the values
described in the bylaw and Subsection A of this section. This
presumption may be overcome upon a showing of clear and convincing
evidence demonstrating that the freshwater wetland does not play a
role in the protection of said interests. In the event that the Commission
determines that the presumption has been overcome, it shall make
a written determination to that effect, setting forth its grounds. This
determination may be overcome at a later date by a change in the site
and reconsideration of its functions.
B.
Performance standards for freshwater wetlands.
Any proposed work in a freshwater wetland shall not destroy or
otherwise impair any portion of said wetland. The cutting of
vegetation within a freshwater wetland in order to maintain a
specific successional stage, such as a wet meadow, or for removal
of invasive plants, may be permitted at the Commission's sole
discretion, through the filing of a notice of intent and subsequent
order of conditions, as part of a management plan approved by the
Commission. In addition, and at its sole discretion, the Commission
may issue an order of conditions allowing work that results in
the loss of up to 5,000 square feet of freshwater wetland when
said area is replaced in accordance with the following conditions
and any additional, specific conditions the Commission deems
(1)
C.
§ 305-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-25
1:459
§ 305-26. Vernal pools.
necessary to ensure that the replacement area will function in a
manner similar to the area that will be lost.
In situations where wetlands loss is unavoidable, a compensatory
wetland area shall be provided that is at least twice the size of the
lost area; is at or below the same elevation; has the same hydrology
and surface water elevation; has the same hydrologic connection
to a water body; and is vegetated within two growing seasons with
a plant community of at least 75% cover consisting of the same
native plant community type and similar species composition to
the lost area; and demonstrates a hydrologic regime similar to the
lost area within two growing seasons. The Commission may require
detailed plans, professional oversight of construction, monitoring
for two years, completion of the replication before the project
begins, and other conditions as needed to maximize the chance of
a successful replication.
(2)
Isolated vegetated wetlands have a fifty-foot no-disturbance
conservation zone the same as bordering vegetated wetlands,
unless they qualify only as vernal pools, in which case they follow
the setback distances described in § 305-26. The one-hundred-foot
buffer zone of an isolated vegetated wetland shall have the same
performance standards as described below for buffer zones of other
wetlands.
(3)
Definition; critical characteristics.
Vernal pools and their associated one-hundred-foot buffer zones are
likely to be significant to the protection of wildlife habitat and rare
animal habitat. Vernal pools constitute a unique and increasingly
rare type of wetland that is used by many species of wildlife, some
of which are totally dependent on vernal pools and the surrounding
upland area for their survival. The area within 100 feet of a vernal
pool is considered vernal pool habitat. These areas provide the
"obligate" vernal pool species with important non-breeding habitat
functions, such as migratory pathways, feeding, shelter, and overwintering
areas. Many other species utilize vernal pools and vernal
pool habitat for breeding and non-breeding functions as well,
although they are not restricted to this type of wetland. The
protection of vernal pools and vernal pool habitat is essential for
the survival of wildlife species that depend on these unique and
threatened resource areas. Vernal pools do not need to be certified
by the NHESP to be protected under the bylaw and regulations,
but must be "certifiable" according to the criteria described in
these regulations. The conservation zone for vernal pools under
the bylaw is based on the size of the pool, although size does not
necessarily indicate value. Vernal pools less than 10,000 square
feet in size are protected with a twenty-five-foot conservation zone,
(1)
A.
§ 305-25 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-26
1:460
and those 10,000 square feet and greater in size have a fifty-foot
conservation zone.
Vernal pools exhibit great variation in physical, geographic,
hydrologic and vegetative conditions, which makes it difficult to
easily define them. A vernal pool is a temporary freshwater body
which in most years holds water for a minimum of two continuous
months, and is free of established, reproducing fish populations.
The boundary of a vernal pool is the perimeter of the largest
observed or recorded volume of water confined in said area. In the
event of conflict of opinion regarding the extent of water confined
in the basin, the Commission shall follow the procedures described
for vernal pools in the WPA regulations, 310 CMR 10.57(2)(a)6 and
10.57(2)(b)3. A vernal pool is protected under the bylaw if it is
shown on the South Hadley Vernal Pool Map in Appendix D54 and
meets one of the following criteria:
(a) The vernal pool has been certified by the NHESP.
The vernal pool contains evidence of breeding of any one or
more of the following obligate indicator species: spotted
salamander, blue-spotted salamander, Jefferson salamander,
marbled salamander, wood frog, or the presence of fairy
shrimp, and evidence that the pool meets the physical criteria
described in the NHESP Guidelines for the Certification of
Vernal Pool Habitat.
(b)
In the absence of obligate indicator species, the vernal pool
contains evidence of breeding by at least two of the following
facultative indicator species: spring peeper, American toad,
gray treefrog, or Fowler's toad, and meets the physical criteria
described in the NHESP Guidelines for the Certification of
Vernal Pool Habitat.
(c)
(2)
Timing of evidence collection and type of evidence.
Many of the indicators of vernal pools are seasonal. For example,
most salamander egg masses are only found between March and
May, except marbled salamanders which breed in the fall. Wood
frog chorusing usually occurs between late March and late May,
and often at night. Not all animals breed every year, depending on
site and seasonal conditions, so evidence may be sparse or lacking
in some years. Consequently, failure to find evidence of breeding
must be tied explicitly to those periods during which the evidence
is most likely to be available.
(1)
Accordingly, in the case of challenges to the presumption of a
vernal pool designation, the Commission may require that the
determination be postponed until the appropriate time period
consistent with the evidence being presented. The Commission
(2)
B.
54.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-26
1:461
may require its own site visits or those of a professional as
necessary to confirm the evidence or lack thereof.
Type of evidence accepted to verify an area as a vernal pool will be
the same as described by the NHESP for its certification program.
In addition, the Commission may accept as evidence a statement
signed under penalties of perjury attesting to the presence of
vernal pool obligate indicator species in a pool, from a competent
source.
(3)
Presumption of significance. Where a proposed activity involves the
removing, filling, dredging, or altering of a vernal pool or its onehundred-
foot buffer zone, the Commission shall presume that the vernal
pool and its one-hundred-foot buffer zone are significant to the
protection of wildlife habitat and rare species. This presumption is
rebuttable by a showing of clear and convincing evidence that the
vernal pool or its buffer zone does not play a role in the protection
of said interests. When such evidence is based on the absence of any
obligate or facultative indicator species, the Commission may require
documentation of such absence of evidence from the spring time of
two different years. In the event that the presumption is deemed by
the Commission to have been overcome, the Commission shall make
a written determination to this effect, setting forth its grounds. The
determination that the basin is not a vernal pool is not permanent, and
may be overcome at a later date by the criteria listed in Subsection A
above.
C.
Performance standards for vernal pools. When the presumption set
forth in Subsection C of this section is not overcome, the following
standards shall apply to vernal pools, their one-hundred-foot buffer
zone, and their twenty-five-foot or fifty-foot conservation zones:
No alteration of vernal pools will be permitted that will have an
adverse effect upon wildlife habitat. "Adverse effect" means the
alteration of any habitat characteristic listed below, insofar as such
alteration will, following two growing seasons of project completion
and thereafter, substantially reduce its capacity to provide the
important wildlife habitat functions listed in the WPA regulations,
310 CMR 10.60(2). These characteristics include the topography,
soil structure, plant community composition and structure, and
hydrologic regime. The procedure to evaluate whether a proposed
project will have an adverse effect is described in the WPA
regulations, 310 CMR 10.60(1) and (2). Restoration and replication
of altered vernal pool habitat shall be performed as described in
the WPA regulations, 310 CMR 10.60(3), except the Commission
requires 2:1 or greater replication and may require other
additional conditions as deemed necessary to guarantee success of
replication and mitigation for the alteration.
(1)
The conservation zone is a no-disturbance zone. No activity shall
be permitted within 25 feet or 50 feet (depending on the size of the
(2)
D.
§ 305-26 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-26
1:462
§ 305-27. Intermittent streams.
pool, as described above) of the edge of the vernal pool. Prohibited
activities include, but are not limited to, grading, filling, vegetation
control, excavation, roadway, driveway or building construction.
For areas within the twenty-five-foot or fifty-foot conservation zone
that are already lawn, gardens, landscaped areas, driveways, or
buildings, no new or expansion of clearing, cutting, grading,
impervious surface or building construction will be permitted.
The one-hundred-foot buffer zone of a vernal pool shall have the
same performance standards as described below for the buffer
zone.
(3)
Migratory pathways of vernal pool breeders. Work shall not be
allowed that obstructs the migratory pathways of vernal pool
breeding species.
(4)
Definition; critical characteristics.
For the purpose of these regulations, an intermittent stream is
that segment of a flowing watercourse that experiences naturally
occurring sporadic flow interruptions such that it does not have
a continuous sheet of surface water for four or more consecutive
days in any consecutive twelve-month period during non-drought
conditions in areas not significantly impacted by beaver or other
impoundments.
(1)
The Streams and Rivers Map in Appendix E55 shows the maximum
possibility of intermittent streams under the protection of the
South Hadley Wetland Protection Bylaw, but it does not determine
which are intermittent and which are perennial. That
determination is made based on this definition and the criteria
below:
Under these regulations, all flowing watercourses shall be
considered perennial streams if they are shown as perennial
streams on the most current USGS topographic map, qualify
under the DEP perennial stream criteria in the WPA
regulations, 310 CMR 10.58(2), or are shown as a perennial
stream on any two or more government-issued maps or plans,
such as Natural Resource Conservation Service soil surveys,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory
Maps, or older USGS topographic maps. This presumption
may be overturned by a preponderance of evidence presented
to and deemed acceptable by the Commission. Information
necessary to overcome this presumption includes, but is not
limited to, direct observation and documentation of:
(a)
(2)
A.
55.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-27
1:463
The absence of a continuous sheet of surface water
throughout the watercourse, or relevant segment, for a
minimum of four consecutive days in any consecutive
twelve-month period (excluding periods when local
drought or other conditions abnormally lowering the water
table are known to exist, or due to water withdrawals) as
witnessed by a member of the Commission or its staff at
least one of those days, and by submittal of documentation
following procedures described in the WPA regulations,
310 CMR 10:58(2)d, which shall be considered definitive
evidence in overcoming the presumption of perennial
status.
[1]
Other information that may be relevant to overcoming the
presumption of perennial stream status for a watercourse or
a segment of that watercourse includes, but is not limited to,
direct observation and documentation of:
[1] Absence of a clearly defined flow channel;
[2] Absence of bank undercutting;
Presence of established nonaquatic plants in the flow path
(i.e., plants that are unable to grow in continuously
submerged conditions);
[3]
Absence of continuous sheet water in the stream channel
or relevant segment at a time when Commissiondesignated
perennial streams of comparable
characteristics are flowing, as witnessed by a member of
the Commission or its staff or documented according to
the WPA regulations, 310 CMR 10:58(2)d, methods.
[4]
(b)
The Commission will also consider estimates from modeling
studies of surface water and groundwater hydrology in the
relevant watershed. However, such information will only be
considered as evidence in conjunction with the observable
indicators noted above. Observational evidence shall, in all
instances, take precedence over estimates, calculations, and
other inferential evidence. The Commission shall consider all
of the evidence available together, judging the validity and
reliability of the information, and base its determination on
the preponderance of acceptable evidence. The determination
of intermittent status of a designated stream shall be only for
that segment or portion for which there is documentation. The
Commission shall determine whether the distances between
documented sites are too far apart to consider it a continuous
section of stream, and how far from the documented site the
determination shall apply.
(c)
Presumption of significance. Where a proposed activity involves the
filling, dredging, or altering of an intermittent stream, the Commission
B.
§ 305-27 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-27
1:464
§ 305-28. Buffer zone.
shall presume that protection of the intermittent stream as a resource
area is significant to the following values: protection of groundwater,
flood control, storm damage prevention, and protection of wildlife
habitat. This presumption may be overcome upon a showing of clear
and convincing evidence demonstrating that the intermittent stream
does not play a role in the protection of said values. In the event that
the Commission determines that the presumption has been overcome,
it shall make a written determination to that effect, setting forth its
grounds. This determination may be overcome at a later date by a
change in the site and reconsideration of its functions.
Performance standards for intermittent streams. No project shall
impair the water quality or water-carrying capacity of any stream
channel or the capacity of the stream to provide important wildlife
habitat functions, protection of groundwater, flood control, and storm
damage prevention.
C.
Definition; critical characteristics.
Buffer zones are considered resource areas under the bylaw, as
they perform vital functions in protecting the values listed in the
bylaw. The buffer zone is the land extending 100 feet horizontally
from the delineated edge of the following resource areas:
(a) Freshwater wetlands.
(b) Vernal pools.
(c) Banks.
The water column in and land under any creek, river, stream,
brook, pond or lake.
(d)
(1)
Note that the riverfront area, bordering land subject to flooding
and isolated land subject to flooding (when it is not a vernal pool)
do not have a buffer zone.
(2)
A.
Presumption of significance. Where a proposed activity involves the
removing, filling, dredging, or altering of a buffer zone, the Commission
shall presume that protection of the buffer zone as a resource area
is significant to the following values: protection of public or private
water supply, protection of groundwater, flood control, erosion and
sedimentation control, storm damage prevention, prevention of water
pollution, protection of fisheries and wildlife habitat, and rare species
habitat including rare plant species, recreation and agriculture. This
presumption may be overcome upon a showing of clear and convincing
evidence demonstrating that the buffer zone does not play a role in
the protection of said interests. In the event that the Commission
determines that the presumption has been overcome, it shall make
a written determination to that effect, setting forth its grounds. This
B.
§ 305-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-28
1:465
determination may be overcome at a later date by a change in the site
and reconsideration of its functions.
Performance standards for buffer zone.
The Conservation Commission will carefully examine any proposals
for work in the buffer zone to determine potential impact on the
resource areas and the interests of the bylaw, and how the
applicant has designed the project to avoid any adverse impact on
them.
(1)
Work permitted in the one-hundred-foot buffer zone shall be in
accordance with the following standards:
Fifty-foot no-disturbance conservation zone. No activity is
permitted within 50 feet of the edge of any freshwater wetland,
bank, or the water column in and land under any creek, river,
stream, brook, pond or lake, or vernal pool 10,000 square feet
or greater in size.
(a)
Twenty-five-foot no-disturbance conservation zone applies to
vernal pools less than 10,000 square feet in size.
(b)
(2)
No-disturbance conservation zone demarcation. To maintain the
integrity of the no-disturbance conservation zone and to ensure
that there will be no encroachments into this zone by the applicant
or future owners of the property, the Commission may require the
no-disturbance conservation zone to be marked on the ground, at
the applicant's expense, with permanent markers. These markers
shall be of weather-resistant material, and the Commission will
decide the type, number, size and locations.
(3)
C.
Wetlands setbacks for existing structures.
Work associated with preexisting structures or other improvements
not presently in compliance with Subsection C of this section may
not increase the degree of nonconformity of those structures or
activities.
(1)
No new activity shall be commenced and no new structure shall
be located closer to the edge of a bylaw-protected wetland than
existing nonconforming activities or structures. The Commission
may permit new activity or structures as close to the wetland as
the existing activity or structure if it finds such activity or structure
will not adversely impact the wetland.
(2)
D.
Temporary disturbances and water-dependent activities.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, the
Commission may allow temporary disturbances in the one-hundred-foot
buffer zone associated with the installation of underground utilities, the
conduct of test pits and other data collection activities, and pruning
or other limited removal of vegetation determined by the Commission
E.
§ 305-28 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-28
1:466
to be consistent with the purposes and intent of the bylaw. The
Commission may also permit water-dependent structures (such as
docks and piers), improvements for recreational purposes (such as
trails and signs) and other minimally invasive improvements (such as
wellheads). Stormwater management structures may be allowed within
this area only when there is no practicable alternative, as determined
by the Commission.
§ 305-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-28
1:467

ARTICLE V
Fees
§ 305-29. Fee schedule.
The fees required under the bylaw are separate from the fees required
under the Wetlands Protection Act. These fees shall be submitted as a
separate check made payable to the Town of South Hadley, with a note on
the check that it is a "Wetlands Bylaw Fee." Administrative fees are payable
at the time of application and are nonrefundable. The administrative fees
shall be calculated by the Commission or its agent according to the schedule
listed below. Town projects are exempt from fees. These fees are for
applications where a filing fee is not already required under the WPA
regulations.
§ 305-30. Failure to pay fees.
Advertising fee. The fee for legal notices in the Town Reminder are
the responsibility of the applicant, and should be paid directly to the
newspaper.
A.
Penalty for late filings. Fees for permit filings after work has
commenced shall be double the fee listed below in Subsection C. For
those filings that already have a fee under the WPA regulations and are
therefore not listed below, such as a notice of intent, there shall be a
late filing fee under the bylaw of $300. A late filing is any filing that is
submitted to the Commission after the start of activity that is subject to
these regulations.
B.
Administrative fees. The following administrative fees shall be applied
to pay for the costs of administering the Wetlands Protection Act and
the bylaw:
Request for determination of applicability:
For activities associated with existing single-family residences:
$50.
(a)
(b) For all other projects: $100.
(1)
Request for amendment to an order of conditions: $200. Fee to be
applied cumulatively for each amendment item of request.
(2)
(3) Request for extension of order of conditions: $100.
(4) Request for duplicate original of an order of conditions: $50.
(5) Certificate of compliance (partial or complete): $100.
(6) Emergency certification: $100.
(7) Request for local administrative appeal: $200.
C.
§ 305-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-30
1:469
§ 305-31. Consultant fees.
As provided by MGL c. 44, § 53G, the Commission may impose reasonable
fees for the employment of outside consultants, engaged by the
Commission, for specific expert services deemed necessary by the
Commission to come to a final decision on an application submitted to
the Commission pursuant to the requirements of the WPA, the bylaw,
Conservation Commission Act (MGL c. 40, § 8C), or any other state or
municipal statute, bylaw or regulation, as they may be amended or enacted
from time to time. Applicants should refer to the procedures described in
the Rules for Hiring Outside Consultants under MGL c. 44, § 53G adopted
by the Commission in 2005. Failure to pay the consultant fee shall be
deemed sufficient grounds to stay the specified time period requiring the
Commission to act under the bylaw or to deny a decision until payment is
made.
Failure to pay the fees required by the regulations shall cause the
application to be deemed incomplete and the time period for the
Commission to act under the bylaw shall be stayed. The Commission,
after notifying the applicant in writing, shall take no further action on
the filing until the fee is paid.
A.
In the event the correct fee as required by the WPA regulations, 310
CMR 10.03(7), has been paid but the fee required by the bylaw
regulations has not been paid, the Commission shall act to sever the
proceedings, if previously consolidated, and proceed as described in
Subsection A above for the bylaw review. The applicant is reminded that
in spite of the issuance of a favorable decision under the WPA, work
on the project in question may not go forward until the requirements
of the bylaw regulations have been met and favorable decisions under
both the bylaw and the WPA have been rendered.
B.
§ 305-30 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-31
1:470
ARTICLE VI
Performance Guarantees
§ 305-32. Security.
The Commission may require the applicant to furnish a performance
guarantee in the form of a deposit of money in an amount determined by
the Commission to be sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the
site alterations specified in the permit and/or shown on the plans approved
by the Commission. Security amounts will be set so that funds will be
adequate to comply with the order of conditions, repair damage to wetlands,
and to permanently stabilize the work site and all soils. Security shall be
determined on a site-by-site basis.
§ 305-33. Covenant.
The Commission may require the applicant to secure the performance
and observance of conditions imposed on the project by a conservation
restriction, easement or other covenant enforceable in a court of law,
executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land
to the benefit of the Town whereby the permit conditions shall be performed
or observed before any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed.
§ 305-34. Reduction of security.
The sum of any required performance guarantee or the amount of any
deposit held hereunder may be reduced from time to time by the
Commission in whole or in part.
§ 305-35. Release of performance guarantee.
Upon completion of the work specified in the permit, security for the
performance of which was given by deposit or covenant, the applicant
shall notify the Commission that the work is complete, with documentation
that the work was completed as specified, and request the release of the
performance guarantee. The Commission shall return the deposit to the
person who furnished it, or release the covenant, as appropriate, within 60
days of determining satisfactory completion of the work.
§ 305-36. Default.
If the applicant fails to complete the work secured by the performance
guarantee by the deadline stated therein, the deposit of money may be
applied, in whole or in part, by and upon a vote of the Commission, for the
benefit of the Town of South Hadley to the extent of the reasonable cost
to the Town of completing such construction or installation as specified in
the agreement. Any excess deposits, including any interest accrued thereon,
that are not required for completion of such construction or installation
shall be returned to the applicant.
§ 305-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-36
1:471

ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 305-37. Violations.
When the Commission determines that an activity has occurred or is
occurring in violation of the bylaw or a permit issued hereunder, the
Commission may issue a notice of violation, or take any other action
authorized by law.
§ 305-38. Form of notice of violation.
A notice of violation may be either a violation notice (letter) or an
enforcement order. A violation notice is a formal letter sent to a property
owner or contractor suspected to have violated the bylaw, requesting the
person to stop the activity and contact the Commission to determine if there
is a problem and how to deal with it. It does not carry any legal force,
but puts the person on notice and starts a paper trail that could lead to
an enforcement order if the problem is not resolved. An enforcement order
is a legal document (DEP WPA Form 9) used for known violations that
are serious because they are continuing to damage a resource area, are
repeat violations by the same individual, or are flagrant violations. When
the activity involves a violation of the WPA as well as the bylaw, the DEP
can step in under the enforcement order to assist in enforcement and issue
fines for wetland violations under the WPA.
§ 305-39. Process for issuing notice of violation.
A notice of violation in the form of a violation notice (letter) may be issued
by the Conservation Administrator upon approval from the Commission
Chair or Vice-Chair. It does not need to be signed or ratified by the
Commission. A notice of violation in the form of an enforcement order
is issued by the Commission and must be signed by a majority of the
It shall be a violation of the bylaw and these regulations to:
(1) Fail to comply with or to observe the conditions in a permit;
Fail to complete approved work described in a permit by the
expiration date of the order of conditions;
(2)
Fail to obtain a valid permit before conducting any activity subject
to regulation under the bylaw;
(3)
(4) Cause, suffer or allow any illegal work or activity;
(5) Fail to comply with a notice of violation; and/or
Fail or refuse to remove illegal fill or to restore any illegally altered
area to its previous condition.
(6)
A.
Each day that any of the foregoing violations continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
B.
§ 305-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-39
1:473
Commission. In a situation requiring immediate action, a notice of violation
enforcement order may be signed by the Chair or Vice-Chair, but must be
ratified by majority vote of a quorum of the members at the next meeting of
the Commission. The enforcement order may also be amended by a majority
of the Commission at a public meeting. Failure to ratify the enforcement
order may render it void. Because of the importance of getting Commission
ratification of an enforcement order when signed by only one member, the
Commission will post and hold a public meeting within five business days to
review and vote to ratify such enforcement order.
§ 305-40. Request for hearing.
Any person aggrieved by the issuance of a notice of violation may request
a hearing by making a written request delivered to the Conservation
Commission office within seven days of its receipt.
§ 305-41. Fines.
If a fine or an adjustment of fine for a violation is contemplated, the
Commission will discuss this matter at a public meeting. The property
owner will be given at least 48 hours' notice in writing of the date,
time, and place of the public meeting, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or hand delivery. If a majority of the Commission present at
the meeting finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a violation
has occurred, then the property owner may be fined not more than
$100 per offense per day. Each violation may be considered a separate
offense. Each day the violation continues constitutes a separate
violation under the bylaw.
A.
Violation fine schedule. The following fines may be levied by the
Conservation Commission for violation of the Wetland Bylaw and
regulations:
Subject Fine
Violation in 100-foot buffer zone and inner
100-foot riverfront area: failure to obtain an
order of conditions or negative
determination permitting activity
1st offense: $50
2nd and subsequent
offenses: $100
Violation in following resource areas: any
freshwater wetland, vernal pool, water body,
or isolated land subject to flooding: Failure
to obtain an order of conditions or negative
determination permitting activity
1st and subsequent
offenses: $100
Failure to record order of conditions $25
Failure to post DEP file number on property $25
Failure to comply with mitigation measures
by deadlines and/or as indicated in
enforcement order
1st and subsequent
offenses: $100
B.
§ 305-39 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-41
1:474
Subject Fine
Failure to stop activity in 100-foot buffer
zone, or bylaw resource areas as directed in
enforcement order or notice of violation, or
as ordered by police officer, other officer
having police powers, or Commission
member
1st and subsequent
offenses: $100
Failure to comply with general or special
condition contained in order of conditions
1st offense: $50
2nd and subsequent
offenses: $100
§ 305-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-41
1:475

ARTICLE VIII
Severability
§ 305-42. Provisions severable.
The invalidity of any section or provision of these rules and regulations shall
not invalidate any other section or portion thereof, nor shall it invalidate any
permit or determination which previously has been issued.
§ 305-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-42
1:477

ARTICLE IX
Effective Date
§ 305-43. When effective.
These regulations shall take effect upon the date of adoption by the
Conservation Commission.
§ 305-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 305-43
1:479
Chapter 310
COUNCIL ON AGING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Council on Aging — See Ch. 7, Art. I, § 7-4.
§ 305-43 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 305-43
1:480
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations
§ 310-1. Name.
The name of the organization shall be the "South Hadley Council on Aging,"
hereinafter referred to as the "Council," as established by Town Meeting of
the Town of South Hadley, Massachusetts on March 14, 1970.
§ 310-2. Purpose and function.
§ 310-3. Offices.
The present location of the Council will be at the South Hadley Senior
Center, 45 Dayton Street, South Hadley, Massachusetts.
§ 310-4. Membership; term; attendance.
The statement of purpose of the South Hadley Council on Aging is
based on this premise: that the community has a collective
responsibility for those who are 60 and over and this population of
citizens has the right to participate in determining those matters which
vitally affect them, and that there is an important community resource
in the experience and skills which the 60-and-over population has to
give to its community.
A.
In accordance with this philosophy, the Council is committed to
fulfilling the following functions:
To identify the total needs of the 60-and-over population of the
community.
(1)
To act as a provider of information, referral, counseling, nutrition
and health needs that will encourage independence, participation
and community involvement.
(2)
To design, advocate and/or implement programs for residents 60
and over in the community.
(3)
To provide meaningful educational, cultural, social, recreational
and volunteer activities that will foster individual growth and serve
the life of the community.
(4)
To educate the community and enlist support and participation of
all citizens about the needs of the maturing population.
(5)
To be responsive to the changing needs of those 60 and over
in the community, in cooperative communication with community
organizations, agencies and individuals.
(6)
B.
The duties of the Council members shall be to carry out the Council's
Statement of Purpose. The Council shall consist of 11 members,
inclusive of the Chairperson. All shall be residents of the Town of South
A.
§ 310-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-4
1:481
§ 310-5. Voting rights of members; quorum.
§ 310-6. Officers.
Hadley. Council membership shall be composed of at least 51% elders
(persons 60 years and older). Ideally, it shall reflect the make-up of the
community-at-large, with representation from areas such as business,
clergy, education, medical and social service.
The Nominating Committee, at the May meeting, shall present potential
Council members to the Council. Nominations may be made from the
floor. Those candidates approved by the Council membership shall be
recommended to the Selectboard for appointment, effective July 1.
Additional members may be recommended to the Selectboard when
vacancies exist.
B.
All members of the Council appointed by the Selectboard shall be sworn
in by the Town Clerk. The term of office of the Council members shall be
for a period of three years. Members shall serve for no more than two
consecutive three-year terms or not more than seven consecutive years
(including appointments to fill a vacancy). Persons who have served
shall be eligible to become Council members again after one year's
absence. Members must be willing to accept an office by the third year
of their first term or relinquish their position as Council members.
C.
Honorary members may be appointed by the Council in recognition of
meritorious service to the Council and do need to have been a member
of the Board.
D.
Resignations. In the event that a member wishes to resign from the
Council, he/she shall notify the Selectboard, Town Clerk and the
Council on Aging in writing.
E.
Attendance. Regular attendance is expected of all members. In the
event of three unexcused absences or more than four absences
(excused and/or unexcused) per 11 consecutive regular meetings, the
Council may request the written resignation of that member through
the Selectboard.
F.
All voting rights shall be vested in the Council members. Each member
in attendance shall be entitled to one vote with respect to any question
which may come before a meeting of the Council. Honorary members
may make suggestions or advise the Council, but will not have voting
privileges.
A.
Unless otherwise stated in these rules and regulations, the vote of at
least a majority of the Council members present at a meeting shall be
necessary and sufficient to decide any question.
B.
Quorum. At all meetings of the Council, the presence of more than 1/2
of the present Council membership shall be necessary and sufficient to
constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business.
C.
§ 310-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 310-6
1:482
§ 310-7. Committees.
Number, qualifications, elections and terms of office. The officers of
the Council shall consist of a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson, and a
Secretary. The terms of office shall be for one year with the possibility
of renewal.
Officers of the Council shall be elected by a majority vote of the
members present at the June meeting. The newly elected officers
shall take office on July 1.
(1)
Election of officers to fill vacancies created by death, resignation or
other cause may take place at any regular meeting and shall be for
the period of the unexpired term of the previous incumbent, except
that the office of the Chairperson, if vacated, shall be filled by the
Vice-Chairperson for the unexpired portion of the Chairperson's
term of office. A new Vice-Chairperson shall then be elected for the
remainder of that term of office.
(2)
A.
Chairperson. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings, appoint
all committees, and be an ex-officio member of all committees. The
Chairperson may act as the spokesperson for the Council in its relations
with Town officials and the public.
B.
Vice-Chairperson. During the absence or disability of the Chairperson,
the Vice-Chairperson shall exercise all the functions of the Chairperson
and, when so acting, shall have all the powers of the Chairperson.
C.
Secretary. The Secretary shall prepare minutes of all the proceedings
of the Council meetings and maintain attendance records of Council
members.
D.
Standing committees of the Council shall include: Nominating;
Planning and Finance (Budget) and Policy.
Nominating Committee. This committee shall present a slate of
candidates for office at the May meeting or when a vacancy should
arise. When a vacancy should arise, a candidate will be sought to
fill the slot as soon as possible.
(1)
Planning and Finance Committee (Budget). This committee shall
develop long-range plans in accordance with the philosophy and
purpose of the Council. The committee shall also assist the Director
in reviewing the availability of grant monies and make
recommendations to the Council for the utilization of these funds.
The committee shall also assist the Director in developing and
presenting the Annual Budget. It shall also assist in any other
financial matters as requested by the Director or Chairperson of
the Council.
(2)
Policy. This committee shall develop Council Rules and Regulations,
as well as a Policy and Procedures Handbook. The Rules and
(3)
A.
§ 310-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-7
1:483
§ 310-8. Meetings.
§ 310-9. Amendments.
Regulations and Policies shall be reviewed and updated at least
annually. Any recommendations for changes must be presented to
the Council.
Other committees. Other standing and ad hoc committees may be
added by the Council as deemed necessary. Each shall have a written
statement of purpose or function.
A representative from each standing and ad hoc committee shall
report on its meetings at each regular Council meeting.
(1)
All committees shall consist of a minimum of three members,
including a chairperson. A member may serve on more than one
committee. Honorary members may also serve on committees as
requested by the Council Chairperson. It is required that each
Council member serve actively on at least one committee annually.
Members authorized to represent the Council or Town on the
boards of other agencies, such as PVTA or WestMass ElderCare,
shall be recognized as fulfilling a committee obligation, provided
reports are made regularly to the Council.
(2)
B.
Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the members of the Council
shall be held once a month on the second Monday with the following
exceptions.
When the second Monday falls on a legal holiday, the meeting
scheduled for that day shall be held the Monday following the
holiday.
(1)
(2) When special circumstance so require.
(3) No meetings in August, unless special circumstances arise.
A.
Special meetings. Special meetings of the Council members may be
called at any time by the Chairperson, or the Secretary, if requested by
a majority of the members, with 48 hours' due notice to each member
of the Council and with proper notice posted at Town Hall.
B.
Rules of order. The rules contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised,
shall govern this Council in all cases in which they are applicable and
are consistent with these rules and regulations.
C.
These rules and regulations or any section thereof may be amended or
repealed by a two-thirds vote of the Council at any scheduled meeting.
Written notice of such proposed changes shall be presented to each
member of the Council at least 10 days prior to the meeting at which
proposed changes shall be submitted to a vote.
A.
§ 310-7 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 310-9
1:484
§ 310-10. When effective; copies of rules and handbook.
Proposed changes in rules and regulations should come as a
recommendation of the Policy Committee to the Council.
B.
The effective date of these rules and regulations shall be the date
adopted by the Council on Aging and by the Selectboard (3-14-1988).
Revisions adopted by the Council on Aging have been approved by the
Selectboard.
A.
The Council shall make copies of these Rules and Regulations and
Policy Handbook available to each member of the Council, the
Selectboard Office and the Town Clerk. An annual review of the Rules
and Regulations and Policy Handbook shall take place at a regularly
scheduled meeting of the Council.
B.
§ 310-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-10
1:485

ARTICLE II
Policies
§ 310-11. Participation in programs.
Council programs and activities are intended solely for South Hadley
residents 60+ years of age unless otherwise indicated. Non-Town residents
and/or non-senior citizens may participate on space-available basis,
provided they have the permission of the Director, who shall consult first
with the instructor/leader of the program. Participants needing assistance
with personal needs and/or mobility must be accompanied by someone
capable of performing these tasks throughout their visit to the senior center.
The Director reserves the right to assess and determine if the situation is
potentially hazardous to the participant or others and shall act accordingly.
§ 310-12. Council meetings.
Council members are expected to refrain from personal attacks and
innuendoes concerning Council members, staff or other Town personnel.
The courtesy of attentiveness and quiet is expected during the meeting.
Problems concerning Council on Aging programs, activities or staff should
be reported to the Director or Chairperson of the Council. If it is deemed
necessary to bring an item before the Council, a request should be
submitted in writing to be placed on the agenda before the Council meeting.
The Chair will determine priorities among the agenda items.
§ 310-13. Complaint policy.
§ 310-14. Nominating Committee procedures.
The Nominating Committee should have a minimum of three members and
should consult with, but not be bound by, the Council Chairperson before
finalizing nominations. In nominating individuals for Council membership,
the committee should be mindful of the statement in the rules and
regulations that "Council membership shall reflect the make-up of the
community-at-large . . ." With the exception of the replacement of officers,
Anyone who is not satisfied with a decision or action of any Council on
Aging staff member should first discuss the problem with the Director.
If the problem is not resolved, the matter should then be taken to
the Chairperson of the Council. If there is still no resolution, for nonemployment
issues the Board could be contacted; for employment
issues, the South Hadley Personnel Officer could be contacted.
A.
On matters of interest or concern to the Council, the Chairperson and/
or the Director shall represent the Council before the Selectboard or
other Town officials. Council members should report to the Chairperson
or Director any problem which they think should be brought before
the Selectboard or other Town officials. Under special circumstances,
the Chairperson may designate some other Council member as
spokesperson.
B.
§ 310-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-14
1:487
as needed, the Nominating Committee should make nominations to fill
vacancies for Council membership, when needed. Nominations should be
included in the agenda packet for the meeting and should state briefly
the candidate's qualifications and history of Council activities. Along with
May nominations, the Nominating Committee should present a table giving
the terms of continuing members. The slate of nominations for the annual
election of officers should be included in the agenda packet for the June
meeting, and should state briefly the candidates' qualifications and history
of Council membership.
§ 310-15. Procedures for selecting committee chairpersons.
Each standing committee shall select its chairperson for a period of one
year, with the option of renewal. If the members of a standing committee
cannot reach a consensus regarding the selection of its chairperson, the
Chairperson of the Council shall make the decision. When the Chairperson
of the Council appoints an ad hoc committee, he/she may appoint its
chairperson or direct the committee to do so.
§ 310-16. Weather cancellation policy.
In the event of inclement weather, the Director has the authority to make
the decision regarding the operations, namely meals and transportation, of
the Senior Center and will notify local television stations 3, 22, and 40. The
office will be open and staff shall report to work unless Town Hall is closed.
§ 310-17. Minibus policies.
The South Hadley Council on Aging will provide transportation for
senior citizens to and from the Senior Center and its activities from
9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday (with the exception of
holidays and "snow" days). The following are the rates per person:
(1) COA/Senior Center Activities, $0.75 each way.
(2) Within South Hadley, $1.25 each way.
(3) Chicopee/Granby/Holyoke/Hadley (special trips), $3 each way.
(4) Outside communities (special trips), $5 each way.
A.
Calling the Council on Aging office, at least 24 hours before
transportation is required. A week of reservations may be made with
one call, but one must call the Council on Aging if it is necessary to
cancel.
B.
Riders should be ready 15 minutes before scheduled pick-up time.
Transportation is door-to-door. According to COA policies, a driver
may not enter a building to assist a passenger. It is suggested that
passengers needing a cane, walker or wheelchair for stability, or
anyone needing assistance, have someone accompany them. Persons
needing assistance from their door to the van must have the walkway,
C.
§ 310-14 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 310-17
1:488
§ 310-18. Nutrition policies.
stairs, and/or ramps clear of ice or snow. Ramps should have safety
strips. The Council reserves the right to refuse transportation if the
area is not clear or if there is a dangerous situation.
In addition to 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
transportation, the South Hadley Council on Aging may be able to
provide transportation for special functions with volunteer drivers.
These may include church, special and mall trips. A minimum of five
passengers is required for transportation requests of non-COA
scheduled activities beyond normal COA hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m., Monday through Friday. A one-week notice must be given for all
special trips not scheduled in the COA monthly calendar.
D.
The Council on Aging reserves the right to deny transportation to
individuals they deem inappropriate for the trip (e.g., someone who
may wander cannot go on a mall or similar trip without a companion so
that they will not get lost).
E.
Driver training with the regular staff driver is required before staff or
volunteers may drive the minibus. An on-the-road evaluation will be
required. Anonymous passenger evaluations of both paid and volunteer
drivers will be done annually. Categories of the evaluation will include
safety, courtesy, speed and following motor vehicle regulations.
F.
In-Town transportation may be provided Monday through Friday if the
schedule permits, with 24 hours' advance request. The current van can
only accommodate one power chair; therefore, the first person to make
a reservation is given priority.
G.
Congregate meals. Luncheon is regularly served at the South Hadley
Senior Center Monday through Friday, except on holidays and "snow"
days. In order to be eligible for the meals program, a person must be
at least 60 years of age or the spouse of a participant. Because the
program receives financial support from WestMass ElderCare (WMEC)
through Federal Title III funds, participants must fill out a nutrition
application for WMEC. Guests of a senior participant will be allowed to
attend lunch if reservations are made on time and space allows. The
COA reserves the right to serve a meal only to senior participants. A
donation of $2.25 per person/meal is suggested. Staff and all guests
under 60 must pay $3 for all meals. Reservations and cancellations can
only be made at the office. Reservations should be made by calling or
stopping by the Council on Aging office at 538-5042 by 12:00 noon
of the previous day, or earlier. The earliest date for reservations for
all special luncheons will be announced in the newsletter. "Daily
participants" are defined as participants who attend the lunch site on
each day that it is open and can sign up for the entire month upon their
request. "Occasional participants" are participants who attend on an
irregular basis and must make reservations or cancellations with the
Council on Aging office. Cancellations should be called in to the COA
A.
§ 310-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-18
1:489
§ 310-19. Orthopedic supplies policy.
The South Hadley Council on Aging has a variety of orthopedic equipment
(wheelchairs, walkers, commodes, etc.) which may be loaned to any South
Hadley resident upon completion of a form stating they will be responsible
for the item, its repair, or its replacement, if not returned. Maximum loan of
equipment will be for a period of three months. This may be extended under
extenuating circumstances after review by the Council on Aging Director
and Social Service Coordinator.
§ 310-20. Personnel evaluation policy.
All personnel evaluations shall be treated as confidential. Records of these
must be secured and made available only to authorized individuals.
office by 4:00 p.m. on the previous day for which a reservation is being
held. Meals will be served at 11:45 a.m. until 12:15 p.m., cafeteria style.
Those who are unable to serve themselves will be served by a volunteer.
The meals at the Senior Center are to encourage socialization as well
as nutrition. Therefore, seating is on a first-come basis. No seats shall
be reserved, with the exception of the volunteer table and birthday/
anniversary table at those parties. No food shall be taken from the
dining room, with the exception of your own serving of milk and fresh
fruit which is served for dessert. This is a regulation of the federal
nutrition program.
Hot meals on wheels. Luncheon is regularly delivered from the South
Hadley Senior Center to eligible South Hadley recipients Monday
through Friday, except on holidays and "snow" days. In order to be
eligible for the meals program, a person must be at least 60 years of
age, homebound (cannot go out without assistance), and have no one
at home to prepare a meal. Because the program receives financial
support from WestMass ElderCare (WMEC) through Federal Title IIIC
funds, WMEC must approve referrals. Referrals may be made to
the South Hadley Council on Aging or directly to WMEC. A donation
of $2.25 per person is suggested. The program cannot accommodate
special dietary needs except for low-salt substitutions and diabetic
desserts. Occasional substitutions may be made if a food allergy or
dietary restriction is specified by WMEC Intake Referral or by a letter
from a doctor. Meals will not be delivered when walkways and/or stairs
present a hazardous condition. Weekend frozen and/or snow pack meals
are available to those authorized by WMEC.
B.
Evaluation of staff other than Director. The Director will evaluate each
staff member responsible to him/her annually. At that time, the prior
year's evaluation will be reviewed to see if goals and objectives have
been met. The evaluations will then be submitted to the Personnel
Officer.
A.
§ 310-18 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 310-20
1:490
§ 310-21. Harassment policies.
Evaluation of the Director. The Town Administrator is responsible for
the evaluation of the Director. Council on Aging Board members are
welcome to submit comments to the Town Administrator.
B.
General harassment policy. It is the policy of the Council on Aging
to provide an environment free of harassment. Harassment of or by
employees, members and others will not be tolerated. The definition
of "harass" (source: Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary) means
to annoy persistently. Any incidents of harassment of or by employees,
members and others will be reported to the Director and/or the Council
Chairperson for appropriate action.
A.
The Senior Center is host to programs for senior citizens and their
guests. To ensure that it remains a friendly and welcome environment,
the following will not be tolerated:
Sexual Harassment Policy: making unwelcome sexual advances,
whether they involve physical touching or not. Making sexual
epithets, jokes, written or oral references to sexual conduct.
Gossiping about one's sex life. Commenting on an individual's body
or about an individual's sexual activity, deficiencies or prowess.
Displaying sexually suggestive objects, pictures or cartoons.
Unwelcome leering, whistling, brushing against the body, sexual
gestures, suggestive or insulting comments. Making inquiries into
one's sexual experiences. Discussing one's sexual activities. This
sexual harassment statement has been approved by the Council
on Aging and the Selectboard. (Source: Massachusetts Commission
Against Discrimination, model sexual harassment policy.)
(1)
COA employees are subject to the Town of South Hadley
Harassment Policy.
(2)
B.
§ 310-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-21
1:491
Chapter 315
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 200.
Trees — See Ch. 223.
Board of Health regulations — See Ch. 300.
§ 310-21 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 310-21
1:492
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 315-1.1. Applicability.
§ 315-1.2. Conflict with other laws; severability.
§ 315-1.3. Liability of property owner for fees.
The property owner will be charged fees for services as set by the
Selectboard and will be held liable for all charges on account of the same.
§ 315-1.4. Adoption of rates; billing frequency.
The Selectboard will revise and set all fees required to operate the
Department of Public Works of the Town of South Hadley. The fees will
remain in effect until further notice. Billing will occur at a frequency
determined by the Selectboard.
§ 315-1.5. Right of entry; authority of inspectors.
The following rules and regulations and all subsequent changes and
additions thereto shall constitute a part of the contract with every
person, corporation, and owner of property in the Town of South
Hadley. Every such person, corporation, and property owner shall be
considered as having expressed consent to be bound thereby.
A.
All residents are requested to read this document carefully, as failure
to know the rules and regulations will not excuse anyone from the
consequences of neglect or infringement of such rules and regulations.
B.
All rules and regulations or parts of rules and regulations in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed.
A.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence, or provision of these
rules and regulations shall not affect the validity of any other part of
these rules and regulations, which can be given effect without such
invalid part or parts.
B.
Duly authorized employees of the Department of Public Works shall be
permitted ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of private
property for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, testing, and records examination, in the performance of their
duties in accordance with the provisions of these rules and regulations.
Relevant records shall be available for copying. The Town shall have
the right to install on private property such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. Where a property owner has security measures that require
proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises,
the property owner shall make the necessary arrangements with its
A.
§ 315-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-1.5
1:493
§ 315-1.6. Abatements.
§ 315-1.7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
security guards so that personnel from the Town will be permitted to
enter without delay.
Duly authorized employees and representatives of the Department of
Public Works shall be permitted to enter all private properties through
which the Town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of,
but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and
repair/maintenance of any portion of the pipe or facility lying within
said easement.
B.
Unreasonable delays in allowing access to the property owner's
premises shall be a violation of these rules and regulations.
C.
Abatements will only be authorized by the Selectboard or its designee.
Criteria for abatements relating to trash and sewer fees are found in
Articles V and VI, respectively, of these rules and regulations.
A.
A resident who files a false abatement shall make restitution, if
applicable, and be subject to a fine not to exceed $300.
B.
All abatement requests must be filed on the proper form within 30 days
of receipt of the bill. Abatement requests received after this time frame
shall not be approved.
C.
Whenever a person is found to be violating any section of these rules
and regulations, including any condition or limitation required by a
permit issued under these rules and regulations, the Department of
Public Works may take any or all of the follow actions:
(1) Issue a notice of violation.
(2) Publish a notice of violation publicly.
Issue an administrative compliance order, an order requiring the
person to comply with such section or requirement by a specified
date.
(3)
Issue a show-cause order, an order requiring the person to appear
before the Selectboard, explain the noncompliance, and show
cause why more severe enforcement actions against the person
should not be taken.
(4)
Fine the person an amount not exceeding $300 for each violation.
Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
(5)
Revoke any permit issued to the person by the Town under these
rules and regulations.
(6)
A.
§ 315-1.5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-1.7
1:494
§ 315-1.8. Vandalism; protection from damage.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface, apply graffiti to, or tamper with any
Town-owned structure, appurtenance, facility, or equipment. Any person
violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of
disorderly conduct and/or any of the penalties listed in § 315-1.7A.
(7) Deny service to or disconnect the person.
(8) Bring a civil action in accordance with Subsection B of this section.
(9) Seek criminal action as provided by law.
Take any other action available to it under federal, state, or local
laws, rules or regulations.
(10)
The Town may bring a civil action for appropriate relief to enforce these
regulations, including any requirement of a permit or order issued
hereunder, in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such relief may include,
but is not limited to, any or all of the following: a permanent or
temporary injunction; the imposition of penalties; or the recovery of
expenses as set forth in Subsection D of this section.
B.
Any person who violates these regulations shall be liable for any
expense incurred by the Town as a result of such violation, including,
but not limited to, any or all of the following: costs; attorney's fees; loss;
penalties; or damages.
C.
Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the Town from pursuing
other legal or equitable rights or remedies which may be available to it
under federal, state or local law, rules or regulations.
D.
§ 315-1.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-1.8
1:495

ARTICLE II
Highway Department Regulations
§ 315-2.1. Permit required for work in public way; plan for
nonemergency work.
§ 315-2.2. Parking bans.
§ 315-2.3. Sidewalk snow removal.
All property owners are responsible for snow removal on all public
sidewalks that abut their property. The Selectboard approves a list of
sidewalks where snow is removed by the DPW. However, these sidewalks
are typically done after the Town roads are plowed. Property owners that
abut sidewalks that are on the DPW sidewalk list are not absolved of their
responsibility for sidewalk maintenance. The Town's snow and ice policies
are shown in Appendix B.57
Before any work is done within the Town's right-of-way, the applicant
must file a road opening permit and pay the appropriate fee. If
applicable, the applicant shall complete the trench permit portion of the
road opening permit. All work shall comply with the rules, regulations,
and standards contained in the road opening permit as shown in
Appendix A.56
A.
Before any nonemergency utility work, including but not limited to
water, electric, phone, and cable TV, is performed in any right-of-way,
the utility shall submit a plan of all proposed work to the Department
of Public Works. The Department of Public Works shall approve the
locations of all proposed appurtenances, including but not limited to
hydrants, manholes, valve boxes, junction boxes, panels, and telephone
poles.
B.
Winter storm residential parking bans shall be declared, as necessary,
by the Department of Public Works. When a winter storm residential
parking ban is enacted, there is no on-street parking allowed on the
following streets: Main Street, Bridge Street, Lamb Street, North Main
Street, Bardwell Street, and Route 116. On all other streets, vehicles
must park on the even side of streets on even days and on the odd side
of streets on odd days.
A.
The Department of Public Works may declare other parking bans to
facilitate the maintenance/repair of Town infrastructure or for other
reasonable purposes.
B.
Vehicles not abiding by a declared parking ban shall be subject to
towing at the owner's expense.
C.
56.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Town offices. The road opening and sewer
connection permit form is also available on the Town website: www.southhadley.org.
57.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town offices.
§ 315-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-2.4
1:497
§ 315-2.4. Placement of snow or leaves on public streets.
§ 315-2.5. Private property located within Town right-of-way.
§ 315-2.6. Street maintenance responsibilities.
The maintenance responsibilities for streets in South Hadley are shown in
Appendix C.58
§ 315-2.7. Adopt an Island program.
Each year, the DPW manages an "Adopt an Island" program where
individuals can volunteer to maintain a traffic island or other public space.
The rules and forms relating to this program are shown in Appendix D.59
§ 315-2.8. Roadside signs and road marking.
§ 315-2.9. Driveway aprons.
No person shall shovel, plow, blow, or otherwise place snow onto any
public street.
A.
No person shall rake, blow, or otherwise place leaves or other debris
onto any public street.
B.
Any person found violating any subsection of this section may be
subject to a fine not to exceed $300.
C.
The Town shall not be responsible for damage to private property that
is located within the Town's right-of-way.
A.
The Town will repair or replace mailboxes that are damaged during
snow removal operations only if the mailbox is struck by the Town's
vehicle or plow. The property owner is responsible for any damage to a
mailbox that is due to snow coming off the face of the plow.
B.
Public streets and sidewalks shall not be blocked by fences, shrubs,
or any other private property. Fences, shrubs, or any other private
property shall not block views of traffic on public streets.
C.
Requests for roadside traffic signs and road markings must be made to
the Town's Traffic Sign Committee.
A.
No person shall erect any unofficial roadside traffic sign, unofficially
mark any public road, or install any unauthorized visibility mirror.
B.
"Driveway aprons" are defined as the portion of a driveway from the
edge of the road to the property line.
A.
58.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Town offices.
59.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Town offices. The Adopt-an-Island application
form is also available on the Town website: www.southhadley.org.
§ 315-2.4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-2.9
1:498
B. The apron shall be maintained by the property owner.
During road reconstruction projects, the Department of Public Works
will replace that portion of the apron necessary to create a proper
transition from the road to the driveway, as determined by the
Department of Public Works.
C.
§ 315-2.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-2.9
1:499

ARTICLE III
Tree Department Regulations60
§ 315-3.1. Existing trees.
§ 315-3.2. New trees.
§ 315-3.3. Firewood.
§ 315-3.4. Removal of nonhazardous public shade trees.
The property owner is responsible for all trees that are located on
private property. The Town is responsible for all trees located on Town
property (to include public ways). The State of Massachusetts
Department of Transportation is responsible for all trees located on
state-owned property and public ways (Route 202, portions of Route
116).
A.
Town trees will only be removed by the Department of Public Works if
the Tree Warden or his/her representative determines that the tree is
dead or is a hazard.
B.
Property owners wishing to have a tree planted in the tree belt in front
of their property will fill out the tree request form shown in Appendix
E.61 Applications must be by the property owner. Tree requests will not
be approved from applicants who do not own the land just opposite the
street line of Town-owned public ways.
A.
Periodically, the Department of Public Works will create a tree planting
list from the applications received. Generally, applications will be
addressed on a first-come, first-served basis. The Department of Public
Works reserves the right to add trees to or delete trees from the tree
planting list in the interest of fairness or benefit to the public.
B.
A list will be maintained by the Highway Superintendent of residents
who are interested in receiving free firewood. As wood becomes
available, it will be offered first to the owners of the properties in the
vicinity of the tree. If those owners do not want the wood, then it will
be offered to residents on the list. For the most part, the wood will be
offered to residents by their order on the list. However, deviations may
occur from time to time for operational reasons.
A.
To get on the firewood list, a resident must submit a signed firewood
waiver form shown in Appendix F62 that states he or she will not hold
the Town liable for damage to his or her property or any injury that may
result from the handling, hauling, or cutting of the wood.
B.
60.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 223, Trees.
61.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Town offices.
62.Editor's Note: Appendix F is on file in the Town offices.
§ 315-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-3.4
1:501
Trees are recognized as an asset to the community, providing a more
healthful and beautiful environment in which to live. Trees and other
vegetation provide oxygen, shade, protection from wind, glare, noise
and provide natural privacy to neighbors, wildlife habitat, aesthetics
and a priceless psychological counterpoint to the man-made setting.
Preserving trees is economically beneficial in attracting new residents,
visitors and industry.
A.
The Town recognizes that a property owner may wish to remove a
nonhazardous public shade tree. The Town of South Hadley defines
public shade trees under MGL c. 87. Public shade trees shall not be
removed other than by or on behalf of the Town. If a property owner
wishes to remove a tree that the Tree Warden does not deem a hazard,
the following steps shall be taken:
The property owner must submit a completed tree removal permit
application to the Tree Warden.63
(1)
The Tree Warden shall hold a public hearing. The cost of the legal
notice for the hearing shall be paid by the property owner, unless
the Tree Warden is already posting a legal notice for the removal
of other Town trees. In this case, the property owner's tree shall
be included in the legal notice and the property owner shall not be
responsible for any portion of the cost of the notice.
(2)
If, at the hearing, no person objects to the removal of the tree, the
property owner shall be allowed to remove the tree. The property
owner will be responsible for all applicant responsibilities and tree
replacement requirements as described below in the nonhazardous
tree removal policy.
(3)
If, at the hearing, any person objects to the removal, in accordance
with MGL c. 87, the Tree Warden cannot grant approval to remove
the Town tree. The property owner may appeal to the Selectboard.
(4)
An appeal for removal of a tree shall be submitted to the
Selectboard in writing. The appeal shall state the reason(s) the
applicant wishes to remove the tree.
(5)
If the Selectboard approves the removal of the Town tree, the
property owner will be responsible for all applicant responsibilities
and tree replacement requirements as described below in the
nonhazardous tree removal policy.
(6)
B.
Applicant responsibilities.
Any applicant that is granted permission to remove a nonhazardous
public shade tree will be responsible for all expenses associated
(1)
C.
63.Editor's Note: The tree request form is available on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 315-3.4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-3.4
1:502
with the removal of the tree and stump, to include, but not be
limited to:
(a) Any additional permits or notifications that may be required.
The cost of complete tree removal, disposal of wood, stump
removal or grinding, backfilling of stump hole, including loam
and reseeding of lawn areas.
(b)
(c) The cost of police details.
(d) Repair of street surface and shoulder.
(e) Repair and restoration of utility services.
(f) Performance bond if required by the Tree Warden.
All tree work shall be performed in compliance with ANSI Z-133
and International Arboriculture and Tree Care Industry Association
standards. The tree removal contractor must be approved by the
Tree Warden as to equipment, qualifications and experience.
Certificates of insurance, including worker's compensation, bodily
injury, property damage and liability, satisfactory to the Town
requirements shall be submitted to the Town prior to starting work.
(2)
Before the start of any work or arrival of equipment or materials,
the contractor shall arrange a preconstruction conference with the
Tree Warden. At said conference the Tree Warden will identify
trees and shrubs that are to be protected or removed. The Tree
Warden may require the installation of fencing, mulches or
temporary surfaces to protect surrounding vegetation and Town
infrastructure.
(3)
Tree replacement requirements.
For every nonhazardous public shade tree removed by a property
owner, the Town requires replacement(s) according to the
provisions below. DBH = "diameter at breast height," defined as 4.5
feet above ground level.
DBH of Removed Tree
(inches) Replacement Tree(s)
3 up to 12 1
13 up to 24 2
25 up to 36 3
Greater than 36 4
(1)
The property owner shall choose one of three options to satisfy the
tree replacement requirements:
(2)
D.
§ 315-3.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-3.4
1:503
Provide and plant replacement trees according to the
quantities described above. Replacement trees shall be at least
two inches DBH. The replacement shall be a species that is
appropriate to the site and approved by the Tree Warden. The
Tree Warden shall inspect replacements prior to planting to
ensure they are in satisfactory condition.
(a)
Make a payment to the Town's tree planting account. The
amount of the payment shall be computed by multiplying $125
times the required number of replacement trees.
(b)
A combination of planting(s) and payment to the tree planting
account.
(c)
Nothing contained in this policy shall prohibit the Tree Warden
from refusing to permit the removal of nonhazardous public shade
trees. The Tree Warden may refuse to grant a permit for the
removal of a nonhazardous tree if, in his or her opinion, the tree
is of historic or scenic value; is of a size or species not commonly
found along the roadways of South Hadley; has significant wildlife
value; or is an unusually healthy or significant specimen.
(3)
§ 315-3.4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-3.4
1:504
ARTICLE IV
Parks Department Regulations
§ 315-4.1. Applicability.
§ 315-4.2. Alcoholic beverages.
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages or possess an open container
of alcohol at any park unless a special alcohol permit (beer and wine) has
been issued by the Selectboard in accordance with Chapter 110, Alcoholic
Beverages, § 110-3, of the Town Bylaws.
§ 315-4.3. Solid waste; graffiti.
§ 315-4.4. Golf.
No person shall play or practice golf at any park.
§ 315-4.5. Animals.
The following Parks Department regulations apply to all of the parks
and playgrounds maintained by the South Hadley Department of Public
Works. These parks include, but may not be limited to, Beachgrounds
Park, Buttery Brook Park, Town Farm Park, Town Common, Canal Park,
Frank Smith Park (by the Firehouse Museum), Lecca Park (Morgan
Street at East Street), Ryder Park (Lamb Street at Bridge Street), and
the parks at the Plains School, Mosier School, Middle School, High
School, and former Center School.
A.
For the purpose of this article, the term "park" shall be defined as
the parks listed in Subsection A of this section and shall include all
incidental Town-owned property in the vicinity of each park. This
property includes, but is not limited to, all playgrounds, spray parks,
athletic fields, parking lots, picnic areas, sidewalks, and driveways.
B.
No person shall dispose of any litter at any park except in containers
placed for such purposes.
A.
No person shall deposit household trash, hazardous waste, wastes
included in the current waste ban regulations, or any other
inappropriate wastes at any park.
B.
C. No person shall apply graffiti to any Town-owned property at any park.
No privately owned animals are allowed in any park. No dogs are
allowed in any park as per the Town Bylaw, except for service dogs.64
A.
B. No person shall disturb any Town-owned animals at any park.
C. No person shall feed any Town-owned animals.
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 131, Dogs.
§ 315-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-4.6
1:505
§ 315-4.6. Sale of goods and wares.
No person shall sell any goods or wares in any park without prior approval
of the Selectboard or its designee.65
§ 315-4.7. Use of grills; fires.
§ 315-4.8. Motor vehicles.66
§ 315-4.9. Firearms and weapons; fireworks.67
§ 315-4.10. Camping.
No person is allowed to camp at any park without prior approval of the
Department of Public Works.
§ 315-4.11. Compliance with attendant's directions.
All park visitors must follow any reasonable directions from Parks
Department employees and any other individuals designated by the
Department of Public Works. Any person who fails to follow reasonable
instructions shall forfeit his/her right to use the park.
No person shall start any fires in any park without prior approval of the
Department of Public Works or its designee.
A.
No person shall use any privately owned grill at any park without prior
approval of the Department of Public Works or its designee.
B.
No person shall drive any automobile or motorcycle on any park
property not intended for vehicular traffic without prior approval of the
Department of Public Works.
A.
No person shall drive any snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, or any other
motorized vehicle that cannot be legally driven on a public street on
any park property without prior approval of the Department of Public
Works.
B.
No person shall bring any firearm to any park without prior approval of
the Selectboard.
A.
No person shall bring any weapons (including, but not limited to,
slingshots, bow and arrows, crossbows, and BB guns) to any park
without prior approval of the Selectboard.
B.
No person shall bring any fireworks to any park without prior approval
of the Selectboard.
C.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 190, Peddling and Soliciting.
66.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 230, Vehicles.
67.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 145, Firearms and weapons.
§ 315-4.6 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-4.12
1:506
§ 315-4.12. Rollerskating, rollerblading, skateboarding, and bike
riding.
Rollerskating, rollerblading, skateboarding, and bike riding are only
allowed in the Buttery Brook Park Skatepark.
§ 315-4.13. Nuisances; hindering park employees.
No person is allowed to create a nuisance or disturbance at any park.
Nuisances may include, but are not limited to, loud music, the use of
bullhorns, preventing others from using park facilities, soliciting park
visitors, and preventing Parks Department employees and individuals
designated by the Department of Public Works from performing their duties.
§ 315-4.14. Group outings.
Group outings/picnics are not permitted without the prior approval of the
Department of Public Works. For the purpose of this section, a "group
outing" is an organized event involving 12 or more participants.
§ 315-4.15. Buttery Brook Park rentals.
Rentals at Buttery Brook Park will be in accordance with the Buttery Brook
Park Rental Agreement shown in Appendix G.68
68.Editor's Note: Appendix G is on file in the Town offices.
§ 315-4.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-4.15
1:507

ARTICLE V
Solid Waste Department Regulations69
§ 315-5.1. Definitions.
Unless specifically indicated in these rules and regulations, the meaning of
terms used in this article shall be as follows:
APPROVED BARREL — A watertight receptacle made of plastic, metal, or
fiberglass, having handles and a capacity of not less than 10 gallons nor
more than 30 gallons. The weight of the receptacle and its contents shall
not exceed 40 pounds.
APPROVED GREEN BAG — A Town-approved green plastic weatherproof
sack with the Town Seal printed on it and that is sold at local stores. The
total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 40 pounds.
BULKY WASTE — Large furniture such as mattresses and box springs,
overstuffed chairs, studio couches, sofas, rugs, dressers, etc.
CATHODE RAY TUBES (CRTs) — Any processed glass tube used to provide
the visual display in televisions, computer monitors and certain scientific
instruments such as oscilloscopes.
CFC APPLIANCES — All appliances containing chloroflurocarbons; i.e.,
refrigerators, dehumidifiers, freezers, and air conditioners.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS (C&D) — Wood, asphalt
shingles, insulation (except asbestos), windows and doors, and other
miscellaneous building materials. Demolition waste shall not include
machinery and parts or any toxic or hazardous waste.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION CONTRACTOR — The company that has been
contracted to pick up curbside waste for the Town of South Hadley.
CURBSIDE RECYCLABLES — Recyclable paper and recyclable containers
that are allowed to be placed curbside for pickup in the Town of South
Hadley.
CURBSIDE RUBBISH — Rubbish that is allowed to be placed curbside for
pickup in the Town of South Hadley.
CURBSIDE WASTE — All wastes that are allowed to be placed curbside
in the Town of South Hadley. Curbside waste includes curbside rubbish,
curbside recyclables, and curbside yard waste.
CURBSIDE YARD WASTE — Yard waste that is allowed to be placed
curbside for pickup in the Town of South Hadley. The Town sponsors four
curbside yard waste collections each year (two in the Spring and two in the
Fall).
HAZARDOUS WASTE (HHW) — Waste, in any amount, which is defined,
characterized or designated as hazardous by the United States
69.Editor's Note: See also the Board of Health regulations in Ch. 300, Art. XI, Refuse and
Recycling Collection.
§ 315-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-5.1
1:509
Environmental Protection Agency or Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection or pursuant to federal or state law, or waste, in
any amount, which is regulated under federal or state law.
HOUSEHOLD REFUSE — All solid waste materials not included in the
definitions of bulky waste, construction debris, hazardous waste, residential
garbage, recyclable materials, white goods, and yard waste.
RECYCLABLE CONTAINERS — Containers that are accepted at the
Springfield Materials Recycling Facility. These items include glass bottles
and jars, clear and colored; rigid plastic containers marked on the bottom
with one of the following symbols: PETE, HDPE (#1 to #7); aluminum
deposit and no-deposit cans, pie plates, and aluminum trays; and steel
("tin") food cans.
RECYCLABLE PAPER — Paper products that are accepted by the Springfield
Materials Recycling Facility. These paper products include newspapers,
magazines, catalogs, junk mail, phone books, and paperboard.
RECYCLING BINS — Receptacles designed for the purpose of curbside
collection of recyclable materials. The receptacle shall be one made of
fiberglass, plastic, or metal.
RECYCLING CENTER — The Town-operated recycling facility, including the
Town-operated compost area, located at 10 Industrial Drive, South Hadley,
Massachusetts.
RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE — Vegetable matter and recyclable wastes from
residential kitchens.
WASTE BAN — The prohibition of the disposal of specified wastes in
Massachusetts landfills by the Department of Environmental Protection in
accordance with 310 CMR 19.017.
WHITE GOODS — An appliance employing electricity, oil, natural gas, or
liquefied petroleum to preserve or cook food, to wash or dry clothing,
cooking or kitchen utensils or related items or to cool or heat air or water.
These include dishwashers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, gas or electric
ovens and ranges and hot water heaters.
YARD WASTE — All tree trimmings (less than 1/2 inch in diameter), grass
cuttings, weeds, leaves, wood chips and shavings, and other wastes
associated with residential yard maintenance that are compostable.
§ 315-5.2. Trash fees.
Trash fees. Each year, the Selectboard shall set the trash fees to be
charged to each property owner that utilizes the Town's curbside
collection program.
A.
The Town of South Hadley trash billing system has the following three
components:
Bag fee. Residents utilizing the Town's waste disposal services
must buy and use approved green bags that are sold at local stores.
(1)
B.
§ 315-5.1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-5.2
1:510
§ 315-5.3. Trash fee abatements.
Flat dwelling fee. Residents utilizing the Town's waste disposal
services must pay a flat annual charge that is based on the number
of dwellings within the building (i.e., a three-family house has three
dwellings) per Town Assessor records.
(2)
Recycling center permit fee. Residents who wish to use the
recycling center (including the compost area) must pay the flat
dwelling fee and purchase an annual permit to do so. The purchase
of this permit is optional (i.e., a resident may utilize the Town's
curbside collection service by paying for the approved green bags
and the flat dwelling fee).
(3)
Flat dwelling fee.
Bills for flat dwelling fees are sent to residents by a schedule
approved by the Selectboard. Payments are made to the Town
Treasurer/Collector office at Town Hall.
(1)
Requests for abatements of the flat dwelling fee must be submitted
to the DPW within 30 days of billing (please see § 315-5.3, Trash
fee abatements).
(2)
C.
Recycling center permit fee.
Recycling center permits are issued at the DPW. Residents may
obtain the permits in person or by mail. (The application is included
with the trash bill and is also available at the solid waste page
on the Town's website.) Residents must provide a copy of their
vehicle registration and payment of the recycling center permit fee
to obtain a sticker, which must be placed on the resident's vehicle.
(1)
Families that have multiple vehicles may purchase an additional
sticker for a nominal processing fee.
(2)
If a resident wishes to use a borrowed or rented vehicle to deliver
waste to the recycling center, the resident may obtain a one-day
pass from the DPW as long as the resident has a valid permit
sticker.
(3)
Commercial landscapers are not allowed to use the Town's
recycling center (including compost area).
(4)
D.
Any requests for trash fee abatement must be in writing on the form
provided on the back of the bill and submitted to the Department of
Public Works Business Office, 10 Industrial Drive, South Hadley, MA
01075, within 30 days of the date of the billing.
A.
Abatements will be granted for the following reasons:
Private service. Documentation must be submitted, either a copy
of the contract with the disposal company providing the dumpster
(1)
B.
§ 315-5.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-5.3
1:511
§ 315-5.4. Curbside collection.
or copies of cancelled checks for payment of the dumpster fees.
Residents taking trash to work must provide a letter from the
employer stating that the employee is allowed to use the dumpster
at work and a copy of an invoice from the trash hauler providing
the service to the employer. Abatements will not be approved for
residents taking trash to another residence in South Hadley, a
residence in another community that provides municipally
sponsored trash service, or to the South Hadley recycling center.
Inaccurate number of dwellings. The number of dwellings is based
on the most current information provided by the Town Assessor's
office. If the information is in dispute, the Building Inspector shall
inspect the property and determine the correct number of
dwellings.
(2)
Unoccupied dwellings.
The total flat fee charged for each property is computed by
multiplying the number of dwellings in the building (i.e., a
three-family building has three dwellings) by the flat fee.
Abatements will only be granted for vacant dwellings (houses
or apartments) under the following conditions:
The property owner completes and signs an affidavit that
states the vacant dwelling will not be occupied, the
electric meter shall be disconnected, and the water shut
off and sealed by the Water Department for the entire
fiscal billing year (July to June).
[1]
The Town receives confirmation from the South Hadley
Electric Light Department that the electricity has been
shut off to the vacant dwelling.
[2]
The Town receives confirmation from the Water
Department that the water has been shut off to the vacant
dwelling.
[3]
(a)
If the dwelling is occupied or the water and/or electricity is
turned back on during the fiscal year described in the affidavit,
the property owner may be subject to a fine of up to $300.
(b)
(3)
An appeal of the denial of an abatement request may be directed to the
Town Administrator.
C.
Curbside waste must be curbside by 7:00 a.m. and shall not be placed
in any way to interfere with an abutter's access to his or her property.
Curbside waste must be placed at the curb or at a point in the treebelt
that is no further than five feet from the back of the curb. In areas
where there are no curbs, curbside waste must be placed at a point
A.
§ 315-5.3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-5.4
1:512
§ 315-5.5. Prohibited wastes in curbside waste.
in the treebelt that is no further than five feet from the edge of the
roadway.
Curbside waste shall be placed out for collection on the day of the
scheduled pickup. Empty containers shall be removed within one day
after pickup.
B.
The curbside collection contractor will only be called back to a
residence if the contractor missed the stop. The contractor will not be
called back if a customer does not have its curbside waste out by 7:00
a.m.
C.
Approved barrels shall be galvanized iron or other nonrusting metal,
plastic, or fiberglass, having handles and a capacity of not less than 10
gallons nor more than 30 gallons per receptacle, with a maximum 40
pounds with contents. Any receptacle that does not conform to these
specifications or that may have ragged or sharp edges, or any other
defect tending to hamper or injure the persons collecting, will not be
collected.
D.
Curbside rubbish and curbside recyclables are picked up once every
two weeks (26 times per year). When New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day fall on a
weekday, collection days will be scheduled one day later, beginning with
the holiday and ending at the end of that week (i.e., since Thanksgiving
is always on a Thursday, the collection schedule for that week does not
change for Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday. Thursday's collection is
done on Friday and Friday's collection is on Saturday.). There are no
collections on Sundays.
E.
All curbside rubbish shall be placed in approved green bags that are
securely tied. Curbside rubbish shall be placed at the curb so that it
does not get blown away by wind or scattered by animals. The curbside
collection contractor is not responsible for cleaning up scattered waste.
F.
Garbage or household food wastes must be mixed in with the household
refuse. Garbage and food waste will be drained and wrapped tightly in
newspaper or bagged (plastic bag or other) and placed in the rubbish.
G.
Any human or animal wastes included in the curbside rubbish shall be
double-bagged and securely tied.
H.
Ash may be included with the curbside rubbish, but it must be at least
two weeks old and put in a tied plastic bag.
I.
No person shall include any of the following wastes with his/her
curbside waste:
(1) Waste oil.
(2) Propane tanks.
A.
§ 315-5.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-5.5
1:513
§ 315-5.6. Curbside recyclables.
(3) Nonalkaline batteries.
(4) Tires.
(5) White goods.
(6) Bulky wastes.
(7) Cathode ray tubes.
(8) Computers/Televisions.
(9) Construction and demolition debris.
Metal. (Recyclable metal containers should be included in curbside
recyclables.)
(10)
(11)Sharps.
(12)Paint. (Dried latex paint may be included in curbside rubbish.)
(13)Gasoline.
(14)Pesticides.
(15)Solvents.
(16)Hazardous waste.
(17)Products that contain mercury.
Disposal options. Items (1) through (10) above may be brought to the
Town's recycling center when it is open on Wednesdays and Saturdays
(8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.). Please see § 315-5.8 for information pertaining
to the disposal of sharps and § 315-5.9 for information about the
disposal of Items (12) through (17). Fees may apply.
B.
Yard waste. Yard waste shall only be allowed to be included with
curbside waste on four separate collections: twice in the Spring
(typically May) and twice in the Fall (typically November). When yard
waste is collected by the curbside collection contractor, the collections
occur on the same day of the week as the scheduled curbside waste
collection. Yard waste must be put in paper leaf bags, approved barrels,
or tied in bundles no larger than four feet long. Yard waste will not be
collected if it is in plastic bags. Town residents may also drop off their
yard waste at the recycling center on Wednesdays and Saturdays (8:00
a.m. to 3:00 p.m.) and at other posted drop-off hours.
C.
Curbside recyclables must be separated into recyclable paper and
recyclable containers. Curbside recyclables must be placed at least two
feet away from curbside rubbish.
A.
B. Curbside recyclables shall be rinsed clean and clear of any food.
§ 315-5.5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-5.6
1:514
§ 315-5.7. Recycling center.
§ 315-5.8. Sharps (medical needles).71
Sharps (medical needles) may not be placed with curbside waste. South
Hadley has a medical sharps program. Special red sharps containers are
available at the DPW for residents to collect medical sharps such as used
needles, lancets, etc. Filled containers may be returned to the DPW and
exchanged for empty containers.
§ 315-5.9. Household hazardous wastes.
Household hazardous waste (HHW) collections are typically held twice each
year at the DPW. Typically, a HHW collection occurs on a Saturday in the
Spring and a Saturday in the Fall. Preregistration is required and begins
one month before the collection date (538-5033).
§ 315-5.10. Christmas trees.
Curbside recyclables, except cardboard, shall be placed in recycling
bins, a clearly marked receptacle of similar size, or an approved barrel.
Cardboard may be placed curbside in bundles that are no longer than
three feet in any dimension. Curbside recyclables shall be placed so
that they do not get blown away by wind or scattered by animals. The
curbside collection contractor shall not be responsible for cleaning up
scattered waste.
C.
Curbside recycling not placed in recycling bins must be clearly marked
with Town-provided stickers. Green stickers shall be placed on
receptacles or approved barrels containing recyclable paper. Orange
stickers shall be placed on receptacles or approved barrels containing
recyclable containers. Stickers may be obtained at the DPW. Brown
paper bags may be used for recyclable paper.
D.
E. Plastic bags shall not be included with curbside recyclables.
The recycling center is open to all South Hadley residents on
Wednesdays and Saturdays from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
A.
B. Curbside recyclables shall be rinsed clean and clear of any food.
All vehicles entering the recycling center must display a valid recycling
center sticker.
C.
A list of items that are accepted at the recycling center and the
corresponding fees, if applicable, are shown in Appendix H.70
D.
E. All payments at the recycling center must be made by check.
70.Editor's Note: Appendix H is on file in the Town offices. Information is also available on
the Town website: www.southhadley.org.
71.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 300, Board of Health, Art. VII, Medical Sharps.
§ 315-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-5.10
1:515
§ 315-5.11. Illegal dumping.
Residents may put their Christmas trees at the curbside during the
month of January and the DPW will collect them. Residents may also
bring their Christmas trees to the recycling center when it is open.
A.
All Christmas trees and wreaths must be stripped of all decorations and
wire and not placed in bags.
B.
No person shall dispose of any litter at any Town-owned property
except in containers placed for such purposes.
A.
No person shall deposit household trash, hazardous waste, wastes
included in the current waste ban regulations, or any other
inappropriate wastes along any road or other Town-owned property.
B.
§ 315-5.10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-5.11
1:516
ARTICLE VI
Sewer Department Regulations
§ 315-6.1. Authority.
The Selectboard of the Town of South Hadley, Hampshire County,
Massachusetts, acting in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 83, § 10,
as amended, hereby adopts the following rules and regulations governing
connection to and use of the Town's public sewer system.
§ 315-6.2. Definitions.
Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand (five day)
BMP Best management practice
BMR Baseline monitoring report
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CIU Categorical industrial user
COD Chemical oxygen demand
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Gpd Gallons per day
IU Industrial user
l Liter
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU Nonsignificant categorical industrial user
POTW Publicly owned treatment works (owned and operated by
the Town of South Hadley)
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SIU Significant industrial user
SNC Significant noncompliance
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
A.
Unless specifically indicated in these rules and regulations, the
meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the "Clean Water Act," as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
B.
§ 315-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.2
1:517
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Region 1 Administrator of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or his/her authorized representative.
AUTHORIZED OR DULY AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE
USER —
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPS — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in § 315-6.8
of this article [40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)]. BMPs include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw materials storage. BMPs can also include alternative means
of complying with or in place of certain established categorical
pretreatment standards and effluent limits as authorized by EPA.
If the user is a corporation:
The President, Secretary, Treasurer, or a Vice President of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decision-making
functions for the corporation; or
(a)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the
regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty
of making major capital investment recommendations, and
initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to
assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the
necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for the individual
wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to
the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
(b)
(1)
If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, a general partner
or proprietor, respectively.
(2)
If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility, a
director or the highest official appointed or designated to oversee
the operation and performance of the activities of the government
facility, or his/her designee.
(3)
The individuals described in Subsections (1) through (3) above may
designate a duly authorized representative if the authorization is
in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which
the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, and the written
authorization is submitted to the Town of South Hadley.
(4)
§ 315-6.2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.2
1:518
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams
per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to
the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner
face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the main sewer to the
building or structure.
CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user subject to a
categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard.
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users and that appears
in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 to 471.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND or COD — A measure of the oxygen
required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A sample which represents many aliquots
taken throughout an extended time period.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Town of South Hadley.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for
a pollutant collected during a calendar day.
DAILY MAXIMUM LIMIT — The maximum allowable discharge limit
of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits
are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the
arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived
from all measurements taken that day.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Massachusetts.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Regional Water Management
Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized
official of said agency.
EXCESSIVE — An amount or concentration of a constituent of
wastewater which, in the judgment of the Selectboard:
§ 315-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.2
1:519
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge that is not a new source.
FATS, OIL AND GREASE (FOG) PROGRAM — The regulation approved
by the Selectboard to minimize the quantity of this material entering
the sewer system; provides requirements for traps and interceptors,
maintenance, and reporting requirements specifically for the food
service industry.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
GENERAL PERMIT — A local permit to regulate commercial or
industrial establishments which do not meet the criteria of a significant
industrial user by the EPA, but which, in the best determination of the
Superintendent, require some oversight. This includes but is not limited
to manufacturing facilities and long-term groundwater remediation
projects. Subject to the most current fees and guidelines approved by
the Selectboard.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample that is taken from a waste stream on a onetime
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a
period of time not to exceed 15 minutes.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under
Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of wastewater discharge into the POTW
which constitutes an "indirect discharge" as defined herein.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade, or business, as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
INFILTRATION — Water other than wastewater that enters a sewer
system (including sewer connections and foundation drains) from the
ground through means which include, but are not limited to, defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections or manholes. Infiltration does not
include, and is distinguished from, inflow.
INFILTRATION/INFLOW (I/I) — The quantity of water from both
infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source.
(1) Will cause damage to any facility;
(2) Will be harmful to a wastewater treatment process;
Cannot be removed in the treatment works to the degree required
in limiting stream classification standards of the Connecticut River
and/or its tributaries;
(3)
(4) Can otherwise endanger life or property; or
(5) Can constitute a nuisance.
§ 315-6.2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.2
1:520
INFLOW — Water, other than sanitary flow, that enters a sewer system
(including sewer connections) from sources that include, but are not
limited to, roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, drains
from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-connections
between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling
towers, stormwaters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage.
Inflow does not include, and is distinguishable from, infiltration.
INSTANTANEOUS LIMIT — The maximum concentration of a pollutant
allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis
of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the
industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
LOCAL LIMIT — Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by
the Town upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the
general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1)
and (b).
MEDICAL WASTE — Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated
laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface or ground water.
NEW SOURCE —
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(1)
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions
and regulations or permits issued thereunder or any more stringent
state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act,
the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act" (RCRA), and any state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and
the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
(2)
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there
is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
(1)
§ 315-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.2
1:521
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Water used for cooling that does
not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate or
finished product, or waste products; for example, water discharged
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at
a site at which no other source is located; or
(a)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces
the process or production equipment that causes the discharge
of pollutants at an existing source; or
(b)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as
the existing source should be considered.
(c)
Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results
in a modification rather than a new source if the construction
does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of Subsection (1)(b) or (c) of this definition
but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or
production equipment.
(2)
Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
[1]
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
[2]
(a)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in
its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase
or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and
design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under
this subsection.
(b)
(3)
§ 315-6.2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.2
1:522
from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to
which the only pollutant added is heat.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, society, corporation,
group or government agency or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal,
state, and local governmental agencies.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units.
POLLUTANT — Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical
wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
municipal, agricultural, commercial and industrial wastes, and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity,
color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor) which is or may be discharged.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT or SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — That
portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to municipal
sewage and industrial wastewaters.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior
to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other means,
except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by
an applicable treatment standard.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National
Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD or STANDARD — Prohibited discharge
standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED
DISCHARGES — Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain
substances, as specified in 40 CFR and § 315-6.8C and D of these
regulations.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
§ 315-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.2
1:523
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by public authority.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) OR SEWAGE
WORKS — A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this instance by the Town of South
Hadley. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the
collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or
industrial wastes of a liquid nature, and any conveyances that convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. This does not include pipes,
sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
treatment. For purposes of these regulations, "POTW" shall also include
any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside
the Town who are, by contract or agreement with the Town, users of the
Town's POTW.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm-, surface, and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SELECTBOARD — The duly elected Selectboard of the Town of South
Hadley, acting in accordance with Chapter 83 of the General Laws. The
Selectboard is the designated "Sewer Commissioners" for the Town of
South Hadley, having oversight of all Town sewers, including but not
limited to sanitary, separated, combined, and storm sewers. The Board
may delegate its authority under portions of or all of these rules and
regulations to various Town employees and/or representatives.
SEPTAGE OR HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks
such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and
vacuum-pump tank trucks.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from the
residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with such ground-, surface and stormwaters
as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for the treatment of sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) — Except as provided in
Subsections (3) and (4) of this definition, a significant industrial user is:
An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards;
or
(1)
(2) An industrial user that:
§ 315-6.2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.2
1:524
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — As defined in 40 CFR 403.8.
Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact
cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater);
(a)
Contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or
more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity
of the POTW treatment plant; or
(b)
Is designated as such by the Town on the basis that it has
a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
(c)
The Town may determine that an industrial user subject to
categorical pretreatment standards is a nonsignificant categorical
industrial user rather than a significant industrial user on a finding
that the industrial user never discharges more than 100 gallons
per day (gpd) of total categorical wastewater (excluding sanitary,
noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater, unless
specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the
following conditions are met:
The industrial user, prior to Town's finding, has consistently
complied with all applicable categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements;
(a)
The industrial user annually submits the certification
statement required in § 315-6.14B [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)],
together with any additional information necessary to support
the certification statement; and
(b)
The industrial user never discharges any untreated
concentrated wastewater.
(c)
(3)
Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in Subsection (3) of
this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard
or requirement, the Town may at any time, on its own initiative or
in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in
accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that
such user should not be considered a significant industrial user.
(4)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken
for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period
exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or
requirement, including instantaneous limits;
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of wastewater measurements taken for each
pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds
(2)
§ 315-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.2
1:525
SLUG LOAD OR DISCHARGE — Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
standards in § 315-6.8 of this regulation. A slug discharge is any
discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited
to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has
a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in
any other way violates the POTW's regulations, local limits or permit
conditions.
SMALL COMMERCIAL DISCHARGE AUTHORIZATION — A local
permit used to regulate a specific commercial category. The
authorization is issued to all establishments within the category;
however, a modified authorization can be issued to an individual
location with additional concerns or noncompliance issues; subject to
the most current fees and guidelines approved by the Selectboard.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, multiplied by the applicable criteria
(1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
(daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or
narrative standard) that the Superintendent determines has
caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference
or pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public;
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted
in the Superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt
or prevent such a discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in an individual wastewater
discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with
compliance schedules;
(6)
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of best
management practices, which the Superintendent determines will
adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
(8)
§ 315-6.2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.2
1:526
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
STANDARD METHODS FOR THE EXAMINATION OF WATER AND
WASTEWATER — The most recent version, as published by the
American Public Health Association and approved under 40 CFR 136,
shall be the basis for all laboratory testing required hereunder and the
definition of all laboratory or chemical terms used herein
STATE — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
STATE ACT — The Massachusetts Clean Waters Act, as amended, MGL
c. 21 §§ 26 through 53.
STORM DRAIN OR SEWER — A sewer which carries storm- and surface
waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other
than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER — Any flow not sanitary or industrial in nature
occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the Town of South
Hadley to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged
with certain duties and responsibilities by these rules and regulations.
The term also means a duly authorized representative of the
Superintendent.
TEMPORARY DISCHARGE PERMIT — A local permit category used
for the regulation of short-term or one-time-only discharges, including
but not limited to groundwater remediation projects lasting less than
one year, tank removals, excavation waters, and industrial user special
projects or trials; subject to the most current fees and guidelines
approved by the Selectboard.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) or SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The
total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in,
water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory
filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the
Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 30/(a) or
other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the Town's POTW.
WASTEWATER — Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and
sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 315-6.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.3
1:527
§ 315-6.3. Billing.
Sewer fee. Each year, the Selectboard shall set the sewer fee to be
charged to each property owner that is connected to the Town's sewage
collection system.
A.
Billing for yearly sewer services shall be determined by multiplying
the sewer fee by the number of equivalent dwelling units (EDUs) at
the property. The yearly billable amount is determined in the Fall of
each fiscal year. Sewer billing occurs twice each year. Half of the yearly
billable amount is billed in the Fall and the other half is billed in the
Spring.
B.
Residential accounts. The number of EDUs for single-family homes is
one. The number of EDUs for multifamily residences is determined by
the number of apartments in the building (i.e., a six-unit building will
be charged six EDUs).
C.
Commercial accounts.
The number of EDUs for commercial accounts shall be determined
by the following formula:
# EDUs = Water Usage (cubic feet)/10,000
(1)
Water usage is the metered water usage measured during the
previous fiscal year and as billed by the Water Department. All
EDUs for commercial accounts will be whole numbers. The
minimum number of EDUs for any commercial account is one. If
there is any fractional amount in the result of the abovementioned
formula, the number of billable EDUs for the account will be
rounded up to the next highest whole number (i.e., if the result is
12.25, the number of billable EDUs is 13).
(2)
D.
Mount Holyoke College.
The number of EDUs for Mount Holyoke College academic
buildings and dormitories shall be calculated as the greater result
of the following formulas:
# EDUs (Flow) = Water Usage (cubic feet)/10,000
# EDUs (Occupants) = Total # Students Living On Campus/4
(1)
Water usage is the metered water usage measured during the
previous fiscal year and as billed by the Water Department. If
there is any fractional amount in the result of the abovementioned
formulas, the result will be rounded up to the next highest whole
number.
(2)
E.
Industrial accounts.
The total number of EDUs for industrial accounts shall be
calculated by the following formula:
(1)
F.
§ 315-6.3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.3
1:528
§ 315-6.4. Sewer billing abatements.
§ 315-6.5. Sewer service connections and maintenance.
# Ind. EDUs = # EDUs (Proc.) x [0.35 + (0.0016) x Avg. BOD +
(0.001) x Avg. TSS] + # EDUs (San.)
Where:
# EDUs (Proc.) = Metered Water Discharged (gallons)/74,810
#EDUs (San.) = # Employees x 25 (gallons/day) x 265 (days/
years)/74,810 (gallons/cubic feet)
Avg. BOD equals the average biological oxygen demand
measured in parts per million
Avg. TSS equals the average total suspended solids measured
in parts per million
If Avg. BOD is less than 250 parts per million, then Avg. BOD
in the abovementioned formula is 250.
If Avg. TSS is less than 250 parts per million, then Avg. TSS
in the abovementioned formula is 250.
Water usage is the metered water usage measured during the
previous fiscal year and as billed by the Water Department. BOD/
TSS data is also from the previous fiscal year.
(2)
Any requests for abatement, reclassification, or special allowance must
be in writing on the form provided on the back of the bill and submitted
to the Selectboard's Office, 116 Main Street, South Hadley, MA 01075,
within 30 days of the date of the billing.
A.
Abatements will be granted for the following reasons:
(1) Inaccurate number of units billed.
Water shutoff by Water Department. Documentation from the Water
Department must be submitted. No abatement will be granted for
partial discontinued use during a billing period.
(2)
B.
No abatements will be granted for alternative use of space or for
unoccupied units.
C.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any buried sewer (including public
sewers and private sewer services to a point immediately outside of the
buildings' foundations) or appurtenance thereof without obtaining an
approved road opening and trench permit, shown in Appendix A,72 from
the Department of Public Works.
A.
72.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Town offices. The road opening and sewer
connection permit form is also available on the Town website: www.southhadley.org.
§ 315-6.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.5
1:529
All repairs of existing sewer services and construction of new services
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the Department of
Public Works and as herein noted. No portion of any construction shall
be backfilled or otherwise covered until inspected by the authorized
agent of the Department of Public Works and written approval given
therefor. If the authorized agent deems the service improperly installed,
the necessary corrections will be made at the owner's expense. The
service will not be used until all corrections are made.
B.
The Department of Public Works shall charge an entrance fee for
the connection of the building sewer to the common sewer and an
inspection fee for new connections. The fees shall be as shown in
Appendix B.73
C.
No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain, which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sewer. Sump or cellar pumps
used for the control or relief of groundwater and/or drainage shall not
be discharged to the building sewer, either directly or indirectly, unless
approved by the Department of Public Works.
D.
All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from
hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property
disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the Department of Public Works.
E.
The Department of Public Works shall monitor the amount of gravel put
in the trench at the time of backfilling as well as proper compaction
(twelve-inch lift maximum). Gravel is to be of the same consistency
and depth as the road base in compliance with Town Highway
Specifications. A temporary patch will be installed when asphalt plants
are closed. Hot patch will be installed when plants are open. Final
patches shall be installed after a straight cut is made on the trench line.
F.
All sewer maintenance issues that occur within the sewer service, from
the connection at the main to the premises, are the responsibility of
the property owner. The Town is responsible for all problems that occur
within sewer mains. The periodic removal of tree roots from services
and the presence of grease are considered to be routine maintenance
and the responsibility of the property owner.
G.
If, in the sole judgment of the Department of Public Works, an existing
sewer service must be replaced, the Town will replace the portion of
the service from the main to the tree belt. The owner is responsible for
replacing the portion of the service from the tree belt into the building.
H.
Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants that are being
I.
73.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town offices.
§ 315-6.5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.5
1:530
§ 315-6.6. New sewer services.
§ 315-6.7. Construction of sewer services.
discharged into the sewer shall notify the Department of Public Works
at least 45 days prior to the proposed addition or change.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: 1) for residential
and commercial service, and 2) for service to establishments producing
industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall file a
road opening and trench permit and pay all applicable fees prior to
any construction. The permit application shall be supplemented by
any plans (stamped by a professional engineer or not), specifications,
or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the
Department of Public Works. The applicant is responsible for the cost
of any supplemental material. Industrial users are directed to the
requirements of § 315-6.11 of this regulation.
A.
The applicant is responsible for the construction of the building sewer
from the sewer main to the building. All costs and expenses for the
installation of the building sewer shall be borne by the applicant or
property owner.
B.
All construction shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Department of Public Works and as herein noted. No portion of the
construction shall be backfilled or otherwise covered until inspected by
the authorized agent of the Department of Public Works and written
approval given thereof.
C.
The Department of Public Works shall charge a sewer entrance fee
for the connection of the building sewer to the Town sewer main and
an inspection fee for new connections. The fees shall be as shown in
Appendix B.74
D.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building except where one building stands at the rear of another on
an interior lot and, in the sole judgment of the Department of Public
Works, it is not feasible to install a separate sewer to the back building.
In this case, the sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer.
E.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new building
sewers only when they are found, on examination and test by the
Department of Public Works, to meet all requirements of these rules
and regulations.
F.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe,
jointing, testing, and back filling the trench, shall all conform to the
A.
74.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town offices.
§ 315-6.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.7
1:531
§ 315-6.8. Use of public sewers.
requirements of the State Plumbing Code, as applicable, the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM, and
WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9, and the requirements of the
Department of Public Works.
(1) Pipe shall be a minimum of four inches.
Pipe material shall be made of cast iron, ductile iron, or SDR35
plastic pipe, or other material approved by the Department of
Public Works; all materials must be of sufficient strength for the
particular installation, as determined by the Department of Public
Works.
(2)
(3) Pipe joints shall be factory-made rubber gasket, push-on joints.
All building sewers shall be laid straight to line and grade with a
minimum pitch of 1/4 inch per foot.
(4)
All building sewers shall be carefully bedded in suitable material
and backfilled to prevent damage.
(5)
(6) All pipe, joints, and connections shall be watertight and gastight.
All connections to the sewer main shall be done with an approved
saddle-type connection in compliance with the Department of
Public Work's guidelines. Connections to the sewer main will be
perpendicular to the main or angled so the sewage is discharged
with the flow in the main.
(7)
All materials must be approved by the Department of Public Works
prior to installation.
(8)
An accessible backwater valve shall be installed on all new building
sewers.
(9)
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the DPW
when the building sewer is ready for inspection. The connection
shall be made under the supervision of a representative of the DPW.
(10)
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building
at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any
building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such a building drain shall be lifted by an
approved means and discharged to the building sewer.
B.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters
to any sanitary sewer without prior approval.
A.
§ 315-6.7 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.8
1:532
Stormwater and all other unpolluted waters and drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm
sewers; or to a natural outlet approved by the Department of Public
Works. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, on approval by the Department of Public Works, to a storm
sewer or natural outlet.
B.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers, whether or
not they are subject to categorical standards or any other federal, state
or local pretreatment standards or requirements:
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
(1)
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases, heat or any other pollutant, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants in such flow and/or concentration either singly or by
interaction with other wastes which will cause interference or passthrough
as defined in § 315-6.2 or constitute a hazard to humans
or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. This shall include
but is not limited to heat in such quantities that the temperature at
the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40° C. (104° F.).
(2)
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or more than
12.0, or having any other corrosive property which will cause
corrosive structural damage to the POTW or collection system.
(3)
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference
with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not
limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood,
paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups,
milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(4)
Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup
flashpoint of less than 140° F. or 60° C. using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(5)
Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass-through.
(6)
Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
(7)
Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the Town of South Hadley.
(8)
C.
§ 315-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.8
1:533
Pollutants in excess of local industrial pretreatment limits designed
to protect the treatment works from pass-through or interference,
protect receiving water quality and sludge quality, protect against
treatment inhibition and to protect worker health and safety as
required and approved by USEPA.
The local limits are as follows:
Cadmium 0.028 mg/l
Copper 1.620 mg/l
Lead 2.130 mg/l
Mercury 0.016 mg/l
Titanium 11.160 mg/l
Toluene 2.040 mg/l
Heptachlor 0.003 mg/l
TSS 1,500 mg/l
pH 5.5 to 9.5 S.U.
(a)
All of the local limits, with the exception of TSS, are maximum
daily average concentrations. The value for TSS is a maximum
daily grab concentration, and pH is an instantaneous grab
value.
(b)
(9)
The discharge of any material that meets the criteria for
"hazardous waste" by any state or federal definition.
(10)
Effective May 1, 2009, industrial discharges in the State of
Massachusetts shall not have more than 1 part per billion (ppb)
of mercury. In the event a duly established local mercury limit
is applicable to an indirect discharger to the POTW, the most
stringent standard shall apply.
(11)
In addition to the prohibitions set forth in Subsection C above, the
following substances shall not be discharged to the common sewers
without prior approval from the Selectboard in conformance with the
requirements of 40 CFR 403.18 (Modifications of POTW Pretreatment
Programs). Such approval shall be specified as requirements of an
individual user discharge permit. No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters,
or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the Selectboard that
such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process,
or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance.
In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
Selectboard will give consideration to such factors as the sewers,
materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment
process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability
of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors.
D.
§ 315-6.8 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.8
1:534
The substances which shall not be discharged to the common
sewers without prior approval of the Selectboard are as follows:
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 104° F.
at the point of discharge.
(a)
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l of containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32° F. and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.).
(b)
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The
installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped
with a motor of 3/4 horsepower (0.76 ph metric) or greater
shall be subject to the review and approval of the Department
of Public Works.
(c)
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling
wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized
or not.
(d)
Any waters or wastes containing phenols, or other taste- or
odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding
limits which may be established by the Selectboard as
necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of the State Division of Water Pollution
Control.
(e)
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Selectboard in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
(f)
Any waters or wastes having a pH of less than 5.0 or more than
12.0 in the building sewer.
(g)
Materials which exert or cause:
[1] Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids.
[2] Excessive discoloration.
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements.
[3]
[4] Unusual volume of flow.
(h)
Waters or wastes containing cyanides in excess of two mg/l as
CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer or of one
mg/l as CN after dilution by the minimum flow in the common
sewer.
(i)
Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other
(j)
(1)
§ 315-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.8
1:535
wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard
to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or
repair.
Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the Town
in a wastewater discharge permit.
(k)
Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances in
quantities which might cause excessive foaming at the POTW.
(l)
Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this subsection
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could
be discharged to the POTW.
(2)
Action by Selectboard.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in
Subsection D of this section, and which in the judgment of the
Selectboard may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
process, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create
a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Selectboard
may:
(a) Reject the wastes;
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers;
(b)
Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or
(c)
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges.
(d)
(1)
If the Selectboard permits the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design of the plans and installation of the
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Selectboard and subject to the requirements of all applicable
codes, bylaws, regulations, and laws.
(2)
E.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion
of the Selectboard, they are necessary for proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the
Selectboard, shall comply with the Town's fats, oils, and grease rules
and regulations for food service establishments if applicable, and be
located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Units
shall be maintained at the owner's expense. Units operated by food
F.
§ 315-6.8 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.8
1:536
service establishments shall be inspected, cleaned and maintained in
accordance with all of the requirements specified in the Town's fats,
oils, and grease rules and regulations for food service establishments.
The Superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on that person's property and at that person's
expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure
equalization of flow. An individual wastewater discharge permit or
a general permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. Where
preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any
wasters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
G.
When required by the Selectboard, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable
control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling,
and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the Selectboard. The manhole shall be installed
by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as
to be safe and accessible at all times.
H.
Measurements, tests and analyses.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in these rules and
regulations shall be determined in accordance with the procedures
approved by EPA and specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
amendments thereto, unless otherwise specified in a pretreatment
standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the
EPA determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical
techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed by using validated
analytical methods.
(1)
Samples shall be collected at the control manhole provided; if no
special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be
considered the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to
the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall
be carried out by methods determined by the Department of Public
Works to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
(2)
I.
Hauled wastewater. Hauled wastewater may be accepted upon
approval by the Superintendent only at specified locations, during
normal POTW business hours, and such discharge shall be overseen by
plant personnel.
J.
§ 315-6.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.8
1:537
§ 315-6.9. Power and authority of inspectors.
Septic tank wastewater shall not be contaminated with any other
material that would violate any condition of these rules and
regulations.
(1)
Industrial wastewaters are subject to all requirements of these
rules and regulations. Generators may be required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit, provide analytical data on material
prior to acceptance, and provide appropriate legal waste tracking
forms for each load to be accepted. The Superintendent may
require samples be taken of any load to ensure compliance with
any applicable standards, and may prohibit the disposal of hauled
wastewater.
(2)
Hauled wastewater shall be subject to a fee as shown in Appendix
I and as periodically adjusted by the Selectboard.75
(3)
No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing
any special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength
or character may be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to
payment therefor by the industrial concern, and subject to compliance
with applicable federal and/or state discharge standards and
limitations.
K.
The Selectboard and other duly authorized employees and
representatives of the Town shall be permitted to enter all properties
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling,
and testing in accordance with the provisions of these rules and
regulations.
A.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in Subsection A above, the Selectboard or duly authorized employees
and representatives of the Town shall observe all safety rules applicable
to the premises established by the company.
B.
The Selectboard and other duly authorized employees of the Town
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
Town holds a duly negotiated easement for the purpose of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
C.
The POTW Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of
the Town shall be permitted ready access at all reasonable times to
all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, observation,
D.
75.Editor's Note: Appendix I is on file in the Town offices.
§ 315-6.8 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.9
1:538
§ 315-6.10. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
measurement, sampling, testing, and records examination, in the
performance of their duties in accordance with the provisions of these
rules and regulations. Records shall also be available for copying.
The Town shall have the right to set up on the user's property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into their premises, the User shall make
necessary arrangements with their security guards so that on
presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the Town will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities.
Unreasonable delays in allowing the Superintendent access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of these regulations.
E.
Whenever, on the basis of information available to it, the Town, acting
through the Selectboard or its designees, determines that any user is
in violation of any section of these regulations, including any condition
or limitation required by a permit issued under these regulations, the
Town may take any or all of the following actions:
(1) Issue a notice of violation; or
(2) Publish notice of violation publicly; or
Issue an order requiring the user to comply with such section
or requirement by a specified date (administrative order or
compliance order); or
(3)
Issue an order requiring the user to appear before the Selectboard;
explain its noncompliance and show cause why more severe
enforcement actions against the user should not be taken (showcause
order); or
(4)
Revoke any permit issued to the user by the Town under these
regulations; or
(5)
(6) Deny service to or disconnect the user; or
Bring a civil action in accordance with Subsection D of this section;
or
(7)
(8) Seek criminal action as provided by law; or
Assess a noncompliance fee as specified under the approved
enforcement response plan; or
(9)
Take any other action available to it under federal, state or local
laws, rules or regulations.
(10)
A.
§ 315-6.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.10
1:539
§ 315-6.11. Industrial wastes.
Whenever, on the basis of information available to it, the Town, acting
through the Selectboard or its designees, determines that a discharge
presents an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, the Town shall, after informal notice to the user, take action to
halt or prevent the discharge immediately and effectively. Such action
may include, but is not limited to, any or all of the following: taking
steps to disconnect the user from the public sewer or bringing a civil
action for injunctive or other relief as set forth in Subsection D of this
section.
B.
Whenever, on the basis of information available to it, the Town, acting
through the Selectboard or its designees, determines that a discharge
presents or may present an endangerment to the environment or
threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW or cause passthrough,
the Town shall, after notice to the user giving the user an
opportunity to respond as set forth in the notice, take action to halt or
prevent the discharge. Such action may include, but is not limited to,
any or all of the following: taking steps to disconnect the user from the
public sewer or bringing a civil action for injunctive or other relief as
set forth in Subsection D of this section.
C.
The Town may bring a civil action for appropriate relief to enforce these
regulations, including any requirement of a permit or order issued
hereunder, in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such relief may include,
but is not limited to, any or all of the following: a permanent or
temporary injunction; the imposition of penalties; or the recovery of
expenses as set forth in Subsection F of this section.
D.
Any person who violates any provision of these regulations or any
order or permit issued hereunder, or who knowingly makes any false
representation in an application, record, report or plan, or falsifies,
tampers with or renders inaccurate a monitoring device or method
required by any regulation, order or permit issued hereunder: (1) shall
be punished by a criminal fine of not more than $5,000 for each day
such violation continues or by imprisonment for not more than one year,
or both; (2) shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000 per
day of such violation, which may be assessed in any action brought on
behalf of the Town in a court of competent jurisdiction.
E.
Any person who violates these regulations shall be liable for any
expense incurred by the Town as a result of such violation, including,
but not limited to, any or all of the following: costs; attorney's fees; loss;
penalties; or damages.
F.
Nothing in these regulations shall prevent the Town from pursuing
other legal or equitable rights or remedies which may be available to it
under federal, state or local law, rules or regulations.
G.
§ 315-6.10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.11
1:540
The Selectboard is authorized to enter into agreements, issue permits,
or to make other arrangements for handling and treating industrial
wastes which, in its opinion, are amenable to treatment in the Town's
POTW.
A.
When the Selectboard determines that a user meets the criteria for a
significant industrial user, or is contributing to the POTW any of the
substances enumerated under § 315-6.8 in such amounts as to interfere
with the operation of the POTW or otherwise inhibit the achievement of
the objectives of these rules and regulations, the Selectboard shall: (1)
advise the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW; and (2)
develop effluent limitation(s) for such user to correct the interference
with, inhibition of, etc., the POTW. This type of user shall then be
considered an "industrial user" and will be subject to an industrial
wastewater discharge permit or special agreement with the
Selectboard.
B.
Federal categorical pretreatment standards. All users in a designated
industrial category must comply with the Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standards found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N,
Parts 405 through 471. As noted in § 315-6.8 of these rules and
regulations, the Selectboard shall limit any specific pollutant
discharges where such limitation is considered in the best interest of
the Town in properly maintaining and operating the POTW. Upon the
promulgation of a Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard in 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405 through 471, for a particular
industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than
limitations imposed under these rules and regulations, shall
immediately supersede the limitations imposed under these rules and
regulations. All users subject to Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards will be required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge
permit as per § 315-6.12 of these rules and regulations. The
Selectboard shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR 403.12.
C.
State pretreatment standards. All users must comply with any
applicable state standards, statutes or laws pertaining to pretreatment
requirements and use of public sewers.
D.
Local limits. The Town shall establish local limits pursuant to 40 CFR
403.5 to protect against pass-through and interference. Pollutants may
be controlled by the development of discharge limits and/or by
establishing best management practices.
E.
Dilution prohibition. No user shall increase the use of process water
in an attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute
for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any
other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the Town or state unless
expressly authorized to do so by the applicable standard or limitation.
F.
§ 315-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.11
1:541
Accidental discharges. Each user shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or slug discharges of other
substances as regulated by these rules and regulations. Facilities to
prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided
and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. The
Board may require that plans showing facilities and operating
procedures be submitted for review and approval prior to the
construction of the facilities. In the case of an accidental discharge
or slug loading, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume,
and corrective action being taken.
Written notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge,
or slug loading, the user shall submit to the POTW Superintendent
a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as
a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to
person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of
any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by
this section or other applicable law.
(1)
Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees
whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers
shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such
accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
(2)
G.
Slug discharge control plans.
The Superintendent shall evaluate whether each SIU needs a slug
discharge control plan or other action to control slug discharges.
The Superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan or take such other action
that may be necessary to control slug discharges. Alternatively,
the Superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. A slug
discharge control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following:
Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(a)
(b) Description of stored chemicals;
Procedures for immediately notifying the appropriate Town
personnel of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by
Subsection G of this section; and
(c)
Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited
(d)
(1)
H.
§ 315-6.11 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.11
1:542
§ 315-6.12. Industrial sewer connections; wastewater discharge
permits.
to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and
transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations,
control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing
toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.
When a slug discharge plan is determined to be necessary, the
requirement shall be included in the discharge permit, and shall be
reviewed at minimum, as part of the permit renewal process.
(2)
Significant industrial users are required to notify the
Superintendent immediately of any changes at its facility affecting
the potential for a slug discharge.
(3)
The Superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge
during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points
of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams, and impose other conditions as may be necessary to protect
the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements
of this regulation.
I.
Industries discharging to the public sewers shall perform such flow
monitoring of their discharges as the Selectboard may require,
including installation, use, and maintenance of monitoring equipment,
keeping records, and reporting the results of such monitoring. Upon
request, such records shall be made available to the Selectboard and
to other agencies having jurisdiction over discharges to the receiving
waters.
J.
Industries that continuously measure the pH of the wastewater
discharge to the sewer shall maintain the pH of that wastewater within
the range specified in the industrial user's wastewater discharge
permit, except excursions from the range are allowed subject to the
following limitations:
The total time during which the pH values are outside the required
range of pH values shall not exceed seven hours and 26 minutes in
any calendar month; and
(1)
No individual excursion from the range shall exceed 60 minutes;
and
(2)
For purposes of this section, an "excursion" is an unintentional
and temporary incident in which the pH value of the discharge
wastewater exceeds the range specified in the industrial user's
wastewater discharge permit.
(3)
K.
§ 315-6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.12
1:543
Permit application, general. Any industry proposing to make a new
connection to the municipal sewerage system, any industry proposing
to utilize an existing connection for its wastewater discharge, and any
existing industry which substantially changes the volume or character
of pollutants in its discharge to the municipal system (whether or
not that industry has been issued an industrial wastewater discharge
permit) shall obtain and submit to the POTW Superintendent at least
45 days before the proposed date of discharge to a new connection
a completed industrial sewer connection/wastewater discharge
application, including application fee if required. The application shall
meet the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(A)(2).
A.
The POTW Superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the
industrial user and may require additional information including but
not limited to additional sampling and analysis, site inspections, etc.
After evaluations and acceptance of the data, a determination will be
made as to whether the industrial user will be issued an industrial
wastewater discharge permit subject to the terms and conditions
provided therein. All costs of sampling and analysis conducted in
connection with this determination, and the fee for issuance of the
industrial wastewater discharge permit, will be borne by the industry.
This fee is separate from any sewer connection fee or any other fees
that may apply.
B.
Existing industrial users. Existing industries discharging to the
municipal sewerage system, that are required to obtain an industrial
wastewater discharge permit, will be notified. The industry must pay
all associated fees within 60 days after the effective date of this
amendment to the rules and regulations.
C.
Permit modifications.
An individual wastewater discharge permit may be modified for
good cause, including significant alterations or additions to the
user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or
characteristics, POTW issues, changes in local, state or federal
pretreatment standards or requirements, or other as determined
necessary by the Superintendent.
(1)
Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the industrial wastewater discharge
permit of industrial users subject to such standards shall be revised
to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by such standard. In addition, the affected industrial
user shall submit to the POTW Superintendent, within 180 days
after the effective date of an applicable Federal Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the following information in accordance
with 40 CFR 403.12 of the general pretreatment regulations:
Initial (baseline) report. This report shall include all
information specified in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii)(A)(2), which
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 315-6.12 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.12
1:544
includes identifying information; listing of environmental
permits; description of operations; flow measurements of
regulated and nonregulated waste streams; measurements of
pollutants; compliance schedules for any additional
pretreatment and/or O&M required to meet pretreatment
standards; and certification by a qualified professional
regarding compliance with applicable standards and the need
for additional pretreatment.
Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M
will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, a
timetable outlining increments of progress leading to
compliance will be submitted. The completion date in this
schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The
compliance schedule will be subject to the approval of the
Board. The user shall follow the procedure outlined in 40 CFR
403.12(b) and (c). The user shall also submit periodic progress
reports within 14 days of a milestone or final compliance date
in the compliance schedule.
(b)
(c) Final report on compliance. See § 315-6.14B.
Further, when an industrial user proposes to modify an existing
discharge permit occurring in compliance with an industrial
wastewater discharge permit, such that the volume and/or
concentration of the discharge will be increased, or the
constituents modified, the industrial user shall request a permit
modification and shall furnish all necessary supporting information
to the POTW Superintendent.
(3)
Signatory and certification requirements. Any and all required
industrial user reports required under any local, state or federal
pretreatment standard or requirement shall include the following
certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR 403.12 and shall be
signed by a responsible corporate officer, a general partner or
proprietor or a duly authorized representative as defined in § 315-6.2 of
these rules and regulations.
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with
a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather
and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the
person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
E.
§ 315-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.12
1:545
Annual certification for nonsignificant categorical industrial users. A
facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user by
the Department of Public Works must annually submit the following
certification statement signed in accordance with the signatory
requirements in the definition of "authorized or duly authorized
representative of the user" in § 315-6.2 of this article. This certification
must accompany an alternative report required by the Superintendent:
"Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible
for managing compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment Standards
under 40 CFR __________________________, I certify, to the best of my
knowledge and belief, that during the period from _________, _____ to
_________, _____ [months, days, year]:
(a) The facility described as ________________________ [facility name]
met the definition of a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
as described in Subsection (3) of the definition of "significant
industrial user" in § 315-6.2 of the Sewer Department
Regulations; [Note: See 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2)]
(b) The facility complied with all applicable Pretreatment Standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
(c) The facility never discharged more than 100 gallons of total
categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting
period.
This compliance certification is based on the following information.
"
F.
Permit conditions. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of these rules and regulations, and
any amendments thereto, and all other applicable regulations, user
charges and fees established by the Town. Permits shall include such
conditions as are deemed necessary to prevent pass-through and
interference, protect the POTW's receiving water, facilitate sludge
management and disposal, protect worker health and safety, and
protect against damage to the publicly owned treatment works. Permits
may contain the following:
The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer.
(1)
Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards. Numerical limits may be
imposed on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
and characteristics.
(2)
Effluent limits, including best management practices, on average
and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization.
(3)
G.
§ 315-6.12 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.12
1:546
Any grant for a monitoring waiver by the Superintendent shall be
included as a condition of the user's permit.
(4)
Requirements for design, installation, and maintenance of
monitoring and sampling facilities.
(5)
Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests, best management practices to be monitored,
and reporting schedules.
(6)
Requirements for resampling, including federally mandated
requirements for categorically controlled industries to resample
and submit analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of a
violation of a categorical limit.
(7)
Standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedules; such schedules may not extend the time for compliance
beyond that required by any applicable local, state or federal law.
(8)
Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined to be
necessary.
(9)
Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Town to ensure
compliance with these rules and regulations, and state and federal
laws, rules, and regulations.
(10)
Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a periods of less than
a year and may be stated to expire on a specific date. The industrial
user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to
the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions
of the permit may be subject to modification by the Town during the
term of the permit as federal, state or local pretreatment limitations
or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The industrial
user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least
30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new
conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
H.
Permit transfer. Industrial wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific industrial user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge
permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner,
new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation, except
under the following conditions. Any succeeding owner or user must
apply to the POTW Superintendent for a new or modified industrial
wastewater discharge permit, or request a permit transfer a minimum
of 45 days in advance. Such request shall include a written certification
by the new owner or operator stating that there are no immediate
plans to change the facility's operations or processes, identify a specific
transfer date, and acknowledge full responsibility for complying with
I.
§ 315-6.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.12
1:547
§ 315-6.13. Waste received from other jurisdictions.
the existing permit. Failure to apply or request a transfer renders the
permit void as of the date of facility transfer.
Revocation of permit. The Superintendent may revoke a permit for good
cause, including but not limited to the following:
Failure to notify of significant changes to the wastewater prior to
changed discharge;
(1)
Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts and/
or data in the application;
(2)
(3) Falsifying reports or certifications;
(4) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
Refusal to allow (Superintendent) timely access to facility premises
or records;
(5)
(6) Failure to pay fines or sewer charge.
J.
If another municipality contributes wastewater to the POTW, the
Selectboard shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the
contributing municipality to ensure that discharges from other entities
outside of its jurisdictional boundaries are regulated to the same extent
as those within. Prior to entering into such an agreement, the
Selectboard shall request the following information:
A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality;
(1)
An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are discharging to the POTW, specifying
commercial and industrial; and
(2)
(3) Such other information as the Selectboard may deem necessary.
A.
An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection A above, shall
contain the following standard conditions:
A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised
user inventory on at least an annual basis;
(1)
Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the
POTW;
(2)
Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
discharge;
(3)
A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms
of the intermunicipal agreement;
(4)
B.
§ 315-6.12 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.13
1:548
§ 315-6.14. Reporting requirements for permittee.
A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer
use regulation, bylaw, or ordinance that is at least as stringent as
this regulation.
(5)
An intermunicipal agreement, as required by Subsection A above, shall
also contain the following standard conditions pertaining to commercial
and industrial discharges:
Commercial and industrial wastewater from a user located in a
contributing municipality shall meet the requirements of these
regulations and the South Hadley industrial pretreatment program;
(1)
If a user located in a contributing municipality meets the criteria
for a significant or categorical Industrial USER, that municipality
shall develop an industrial pretreatment program in accordance
with federal regulations. If such a program is developed, South
Hadley shall have the right to inspect industrial users, and to
review and approve industrial pretreatment limits for those users;
(2)
A provision specifying which pretreatment implementation
activities, including individual wastewater discharge permit
issuance, inspection and sampling, and enforcement, will be
conducted by the contributing municipality; which of these
activities will be conducted by the Superintendent; and which of
these activities will be conducted jointly by the contributing
municipality and the Superintendent;
(3)
A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide (the
Superintendent) with access to all information that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment
activities;
(4)
A provision ensuring the Superintendent has access to the user's
facilities located within the contributing municipality's
jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling,
and any other duties deemed necessary by the Superintendent; and
(5)
A provision to allow South Hadley the right to take action to
enforce the terms of the contributing municipality's regulation,
bylaw, or ordinance or to impose and enforce pretreatment
standards and requirements directly against dischargers in the
event the contributing jurisdiction is unable or unwilling to take
such action.
(6)
C.
Baseline monitoring reports. Within either 180 days after the effective
date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative
decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4),
whichever is later, existing categorical and nonsignificant categorical
industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to
the POTW shall submit to the Superintendent a report which contains
A.
§ 315-6.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.14
1:549
the information listed in Subsection B below. At least 90 days prior
to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that
become categorical industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of
an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the Superintendent
a report which contains the information listed in Subsection B below.
A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to
use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall
give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged. The users described above shall submit the information set
forth in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1) through (7). Sampling and analysis shall
be performed in accordance with the requirements set forth in 40 CFR
136.
Final compliance date report (categorical standards). Within 90 days
following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment
standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement
of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user
subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of
all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are
limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average
and maximum daily flow for these process units in the industrial user's
facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or
requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is
necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be
signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and
certified to be a qualified professional. This report shall contain the
signatory requirements established in the definition of "authorized or
duly authorized representative of the user" in § 315-6.2 of this article.
B.
Periodic compliance (self-monitoring) reports. Any significant industrial
user or any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the
compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a
new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall
submit to the Superintendent twice annually, unless required more
frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Superintendent,
a self-monitoring report (in accord with the format and instructions
issued by the Superintendent) indicating the nature and concentration
of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment
standards, and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
flows for the reporting period.
C.
Sampling. All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities
shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working
order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility
in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that
D.
§ 315-6.14 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.14
1:550
sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. If a user subject
to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any regulated
pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than
required by the Superintendent, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in the report as specified in 40 CFR 403.12(g)(6).
Except as indicated in Subsection D(2) and (3) below, the user
must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flowproportional
composite sampling techniques, unless timeproportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by
the Superintendent. Where time-proportional composite sampling
or grab sampling is authorized, the samples must be representative
of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate
preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA
guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-fourhour
period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited
in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and
grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved EPA
methodologies may be authorized by the Town, as appropriate. In
addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with
instantaneous limits.
(1)
Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained
using grab collection techniques.
(2)
For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and
ninety-day compliance reports required in 40 CFR 403.12(b) and
(d), a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic
compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not
exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available,
the Superintendent may authorize a lower minimum. For the
reports required by 40 CFR 403.12(e) and 403.12(h), the industrial
user is required to collect the number of grab samples necessary
to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(3)
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the Superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis
and submit the results of the repeat analysis within 30 days after
becoming aware of the violation. Resampling by the industrial user
is not required if the Town performs sampling at the user's facility
at least once a month, or if the Town performs sampling at the
user between the time when the initial sampling was conducted
and the time when the user or the Town receives the results of this
(4)
§ 315-6.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.14
1:551
sampling, or if the Town has performed the sampling and analysis
in lieu of the industrial user.
In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a
best management practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative,
the user must submit documentation required by the Superintendent or
pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of
the user.
E.
Dates on which self-monitoring reports are to be submitted to the
Superintendent will be noted on the user's industrial wastewater
discharge permit. These reports shall contain the signatory and
certification requirements established in the definition of "authorized or
duly authorized representative of the user" in § 315-6.2 of this article.
F.
A facility determined to be a nonsignificant categorical industrial user
by the Superintendent pursuant to Subsection (3) of the definition of
"significant industrial user" in § 315-6.2 of this article must annually
submit the signed certification statement as specified in 40 CFR
403.3(v)(2).
G.
Recordkeeping requirements. Users subject to the reporting
requirements of this regulation shall retain, and make available for
inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant
to any monitoring activities under these regulations, any additional
records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements, and
documentation associated with best management practices established
under these regulations. These records shall remain available for a
period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically
extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the
Town, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the Town.
H.
Hazardous waste reporting. Industrial users shall notify the Town, the
EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the Town's
wastewater treatment system of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261 pursuant
to 40 CFR 403.12(p). This provision does not create a right to discharge
any substance not otherwise permitted for discharge by this regulation,
a permit issued hereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
I.
Pretreatment. Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with these rules and regulations and shall achieve
compliance with all Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards within
the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment
regulations. Any facility required to pretreat wastewater to a level
acceptable to the Selectboard shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to
J.
§ 315-6.14 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.14
1:552
the Selectboard for review, and shall be approved by the Board before
construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating
procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable
to the Board under the provisions of these rules and regulations. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the Board prior to
the user's initiation of the changes.
Pretreatment violations publication. The Town shall annually publish
in a newspaper of general circulation that provides meaningful public
notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW a list of the users
which were in significant noncompliance, as defined in § 315-6.2, with
applicable pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during
the 12 previous months.
K.
Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from
reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, any type of
individual wastewater discharge permits, small commercial discharge
authorizations and monitoring programs, and from the
Superintendent's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available
to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests,
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Superintendent,
that the release of such information would divulge information,
processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted
at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested
and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information
should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately
upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES
program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings
involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents
and characteristics and other effluent data, as defined at 40 CFR 2.302,
shall not be recognized as confidential information and shall be
available to the public without restriction.
L.
Charges and fees.
To provide for the recovery of the costs from industrial users
of the Town's POTW for the implementation of the industrial
pretreatment program established herein, the Town may adopt
charges and fees as follows:
(a) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
(b)
(c) Fees for permit applications;
(1)
M.
§ 315-6.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.14
1:553
Charges to cover the cost of consultant services required to
carry out the review of specific applications for industrial
wastewater discharges;
(d)
Fees for consistent removal (at the POTW) of pollutants
otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards;
(e)
Other fees as the Town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
(f)
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by the industrial
pretreatment program and are separate from all other fees
chargeable by the Town, such as sewer entrance fees, sewer user
charge fees, etc.
(2)
§ 315-6.14 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 315-6.14
1:554
Chapter 335
LIBRARY TRUSTEES
§ 315-6.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-6.14
1:555

ARTICLE I
Organization
§ 335-1. Name and authorization.
This organization shall be called "The Board of Library Trustees of the
South Hadley Public Library," (hereafter referred to as the "Board"),
existing by virtue of the provisions of MGL c. 78, §§ 10 through 13 and 21,
and exercising the powers and authority and assuming the responsibilities
delegated to it under said statute.
§ 335-2. Trustees.
§ 335-3. Officers.
The Board shall consist of nine members, three of whom shall be
elected at each annual Town election for a term of three years. Prior
to assuming the position of Trustee, newly elected members must take
and subscribe to the official statutory oath prescribed by the General
Code of Massachusetts.
A.
Any member of the Board may resign by written notice filed with the
Chair and the Town Selectboard. The Town Selectboard, in consultation
with the Board, shall fill any vacancy, regardless of cause, for the
unexpired term of the vacancy.
B.
Any member who fails to attend three consecutive regular monthly
meetings without a valid excuse will be contacted by the Chair in
writing and then by phone. The Chair will encourage the member to
show interest in the Board by faithfully attending meetings in the future
or to submit his or her resignation from the Board.
C.
The officers of the Board shall consist of a Chair, Vice-Chair and a
Secretary. In accordance with laws of the commonwealth, the Treasurer
of the community shall fill the position of Treasurer.
A.
The officers shall be nominated and elected by the Board at the first
meeting following the annual Town election. They shall hold office until
after the next annual Town election, and until their successors are
elected.
B.
Duties of the Chair:
(1) To preside at all meetings of the Board.
(2) To call and preside over special meetings of the Board.
To make decisions for the Board which are not in conflict with
parliamentary rules of order. A majority vote of the Board can
override the Chair's decision.
(3)
C.
§ 335-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-3
1:557
§ 335-4. Committees.
§ 335-5. Meetings.
To create committees to pursue the work of the Board and to
serve as an ex-officio member of each. Appointed sub-quorum
committees are subject to the Open Meetings Law.
(4)
To prepare an annual report on the library's status for inclusion in
the overall Annual Town Report prepared for the citizenry.
(5)
Duties of the Vice-Chair:
(1) To perform the duties of the Chair at his or her request or absence.
D.
Duties of the Secretary:
(1) To keep true and accurate records of all Board meetings.
To ensure posting of all regular and special meeting agendas on the
Town website.
(2)
To ensure posting of all regular and special meeting minutes on the
Town website.
(3)
E.
Committees will only have advisory power unless action has been
previously approved by a majority vote of the Board. Appointed subquorum
exploratory and/or advisory committees are subject to the
Open Meetings Law. Informal gatherings of non-appointed and nonadvisory
sub-quorum numbers of Trustees are not subject to the Open
Meetings Law.
A.
A committee or advisory group shall be considered discharged upon
completion of the work for which it was appointed and after the final
report has been made to the Board.
B.
Regular meetings. Regular meetings shall be held the first Monday
of each calendar month (except July and August) at 7:00 p.m. in the
Trustees' Meeting Room at the South Hadley Public Library or such
other time or place as the Board may determine. Notice of regular
meetings and corresponding agendas should be posted on the Town
website at least 48 hours prior to the meeting schedule, Sundays and
legal holidays excluded.
A.
Special meetings may be called by the Chair or any two members
of the Board, provided that written or oral notice is received by all
Trustees at least 48 hours before that scheduled meeting. Notice of all
special meetings must be posted on the Town website at least 48 hours
prior to the meeting or as soon as possible after the Trustees have
been notified. Notice shall include the reason for requesting the special
meeting.
B.
§ 335-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 335-5
1:558
§ 335-6. Amendments.
Amendments to these bylaws may be proposed at any meeting. Vote on the
amendment will follow at the next regular meeting and will require a simple
majority for passage.
§ 335-7. Orientation.
Copies of these bylaws will be provided to all members of the Board.
The Chair, in concert with the Director, will conduct orientation sessions
for newly elected Trustees to ensure their familiarity with the bylaws.
This orientation may include a brief discussion of library operations and
parliamentary procedures most commonly used during Board proceedings.
A quorum for transaction of business at any meeting shall consist of
at least five Trustees. A vote of Trustees present at a meeting shall be
sufficient to approve outstanding bills, provided they are covered by the
budget.
C.
The Open Meetings Law (MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25) shall apply to
all meetings of the Board. It states that all meetings shall be open to
the public unless held under executive session under terms of the law.
Minutes of all meetings will be retained at the library and on the Town
website, available for public perusal.
D.
If parliamentary procedure is called for by the Chair, then Robert's
Rules of Order as prescribed in Parliamentary Procedure At A Glance,
New Edition by O. Garfield Jones will be used.
E.
The order of business shall consist of:
(1) Call to order.
(2) Approval of minutes of previous meeting(s).
(3) Disposition of bills.
(4) Correspondence.
(5) Acknowledge visitors.
(6) Public comments.
(7) Committee reports.
(8) Director's report.
(9) Unfinished business.
(10)New business.
(11)Adjournment.
F.
§ 335-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-7
1:559

ARTICLE II
Duties and Responsibilities
§ 335-8. Authority and jurisdiction.
The Board is the governing body of the South Hadley Public Library. As
such, the Board has legal responsibility for the custody and management of
the library and its property; for the appointment of its Director; for securing
adequate funding; and for determining library policies. The leadership and
direction provided by the Board have a major impact on the effectiveness
of library services to the community. To ensure this effectiveness, the Board
must operate from a perspective that is objective and broad. It must refrain
from involving itself in the internal operations of the library.
§ 335-9. Board duties and responsibilities.
The Board shall:
Employ a Library Director who is qualified to direct and manage library
services; advises the Board on library matters; and administers policies
without direct Board involvement and consistent with Town of South
Hadley policies.
A.
Participate with the Director in the development of goals, objectives
and long-range plans to enhance the library's service to the community.
B.
Establish written policies to facilitate management of the library by
the Director. Policies will cover, but not be limited to, such areas as
personnel management consistent with Town of South Hadley collective
bargaining agreements, material selections, and public use of the
library facilities.
C.
Establish written policies for governing the Director's job performance
and encourage the Town of South Hadley Human Resource Officer to
periodically re-evaluate the Director's job classification and description
of duties.
D.
Ensure adequate funding for the operation of the library by presenting
and defending budgets before the appropriate Town officials at
designated times.
E.
Represent the library before municipal boards and other official groups
as required.
F.
G. Establish rules governing Board meetings.
Adopt a Code of Ethics demanding integrity, honor and commitment in
performance of the duties of library Trustees as outlined in Article III.
H.
Conduct an annual inspection of the building and grounds to determine
if repairs or corrective measures are warranted.
I.
J. Evaluate the performance of the Director on an annual basis.
§ 335-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-9
1:561
§ 335-10. Trustees duties and responsibilities.
Trustees shall:
The Board may, for purposes of improving the service of said library,
enter into an agreement with the Board of any neighboring library,
network or state agency to pay for services in common; such payments
to be shared in accordance with the terms of such agreement.
K.
A. Attend and participate actively in all Board meetings.
Demonstrate an appreciation of and commitment to library services of
the highest quality.
B.
Recognize the importance of the library as a center of information,
recreation, education, programming, and service to the community.
C.
Recognize and respect the distinction between the roles of the Director
and the Board, particularly in matters of material selection, personnel
appointment and supervision; and budget management and
expenditures.
D.
Delegate operating details, administration, implementation of policy
and the general running of the library to the Library Director.
E.
Recognize that no individuals have the authority to make decisions or
act for the Board unless specifically authorized to do so by official vote
of the Board.
F.
Recognize that no individual, including the Chair, may levy demands or
requirements upon the Director or staff members without the expressed
approval of the Board.
G.
Refrain from making public statements designed to circumvent the
decisions of the Board. Accept majority rule graciously.
H.
Adhere faithfully to the South Hadley Public Library Board of Trustee
Code of Ethics and the Code of Ethics of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
I.
Endorse the American Library Association Code of Ethics for
Librarians.
J.
§ 335-9 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 335-10
1:562
ARTICLE III
Code of Ethics
§ 335-11. Standards.
The goal of the South Hadley Public Library is to serve the needs of
the community to aid and encourage formal and informal education by
providing appropriate and relevant access to programming, services and
materials. This code has been prepared to provide guidelines for the
Trustees to observe, thereby avoiding ethical pitfalls that might compromise
achieving this goal.
Trustees, in performance of their duties providing a high level of library
service, must observe ethical standards with absolute truth, integrity
and honor.
A.
B. Trustees must promote just and equitable library service to all citizens.
Trustees must avoid situations in which personal interests or financial
gain might be derived from those situations.
C.
It is incumbent upon any Trustee to disqualify himself or herself
immediately whenever the appearance of a conflict of interest exists.
D.
Trustees' actions and statements must clearly distinguish between their
personal philosophies and attitudes and those of the institution; the
formal position of the Board should prevail.
E.
Trustees must uphold the principle of intellectual freedom and be
prepared to support to the fullest the efforts of the Director to resist
censorship of library materials by groups or individuals.
F.
Trustees must refrain from individual actions, statements, or comments
that might undermine the authority of the Director. Complaints
received from the staff or the public must be courteously referred to the
Director. If a member of the public is not satisfied with the actions of
the Director, a slot on the Board's agenda may be requested.
G.
Trustees are encouraged to participate in the activities of local, state
and national library agencies to the maximum extent possible.
H.
Trustees accepting appointment to the Board are expected to work
harmoniously with the Board, accepting the vote of the majority without
trying to dominate the Board or individual members.
I.
§ 335-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 335-11

Chapter 345
PLANNING BOARD
§ 345-1. Purpose.
These regulations and fee schedules have been adopted to produce more
consistent application requirements and a more equitable schedule of fees
which more accurately reflects the costs of technical and legal review of
applications to the Planning Board; to take advantage of the procedures
offered by MGL c. 44. § 53G; to establish a review procedure in the selection
of consultants; and to promote more informed decision-making by the
Planning Board.
§ 345-2. Application procedure.
A. Each revolving fund authorized for use by a Town department, board,
committee, agency or officer;
B. The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized
to spend from each fund;
C. The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the
department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with the
program or activity for which the fund is established that shall be
credited to each fund by the Town Accountant;
D. The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be
used;
E. Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
F. Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund; and
G. The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this bylaw.
Fund
Revenue
Source
Authority
to Spend
Funds
Use of
Funds Fiscal Years
Buttery
Brook Park1
Gifts and
donations
Selectboard Support and
maintenance
of Buttery
Brook Park
Fiscal Year
2020 and
subsequent
years
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to 5-8-2019 ATM, Art. 7, an expenditure limit for Buttery Brook
Park for 2020 was established in the amount of $20,000.
§ 65-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 345-2
65:2
§ 345-3. Application fees.
All applications to the Planning Board shall be accompanied by cash or
check payable to the Town of South Hadley in the amount specified in
Appendix D (South Hadley Planning Board Fee Schedule). The costs of
advertising the public hearing are to be paid by the applicant as set forth in
the Public Hearing Notices portion of the Fee Schedule in Appendix D. Said
Appendix D is attached and incorporated herein.2
A. Each application for review by the Planning Board shall be submitted to
the Planning Board, accompanied by two paper copies and one digital
copy of each complete application submittal (this shall include the
completed and signed applicable application form, related project
narrative, site plan, and other supporting materials). Each copy of the
submittal is to be properly collated prior to submittal. A copy of said
application shall be concurrently filed with the Town Clerk.
(1) In the case of an application for an Approval Not Required (ANR)
Plan, the applicant is to also submit two Mylar copies of the
proposed plan.
B. The date of receipt by the Town Clerk shall be considered the date on
which the application has been filed with the Planning Board.
C. The digital copy shall be in a format acceptable to the Town Planner/
Planning Director which will allow transmittal via email and posting on
the Town's website. Generally, the digital copy is to be in a portable
document format (PDF) unless the Town Planner/Planning Director
determines a different format is equally acceptable. The digital copy
may be submitted to the Town Planner/Planning Director via email the
same day on which the paper copies are submitted or contained on a
computer disk or external drive submitted with the paper copies.
D. The Planning Board reserves the right to require submittal of up to nine
additional paper copies of the application submittal (or portions
thereof) if the reviewing departments or Planning Board members
request such materials.
E. Modifications of application materials or subsequent supplemental
materials related to pending applications shall be submitted in the
same quantity and formats as the original application submittal.
F. Any project (other than an ANR Plan) proposed to be carried out within
the DEP Zone II or DEP Zone III of the Dry Brook Public Water Supply
Well is to include an assessment of the proposed development's impact
on the public drinking water supply.
G. For any application (other than for an ANR Plan) for a project proposed
to be carried out within the DEP Zone II or DEP Zone III of the Dry
Brook Public Water Supply Well, the applicant is to document that they
have consulted with the Board of Health. Fire District 2 Board of Water
Commissioners, and the Conservation Commission.
§ 345-2 REVOLVING FUNDS § 345-4
65:3
§ 345-4. Application review fees.
§ 345-5. Consultants.
A. In addition to those fees established in § 345-3 above the Planning
Board may impose a fee, pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 44, § 53G, Chapter 41, § 81Q, and Chapter 40A, § 9, for project
review on those applications which require, in the judgment of the
Planning Board, review by outside professional consultants due to the
size, scale or complexity of a proposed project, the project's potential
impacts, or because the Town lacks the necessary expertise to perform
the review work related to the permit or approval. In hiring outside
consultants, the Board may engage engineers, planners, lawyers,
designers, or other appropriate professionals able to assist the Board
and to ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances, bylaws
and regulations. Such assistance may include, but shall not be limited
to, analyzing an application, monitoring or inspecting a project or site
for compliance with the Board's decisions or regulations, or inspecting
a project during construction or implementation.
(1) If the Planning Board has previously determined that an application
review fee is to be required for a proposed application, the
application review fees shall be submitted at the time of the
submittal of the application for deposit in an account established
pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G. Any such application filed without
this fee shall be deemed incomplete and no review work shall
commence until the fee has been paid in full.
(2) If during the course of the Planning Board review of an application,
the Board determines that an outside review to be paid for by an
application review fee is necessary, the applicant shall submit the
application review fee within 14 calendar days of the Board's
determination.
B. The Planning Board, in collecting and expending said application
review fees, selecting the consultant, and all other matters related to its
utilization of the application review fees, shall be governed by §§ 345-5
through 345-11 below. The applicant's right to appeal said application
review fees is set out in § 345-13 below.
A. Professional expertise/consultants. In hiring outside professional
expertise and/or consultants, the Board may engage engineers,
planners, lawyers, urban designers, regional planning agencies or other
appropriate professionals who are qualified and capable of assisting the
Board in analyzing a project to ensure compliance with all relevant
laws, bylaws, and regulations.
B. Minimum qualifications. All consultants selected by the Board must
meet minimum qualifications consisting of:
2. Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Town offices.
§ 345-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 345-5
65:4
§ 345-6. Filing with Town Clerk.
The selection made by the Board shall be recorded with the office of the
Town Clerk within five business days of the Board's final selection(s).
§ 345-7. Deposit of funds; establishment of special account; use of
funds.
Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall be deposited with
the Town Treasurer, who shall establish a special account for this purpose.
§ 345-8. Amount of application review fees.
§ 345-9. Failure to pay.
Failure of an applicant to pay a review fee shall be deemed failure to
file a complete application and therefore the application shall be deemed
incomplete and either denied by the Board on those grounds, or shall not be
accepted.
(1) An educational degree in or related to, the field at issue, from a
recognized public or private college or university; or
(2) Three or more years of practice in the field at issue or a related
field.
A. Expenditures from fund. Expenditures from this special account may be
made at the direction of the Board without further appropriation.
Expenditures from this special account shall be made only in
connection with the review of a specific project or projects for which a
review fee has been, or will be, collected from the applicant.
B. Review fees may only be spent for services rendered in connection with
the specific project for which they were collected. These services shall
include, but are not necessarily limited to: project reviews, document
reviews, and project-related inspections. Accrued interest may also be
spent for this purpose.
C. If the outside consultant review begins and expenses are generated
prior to the filing of a formal administrative appeal, all such expenses,
up to the time of appeal, shall be paid out of the special account for that
particular project.
A. Minimum fees. The fee schedule of the Planning Board under
application review shall be adhered to in determining the review fee
required for the establishment of the special account.
B. Additional review fee. If review funds charges are insufficient to cover
the costs of outside professional expertise and/or consultant review, the
Board may require the applicant to pay an additional review fee to
cover these costs, provided these costs are reasonable and directly
related to the project undergoing review.
§ 345-5 REVOLVING FUNDS § 345-10
65:5
§ 345-10. Excess funds returned.
At the completion of the Board's review of a proposed project or at a time
determined by any statute, bylaw, or regulation to run from the submission
of the application/permit, including any constructive approval as certified
by the Town Clerk, or upon the withdrawal of said submission in writing,
any excess amount in the account, including interest, attributable to a
specific project shall be repaid to the applicant or the applicant's successor
in interest.
§ 345-11. Report of account.
A final report of the status of said account shall be made available to the
applicant or the applicant's successor in interest.
§ 345-12. Successor in interest.
For the purpose of this regulation, any person or entity claiming to be
an applicant's successor in interest shall provide the Board with
documentation that legally establishes this succession in interest, which
may be subject to review by Town Counsel.
§ 345-13. Appeals.
A. Method of appeal. Any applicant may take an administrative appeal
from the selection of the outside professional expert and/or consultant
to the Selectboard.
B. Grounds for appeal. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to
claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest or does not
possess the minimum required qualifications.
C. Seven days to file appeal. Any applicant aggrieved by a selection of an
outside consultant may appeal to the Selectboard provided that such
appeal is entered within seven calendar days after such selection has
been made as recorded in the office of the Clerk. An appeal will not be
considered valid unless it is formally filed with the office of the Town
Clerk with a copy given to the Selectboard.
D. Waiver of appeal. The applicant should notify the Planning Board of its
acceptance of the consultant and waiver of appeal at the earliest
possible time in the review and consultant selection process. The
Planning Board and staff reserve the right to take no action on an
application until the appeal period has run, unless a waiver of appeal is
filed.
E. Action on an appeal. In acting on an administrative appeal, the
Selectboard may determine that:
(1) A conflict of interest does exist, and/or the consultant does not
meet the minimum qualifications, therefore, the Planning Board
must select another consultant; or
§ 345-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 345-13
65:6
§ 345-14. Review period extended.
The required time limit for action upon an application by the Board shall be
extended by the duration of the administrative appeal, beginning from the
date of filing such appeal.
§ 345-15. Supplementary nature of regulations.
These general regulations are supplementary to other provisions of the
South Hadley Zoning Bylaw. South Hadley Subdivision Regulations, the
Special Permit Rules and Regulations, and the Site Plan Review Rules and
Regulations.
§ 345-16. Procedural history.

Chapter 350
RECREATION DEPARTMENT
§ 350-1. General provisions.
§ 350-2. Eligibility for youth sports.
§ 350-3. Age divisions for youth sports.
Mission statement. The mission of the Recreation Department is to
provide a wide range of recreational programs and activities through
the utilization of tax dollars and self-support.
A.
The Recreation Commission is a seven-member panel of South Hadley
residents that makes policy and advises the Recreation Director on
many different issues relating to recreation in the Town of South
Hadley. Members of the Recreation Commission are appointed by the
Selectboard for a three-year term of office. The Commission meets
monthly with the Recreation Director to accomplish its goals. Any
resident of the Town of South Hadley is encouraged and invited to
attend any of these meetings.
B.
These policies and procedures are intended to support the Recreation
Director in his/her everyday tasks. The Recreation Commission
reserves the right to rule on anything not specifically covered in this
document and/or vote to change/suspend a policy based on a specific
situation it will discuss.
C.
To play in a Recreation Department sponsored youth sports league,
participants must turn five years of age by the qualifying date to be a
kindergarten student in South Hadley. Currently, that date is August 31
as of the current school year.
A.
All participants must be able to furnish a copy of the child's birth
certificate if one is required and/or requested.
B.
Recreation sports are open to any child who resides in South Hadley or
attends South Hadley public schools.
C.
Children residing in neighboring communities may join a sports league,
provided their Town does not offer a comparable program and/or there
is a need for participants in a South Hadley league.
D.
Players are not permitted to play up a division for South Hadley
recreational sports leagues. The exceptions to this policy are if a coach
is needed in a specific division and/or the league need players to have
a team. South Hadley does not move players up based on size and/or
ability level unless that activity includes a posted evaluation or tryout.
A.
South Hadley recreational leagues are split up by grade, with age
minimums/maximums.
B.
§ 335-11 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 350-3
1:564
§ 350-4. Eligibility for summer programs.
§ 350-5. Eligibility for adult programs.
§ 350-6. Registration policies.
§ 350-7. Multiple sports within same season.
Most travel sports leagues have specific age/grade requirements that
must be followed; however, the Recreation Department can set more
stringent guidelines when appropriate.
C.
The age requirement for Recreation Department summer programs will
be set based on the focus and requirements of each specific program
and is specified in the Summer Program Guide.
A.
For programs with roster limitations, residents and school choice
students of South Hadley will be given the first opportunity to register
for programs if they register by the established deadline. After the
deadline, anybody can register for these programs until the programs
are full.
B.
Adult programs are open to any participant who is in good standing
with the Recreation Department and meets the age requirement of that
specific activity. "Good standing" refers to having all dues paid on time
and an individual who has not been suspended from another South
Hadley sports league.
A.
There will be nonresident fees associated with each event to be set by
the Director. These fees will be based on the total cost, popularity and
availability of the program.
B.
Any team that has more than three nonresidents on its roster at any
point during the season will fall into the nonresident fee category.
C.
Registrations shall be taken during the posted registration hours and
registration periods.
A.
Registration periods are typically advertised in the school newsletters,
the Town Reminder, on the Recreation Department website, local cable
access channel (TV-15), social media, local newspapers and on the
Recreation Office bulletin board.
B.
A parent/legal guardian must sign the registration form for anyone
under the age of 18.
C.
There will be a waiting list for anyone signing up after the posted
registration date if that sport or activity has reached full enrollment.
Additionally, if an activity reaches full enrollment when there is no
closing date (an activity with capped enrollment), then a waiting list will
be started. Participants will come off the waiting list on a first-come,
first-served basis.
D.
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-7
1:565
§ 350-8. Seasonal field/sport policy.
§ 350-9. Field usage.
§ 350-10. Registration fees.
Players are permitted to play for multiple Recreation Department
sports in the same season, provided tryouts are not required for either
team they are playing on. In the case where a sport has a tryout option,
that player will be permitted to play on the tryout team, provided they
make it onto the tryout team. If a tryout is not required and/or a player
does not make the tryout team, that player can then play in two sports
in the same season.
A.
Any player who registers and plays tackle football for the Recreation
Department will not be permitted to play another Recreation
Department sport during the Fall season due to the time demands.
B.
A. The Recreation Department will sponsor sports that are "in season."
If space is available and it is feasible for the Parks Department to
prepare the field, the Recreation Department will allow "out of season"
sports to compete; provided they meet the requirements as set forth by
the department and pay any applicable fees.
B.
Any outside group wishing to use a playing field must fill out the
necessary forms and receive written permission from the Recreation
Department.
A.
Recreation and School Department activities have the priority for field
use and scheduling.
B.
Any group wishing to use a school building must have permission from
the School Department through its facility use procedures.
C.
Any group not affiliated with the Recreation Department must pay a fee
for usage of the fields/athletic facilities. This fee has been set at $25 per
day the field is used. Additional fees may be charged as necessary to
cover staff expenses associated with that event.
D.
The Parks Department Superintendent, the School Athletic Director
and the Recreation Director will meet to determine the opening and
closing dates for Town fields. The Parks Department Superintendent
has the ultimate authority over when to open or close the fields due to
inclement weather.
E.
The Recreation Director and/or Recreation Commission will set the
registration fees based on the cost for each program and the needs of
the Recreation Department.
A.
§ 350-7 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 350-10
1:566
§ 350-11. Financial waiver policy.
§ 350-12. Staff and coaches.
§ 350-13. Coach selection.
Financial waivers are available for those who need financial assistance.
The criteria for receiving a financial waiver are listed under § 350-11,
Financial waiver policy.
B.
Any child who qualifies for free school lunch will have 100% of his or
her registration fee waived if he or she fills out the necessary form(s).
A.
Any child who qualifies for reduced school lunch will have 50% of his or
her registration fee waived if he or she fills out the necessary form(s).
Anyone meeting this qualification wishing for a 100% waiver must show
further specific hardship to be approved by the Recreation Director.
B.
Payment plans are available for those requesting one. Payment must be
completed before the season begins.
C.
Anyone not meeting the aforementioned qualifications who would still
like to apply for a financial waiver must appeal to the Recreation
Director. Guidelines that will be used in this situation will be recent job
loss, disability or other similar financial hardship.
D.
All staff, volunteers and coaches will be selected by the Recreation
Director.
A.
All staff, volunteers and coaches must receive a CORI check as
Massachusetts law dictates.
B.
It is highly recommended that all coaches become NYSCA (National
Youth Sports Coaches Association) certified and/or have a sport-specific
certification from a group like US Lacrosse, USA Football, etc.
C.
The Recreation Director may make it mandatory for certain members
of the staff, volunteers or coaches to have the following certifications
based on the demands of that program: CPR, first aid, concussion
(NFHS and/or CDC).
D.
The Recreation Director will set the wages for staff based on a study of
other communities and the approval of the Town Administrator.
E.
The Recreation Director will select the coaches for all Recreation
Department teams.
A.
The criteria used for selecting coaches will be their coaching and/or
playing experience, behavior, and knowledge of the game.
B.
Anyone who would like to appeal the selection of a coach by the
Recreation Director may bring his or her concerns to the Recreation
C.
§ 350-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-13
1:567
§ 350-14. CYO basketball policy.
Any participant of a CYO basketball team is not eligible for participation in
any winter Recreation Department basketball league.
§ 350-15. Tryout policies.
The following guidelines will be followed for the purpose of selecting team
members for Recreation Department tryout teams:
§ 350-16. Discipline.
Commission through written notification to both the Director and Chair
of the Recreation Commission.
An independent panel (selected by the Recreation Director) will be
utilized for any tryout where players will be "cut" from the team. The
coaches will not have any authority over selecting the team.
A.
The panel will be given criteria defined by the Recreation Department
to select players. Some of the criteria will be the player's skill, attitude,
hustle, position, coachability and the number of players on a team.
Grade, size and team role may also play a part in the decision-making
process.
B.
The prospective coaches of the team will be invited to view the tryouts.
The coaches will not be actively engaged in the tryout process or have
any interaction with the players or panel.
C.
The coaches may prepare a list of players they would select and submit
it to the panel for its consideration.
D.
The selection panel will have the final determination regarding the
players chosen for the team and will submit the list of players that were
chosen to the Recreation Department.
E.
The Recreation Department will e-mail the participants who attended
the tryouts, informing them of their status on the team by 9:00 p.m. on
the next available business day.
F.
Any player, coach, parent, spectator or official is subject to the
Recreation Department's Code of Conduct. It is the expectation of
both the Recreation Department and Recreation Commission that the
safety of all participants, coaches, spectators, officials and employees
be paramount. Deviations from this policy will not be permitted.
A.
If anyone is found to be in violation of the Code of Conduct, he or she
will be suspended by the Recreation Director. The length/severity of the
suspension will be based upon the severity of the offense, number of
previous offenses/behavior and any other mitigating factors.
B.
Suspensions may be appealed to the Recreation Commission. The
suspended individual must send a written request to the Recreation
C.
§ 350-13 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 350-16
1:568
§ 350-17. Code of Conduct.
§ 350-18. Alcohol policy at youth sports events.
Commission five days prior to its next meeting to request to be on the
Recreation Commission agenda. The suspended individual will be given
an opportunity to plead his or her case before the Commission and
will be subject to any questions the Commission may have. Following
this meeting, the Commission will determine if the suspension shall be
reduced or rescinded.
I will provide positive support and encouragement for any player,
coach, official, and employee when attending or participating in any
South Hadley Recreation Department activity.
A.
B. I will encourage good sportsmanship at any game or practice.
I will place the emotional and physical well-being of any participant
ahead of any desire to win.
C.
I will demand a sports environment that is free of drugs, tobacco and
alcohol and refrain from their use at all youth sports events.
D.
E. I will do my very best to make youth sports fun for any child.
I will insist that any event will be safe and healthy and I will not
be involved with any altercations (verbal or physical) with any other
parents, spectators, coaches or officials.
F.
I will not coach or yell instructions at players, coaches or officials from
the sidelines.
G.
I will use any social media in a respectful fashion when referring to
my Recreation Department team or activity. Name calling and threats
made to opposing players, teammates, coaches or officials will not be
tolerated and can result in suspension and/or removal from the team.
H.
Alcohol is not permitted at any Recreation Department youth sport
game or event. An "event" is defined as any mandatory team function
where youth players are in attendance. These include but are not
limited to practices, games, team dinners, fund-raisers, banquets and
post-season parties. Coaches and adults have a significant impact upon
the lives of young participants and consuming alcohol at team events
gives them the impression that drinking is acceptable in this
environment.
A.
Any person violating this policy will be removed or ejected from the
activity and will be subject to further disciplinary action from the
Recreation Commission. Any coach who consumes alcohol before or
during a team event will be removed from his or her coaching position
and may be suspended from coaching in the future.
B.
§ 350-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-18
1:569
§ 350-19. Bus trip policy.
Alcohol is permitted at Recreation Department youth sports fundraisers
where player participation is voluntary. An example of this is
a golf tournament benefiting a specific activity. While there may be
youth players in attendance, parents are aware that alcohol will be
consumed at this event and it is their choice to put their children in that
environment.
C.
Tickets for bus trips are provided on a first-come, first-paid basis. The
Recreation Director will set the release date for all tickets/events and
he/she may set a pre-sale date for South Hadley residents based on the
popularity of the program.
A.
Fees.
Deposits (50%) may be accepted for any trip; however, the full
balance must be paid 30 days prior to the trip or by the specific
date set at the time of registration.
(1)
(2) Nonresident fees will be charged at the discretion of the Director.
B.
Cancellation policy.
The Recreation Department may cancel the trip within seven days
of the trip due to lack of enrollment. Any trip may be cancelled at
any time due to weather, natural disaster, etc.
(1)
(2) Any registrant may request a full refund 21 days prior to the trip.
Any registrant requesting a full refund within 21 days of the trip
will only receive a refund if he or she can be replaced by people
on a waiting list or other interested parties. If he or she cannot be
replaced, he or she will not receive a refund and is responsible for
the tickets.
(3)
C.
Each registrant with more than one person attending the trip must
provide a group leader who is responsible for the group. Each group
leader must provide a list of attendees when they register for the trip
and any information that is required.
D.
All participants must act appropriately when they are on a Recreation
Department sponsored trip. Any person who violates this policy will
be barred from attending any future events. Inappropriate behavior
includes but is not limited to:
(1) Swearing, offensive remarks, etc.
(2) Fighting.
(3) Possession of narcotics.
(4) Smoking on the bus.
E.
§ 350-18 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 350-19
1:570
§ 350-20. Summer concerts.
Chapter 360
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 200.
Wetlands — See Ch. 240.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
Board of Health regulations — See Ch. 300.
Conservation Commission regulations — See
Ch. 305.
(5) Alcohol abuse and disruptive behavior.
In conjunction with the Village Commons, the Recreation Department
will run a concert series on the Town Common.
A.
The dates, times, and number of acts each year will be determined by
the Recreation Director and the Summer Concert Committee.
B.
The Director may appoint a committee to assist him/her with the
selection of bands, recruitment of sponsors and/or administration of the
concerts. Residents of the Town of South Hadley are encouraged to join
this volunteer committee.
C.
It is highly recommended that 1/2 of the acts have a direct connection
with the Town of South Hadley. This refers to current residents, alumni
of South Hadley High School, etc.
D.
The same act cannot play in two consecutive years unless there are
extenuating circumstances which are approved by the Recreation
Director.
E.
§ 350-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-20
1:571

ARTICLE I
General
§ 360-1. Authority.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of South
Hadley by MGL c. 41, § 81Q, as amended, and all subsequent amendments
thereto, said Board hereby adopts these Rules and Regulations Governing
the Subdivision of land in the Town of South Hadley under the Subdivision
Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG, inclusive, as amended.
§ 360-2. Purpose.
Pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 81M, these Rules and Regulations Governing the
Subdivision of Land in the Town of South Hadley have been enacted for the
purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants
of South Hadley by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in
subdivisions providing access to the several lots therein, but which have
not become public ways, and ensuring sanitary conditions in subdivisions
and ,in proper cases, parks and open areas. The powers of the Planning
Board and the Board of Appeals under the Subdivision Control Law shall be
exercised with due regard for:
§ 360-3. Subdivision compliance required.
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law of any land within the Town of South Hadley, or proceed with
the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of ways,
or installation of municipal services therein, unless and until a definitive
The provision of adequate access to all lots in a subdivision by ways that
will be safe and convenient for travel;
A.
B. Lessening congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways;
C. Reducing danger to life and limb in the adjacent public ways;
D. Securing safety in case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies;
Ensuring compliance with the Zoning Bylaws of the Town of South
Hadley;76
E.
Securing adequate provisions for water, sewerage, drainage,
underground utility services, streetlighting, fire and police equipment
in a subdivision;
F.
Coordinating the ways in a subdivision with each other and with the
public ways in the Town of South Hadley and with ways in neighboring
subdivisions.
G.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 360-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-3
1:573
plan of such subdivision has been submitted and approved by the Planning
Board as hereinafter provided.
§ 360-4. More than one building for dwelling purposes per lot.
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling
purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot in
the Town of South Hadley without consent of the Planning Board, and such
consent may be conditional upon the providing of adequate ways furnishing
access to each site for such building, in the same manner as otherwise
required for lots within a subdivision.
§ 360-5. Waiver of compliance.
§ 360-6. Amendments.
These rules and regulations or any portion thereof may be amended from
time to time in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81Q.
§ 360-7. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, paragraph, clause or provision of these rules
and regulations shall not invalidate any other section, paragraph, clause or
provision thereof.
§ 360-8. Coordination with municipal departments and other
agencies.
The Planning Board may, in special and appropriate cases, waive strict
compliance with such portions of these rules and regulations as
provided for in MGL c. 41, § 81R, where such action is in the public
interest and not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the
Subdivision Control Law.
A.
A request for a waiver of a requirement, rule or regulation shall be
made by the applicant in writing at the time of the filing of the definitive
plan. Such request shall fully set forth the reasons for the waiver.
B.
If the Planning Board approves the request for a waiver, it shall endorse
conditions of such waiver (if any) on the plan or set them forth in a
separate instrument attached to and referenced on the plan, which
shall be deemed a part of the plan.
C.
In the Town of South Hadley, certain utility services provided to
subdivisions are under the jurisdiction of various Town departments
and other quasi-public agencies, namely:
Sanitary sewerage and storm drainage systems: Board of
Selectmen, Department of Public Works Superintendent (DPW
Superintendent) or his designee. Hereinafter, the term "DPW
Superintendent" includes "or his designee."
(1)
A.
§ 360-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-8
1:574
§ 360-9. Effect of prior recording of subdivision plan.
The recording of a plan of land within the Town of South Hadley in the
Hampshire County Registry of Deeds prior to the effective date of the
Subdivision Control Law in the Town, (February 8, 1954), showing the
division thereof into existing or proposed lots, sites or other divisions and
ways furnishing access thereto, shall not exempt such land from the
application and operation of these rules and regulations except as
specifically exempt by MGL c. 41, § 81FF of the Subdivision Control Law.
Water supply and distribution system: Board of Water
Commissioners from either Fire District No. 1 or No. 2.
(2)
(3) Supply of electricity: the South Hadley Electric Light Department.
Compliance with the applicable regulations and requirements of these
aforementioned agencies and departments shall be required before a
plan is approved by the Board, and certification of performance relative
to the proper construction and installation of the respective utilities
shall be required before the performance guarantee can be reduced or
released.
B.
§ 360-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-9
1:575

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 360-10. Terms defined.
For the purposes of these rules and regulations, unless a contrary intention
clearly appears, the terms and words defined in MGL c. 41, § 81L shall have
the meanings given herein. If a term is not defined and is not a commonly
used term, then the definition in the State Building Code will apply. In
addition, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings:
APPLICANT — May be either the owner of the land stated in the application
for subdivision or all the owners where title is held jointly, in common, or
in tenancy by the entirety, including corporations. An agent, representative,
or his assigns may act for an owner, provided written evidence of such fact
is submitted. Evidence in the form of a list of its officers and designated
authority to sign legal documents shall be required for a corporation.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of South Hadley.
DEVELOPMENT IMPACT STATEMENT (DIS) — A documented, written
analysis of a proposed subdivision which provides the Planning Board and
its agents with information necessary for plan review. Prepared by the
applicant, a DIS shall follow the format presented in the appendixes of this
document.77
LOT — An area of land in one ownership, with definite boundaries, used or
available for use as the site of one or more buildings.
OWNER — The owner of record as shown by the records in the Hampshire
County Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
PLAN, DEFINITIVE — A proposed plan of a subdivision submitted by the
applicant to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or Land Court when
approved by the Planning Board.
PLAN, FINAL — A proposed plan showing more than one building to be
used for dwelling purposes per building lot, to be approved by the Planning
Board as a prerequisite to obtaining building permits.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A plan of a subdivision submitted by the applicant
showing sufficient information to form a clear basis for discussion and
clarification of its general contents and for the preparation of a definitive
plan.
SUBDIVISION —
The division of a tract of land into two or more lots and shall include
resubdivision, and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the
process of subdivision or the land or territory subdivided.
A.
77.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-10
1:577
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW — MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive,
entitled "Subdivision Control," as last amended.
TYPE "A" SUBDIVISIONS — A subdivision for single-family residential
purpose only.
TYPE "B" SUBDIVISIONS — A subdivision for apartments, business or
industrial purposes.
The division of a tract of land into two or more lots shall not be deemed
to constitute a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law under any of the following conditions:
At the time when the subdivision is made, every lot within the tract
so divided has frontage on:
Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is then required
by the Zoning Bylaws of the Town of South Hadley for erection
of a building on such lot, and if no distance is so required, such
frontage shall be at least 20 feet.78
A public way or a way which the Clerk of the Town of South
Hadley certifies is maintained and used as a public way;
(a)
A way shown on a plan previously approved and endorsed in
accordance with the Subdivision Control Law; or
(b)
A way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became
effective in the Town of South Hadley having, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and
adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular
traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting
thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal
services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be
erected thereon.
(c)
(1)
Conveyances or other instruments adding to, taking away from, or
changing the size and shape of lots in such a manner as not to leave
any lot so affected without the frontage above set forth.
(2)
The division of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were
standing when the Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the
Town of South Hadley in which the land lies into separate lots, on
each of which one of such buildings remains standing.
(3)
B.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 360-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-10
1:578
ARTICLE III
Submission and Endorsement of Non-Subdivision Plans (Plans
Believed Not to Require Approval)
§ 360-11. General.
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or
to be filed with the Land Court a plan of land in the Town of South Hadley,
who believes that his plan does not require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law, may submit his plan as hereinafter provided to the Planning
Board for such determination.
§ 360-12. Submission.
§ 360-13. Contents.
The plan shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer and/or land
surveyor and shall be clearly and legibly drawn with waterproof ink upon
tracing cloth or Mylar at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet.
The plan shall contain the following information:
The applicant shall submit to the Planning Board two original Mylars
and two prints of the plan accompanied by an application Form A (see
appendix79), together with any necessary evidence to show that the plan
does not require approval.
A.
The applicant may submit a non-subdivision plan to the Planning Board
office during working hours, or to the Planning Board either by delivery
at a regular or special meeting of said Board, or by delivery or
registered mail, postage prepaid, in care of the Town Clerk. In either
case, written notice (a copy of Form A) shall be filed, by delivery or
registered mail, postage prepaid, with the Town Clerk, stating the date
of submission for such determinations. If the notice is given by delivery,
the Town Clerk shall, if requested, give a written receipt therefor.
B.
Receipt by the Planning Board or date of mailing of such notice, plans
and necessary documentation as may be required in these rules and
regulations shall constitute the effective date of submission.
C.
True North arrow, date, scale, legend and title, "Subdivision Approval
Not Required."
A.
The names and addresses of the owners of record, the applicant, and
the civil engineer and/or land surveyor and official seal(s).
B.
Location, names, lines and widths of all existing streets, with distances
and bearings, and any common or public areas.
C.
79.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-13
1:579
§ 360-14. Endorsement.
Location, distances and bearings and purpose of all easements, both
existing and proposed, within and adjacent to the land in question.
D.
The plan shall show boundary lines, distances and bearings of all lots,
sites or divisions, lot areas in square feet, with all lots designated
numerically and in sequence.
E.
Location of all monuments, properly described and identified as to
whether existing or proposed.
F.
Suitable space to record the action of the Planning Board and the
signature of members.
G.
A locus plan at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet showing the exact
location of the plan of land in relation to two or more existing streets.
H.
I. Location of all existing structures on the plan of land.
The names of all abutters as determined from the most recent tax list,
and book and page from the Registry of Deeds.
J.
If the Planning Board determines that the plan does not require
approval, it shall, forthwith, without a public hearing endorse on the
plan the words "APPROVAL UNDER THE SUBDIVISION CONTROL
LAW NOT REQUIRED," with the appropriate name(s) of the Planning
Board member(s) signed thereto. After such endorsement, the applicant
shall file, forthwith, one print of such endorsement with the Planning
Board.
A.
If the Planning Board determines that in its opinion the plan requires
approval under the Subdivision Control Law, it shall, within 21 days of
submission, give written notice of its determination to the Town Clerk
and applicant and return the plan to the applicant.
B.
If the Board fails to act upon a submitted plan within 21 days after its
submission, it shall be deemed to have determined that approval under
the Subdivision Control Law is not required.
C.
§ 360-13 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-14
1:580
ARTICLE IV
Submission and Approval of Preliminary Plans
§ 360-15. General.
A preliminary plan of a subdivision should be submitted by the subdivider
to the Planning Board, Board of Health, and Water District for approval.
The submission of such a preliminary plan will enable the subdivider, the
Planning Board, and other municipal agencies and owners of property
abutting the subdivision to discuss and clarify the problems of such
subdivision before a definitive plan is prepared. Therefore, it is strongly
recommended that a preliminary plan be filed in every case. In accordance
with MGL c. 41, § 81S, in the case of a nonresidential subdivision, any
person, before submitting a definitive plan for approval, shall submit to the
Planning Board and the Board of Health a preliminary plan.
§ 360-16. Submission.
§ 360-17. Contents.
The preliminary plan may be drawn in pencil on tracing paper, preferably at
a scale of one inch equals 40 feet on a sheet size of 24 inches by 36 inches,
and shall show at least the following information:
If the applicant decides to or is required to submit a preliminary plan,
he shall submit nine prints of his plan and application Form B (see
appendix80) to the Planning Board, accompanied by a fee for handling,
in accordance with the Fee Schedule (see appendix), together with all
other information and documentation as required in these rules and
regulations. The applicant should simultaneously file one print with
the Board of Health and the Water District along with other necessary
information and documentation.
A.
The applicant may submit a preliminary plan to the Planning Board
office during working hours, or to the Planning Board either by delivery
at a regular or special meeting of said Board, or by delivery or
registered mail, postage prepaid, in care of the Town Clerk. In either
case, written notice (a copy of Form B) shall be filed, by delivery, or
registered mail, postage prepaid, with the Town Clerk, stating the date
of submission for such approval. If the notice is given by delivery, the
Town Clerk shall, if requested, give a written receipt therefor.
B.
Receipt by the Planning Board or date of mailing of such notice, plans
and such documentation as may be required in these rules and
regulations shall constitute the effective date of submission.
C.
The subdivision name, boundaries, zoning district, true North arrow,
date, scale, legend and title "Preliminary Plan."
A.
80.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-17
1:581
§ 360-18. Action on preliminary plan.
The names and addresses of the owners of record, the applicant and the
registered civil engineer and/or land surveyor.
B.
The names of all abutters as determined from the most recent tax list,
and book and page from the Registry of Deeds.
C.
Existing and proposed lines of streets, rights-of-way, easements and any
public or common areas within the subdivision.
D.
E. Location, names and present widths of adjacent streets.
Location of natural waterways and water bodies within and adjacent to
the subdivision.
F.
Boundary lines of all proposed lots, with approximate dimensions and
lot areas in square feet.
G.
H. The existing and proposed topography in a general manner.
Proposed storm drainage and sanitary sewerage systems, including
location, size, direction of flow of existing and proposed sewers,
culverts, and storm drains, in a general manner.
I.
J. Proposed water systems, in a general manner.
Profiles of proposed streets, on a horizontal scale of one inch equals 40
feet and a vertical scale of one inch equals four feet, showing existing
and proposed grades along the center lines.
K.
A sketch plan of the applicant's contiguous unsubdivided land, showing
possible or contemplated development and street layout.
L.
After submission, the preliminary plan will be reviewed by the Planning
Board, Board of Health and other municipal agencies and departments
to determine whether it is in compliance with the design standards
as set forth in these rules and regulations and with additional
requirements of other municipal agencies and departments.
A.
Within 45 days after submission of the preliminary plan, both the
Planning Board and the Board of Health shall approve, or approve with
modifications suggested by the Board or agreed upon by the applicant,
or disapprove said preliminary plan, and in the case of disapproval, the
Board shall state in detail the reasons for its disapproval.
B.
The Planning Board shall file a certificate of its action with the Town
Clerk, and shall send notice of its action by certified mail to the
applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act upon a preliminary plan
within 45 days after submission shall be deemed to constitute approval
of such plan.
C.
Except as is otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of the
Subdivision Control Law relating to a definitive plan shall not be
D.
§ 360-17 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-18
1:582
applicable to a preliminary plan, and no Register of Deeds shall record
a preliminary plan. Furthermore, approval of a preliminary plan does
not, in any way, constitute such approval so as to authorize the owner
to proceed with construction of streets or other work in the subdivision.
§ 360-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-18
1:583

ARTICLE V
Submission and Approval of Definitive Plans
§ 360-19. General.
§ 360-20. Submission.
A definitive plan of a subdivision must be submitted to the Planning
Board, Board of Health and Water District for approval.
A.
A definitive plan shall be governed by the Subdivision Regulations in
effect at the time of submission of such plan or in effect at the time
of submission of a preliminary plan, provided that a definitive plan
evolved therefrom shall have been submitted to the Planning Board
within seven months from the date of submission of the preliminary
plan.
B.
A definitive plan shall also be governed by the zoning in effect at the
time of submission of such plan or a preliminary plan from which a
definitive plan evolved in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40A,
§ 6, as amended.
C.
The applicant shall submit the original Mylar and nine prints of the
plan, and application Form C (see appendix81). If the subdivision is
five lots or more or five acres or more, the applicant shall also submit
eight copies of a development impact statement (DIS) (see appendix)
to the Planning Board. The applicant shall also submit the application
for a sewer system extension or connection permit, when connecting
to the public sewer system is proposed, as well as submit calculations
for drainage to the Board. The Town Planner shall distribute copies
of the plans and the DIS to the: DPW Superintendent, Conservation
Commission, Building Commissioner, Electric Light Department, Tree
Warden, Fire Chief, Police Chief and Planning Board. The applicant
shall also submit one set of plans and a DIS to the Board of Health and
Water District.
A.
At the time of submission, a fee, in accordance with the Fee Schedule
(see appendix82), shall be paid by the applicant to cover costs of
handling, reviews and public hearings. Any additional expenses for
advertising, plans, surveys or inspections in excess of this amount shall
also be paid by the applicant.
B.
The applicant shall submit the definitive plan to the Planning Board
either by delivery or registered mail, postage prepaid, in care of the
Town Clerk.
C.
81.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
82.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-20
1:585
§ 360-21. Contents.
In either case, written notice (a copy of Form C) shall be filed, by
delivery or registered mail, postage prepaid, with the Town Clerk,
stating the date of submission for such approval. If the notice is given
by delivery, the Town Clerk shall, if requested, give a written receipt
therefor.
D.
Receipt by the Planning Board, or date of mailing of such notice,
plans and such documentation as may be required in these rules and
regulations shall constitute the effective date of submission.
E.
At the time of submission, the applicant shall have visibly staked out
and identified station points every 100 feet along the center line of
the proposed roadways that correspond to the stations set forth on the
definitive plan.
F.
The definitive plan shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer
and/or land surveyor and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black
waterproof ink on tracing cloth or Mylar. The plan shall be at a scale
of one inch equals 40 feet, unless otherwise specified by the Planning
Board, and of a sheet size not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches in
outside dimensions. If multiple sheets are used, they shall be
accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision, and all
plans, layouts, profiles, cross-sections and application shall be deemed
to constitute the definitive plan.
A.
The definitive plan shall contain the following information:
The subdivision name, boundaries, zoning district, true North
arrow, date, scale, legend and title "Definitive Plan."
(1)
The names and addresses of the owners of record, the applicant
and the registered civil engineer and/or land surveyor and official
seal(s).
(2)
The names of all abutters as determined from the most recent tax
list, and book and page from the Registry of Deeds.
(3)
Existing and proposed lines of streets, rights-of-way, lots,
easements and any public or common areas within the subdivision.
(Proposed names of new streets shall be shown in pencil until they
have been approved by the Planning Board.)
(4)
Location, names and present widths of adjacent streets,
approaching, or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
(5)
The location, dimensions, bearings and purpose of all existing or
proposed easements, within and abutting the subdivision.
(6)
Location of natural waterways and water bodies within and
adjacent to the subdivision.
(7)
B.
§ 360-20 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-21
1:586
Boundary lines, dimensions and bearings of all proposed lots, with
lot areas in square feet, and all lots numbered numerically and in
sequence. (Proposed street addresses shall be shown in pencil until
they have been approved by the Planning Board.)
(8)
Significant site features such as existing stone walls, fences,
buildings, wetlands, floodplains, large trees and rock outcroppings.
(9)
Sufficient data to determine readily the location, direction, width
and length of every street and way line, lot line and boundary line,
and to establish these lines on the ground.
(10)
Location of all permanent monuments and benchmarks, properly
identified as to whether existing or proposed. Bounds are required
at all intersections of street lines, angle points and changes in
curvature of street lines.
(11)
Suitable space to record the action of the Planning Board and the
signatures of the members of the Board.
(12)
A locus plan of the subdivision at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet
showing the exterior lines of proposed streets in the subdivision
and their exact location in relation to two or more existing streets,
and of such accuracy to register as close as possible with the oneinch-
equals-four-hundred-feet Town street map.
(13)
A sketch plan of the applicant's contiguous unsubdivided land,
showing possible or contemplated development and street layout.
(14)
Where a storm drainage line discharges into a brook, stream or
drainage area, a profile will be shown of the brook, stream or
drainage area to determine condition, and proposed method of
stabilization.
(15)
A topographic plan of the entire subdivision at two-foot contour
intervals showing existing (solid line) and proposed (broken line)
topography with proposed spot elevations at the intersection of all
proposed lot lines and other pertinent points to show the proposed
finished grading of the subdivision. Indicate the volume of earth to
be removed from the site.
(16)
A street layout plan on a separate sheet, 36 inches by 24 inches, for
each street in the subdivision showing exterior lines, roadway lines,
partial lot lines, curblines, intersection angles, points of tangency,
and radii of curves. Also included on the street layout plan shall
be location, size, type of construction, elevations and invert of all
pipes and conduits of the:
Water supply system, including wells, pumps, valves, stubs,
gates, hydrants, and similar equipment;
(a)
Storm drainage system, including manholes, culverts, catch
basins and appurtenant structures;
(b)
(17)
§ 360-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-21
1:587
Sanitary sewerage system, including manholes, pumps, septic
tanks and appurtenant equipment;
(c)
Electrical supply equipment, including poles, transformers,
primary and secondary cables, lighting fixtures and other
electrical equipment;
(d)
Other underground utility systems in the right-of-way, such as
gas, telephone and cable TV facilities.
(e)
A profile plan on the same sheet located directly below or above
and coordinated with the street layout plan indicating existing
profiles on the exterior lines (using lightweight lines) and proposed
profile on the center line (using heavyweight lines) of each
proposed street, at a maximum stationing of fifty-foot intervals,
and at a horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet and a vertical
scale of one inch equals four feet. All elevations shall refer to Town
datum. Profiles shall show existing and proposed street grades,
rates of gradient in percentages, ground elevations at center line
of each fifty-foot station, and intersecting streets and ways shall
be clearly indicated. The profile plan shall show vertical location
of existing and proposed storm drainage and sanitary sewer lines,
slopes and quantities and velocities of all storm and sanitary sewer
lines, invert and rim elevations of each manhole or catch basin
and such structures to be properly identified by number. (For
identification purposes, if necessary, water distribution system
shall be in blue, sanitary sewer lines in red, and storm drainage
system in orange colors.)
(18)
A typical cross-section for the full width of the proposed street shall
be shown in accordance with the "Typical Cross-Section" illustrated
in the appendix,83 showing foundation material, wearing surface,
crown and width of traveled way, curbing, grass strips, sidewalks,
utility locations, etc.
(19)
(20)Construction details for catch basins, manholes, endwalls, etc.
Proposed layout and design of any and all parks, pools, or similar
community improvements, including all water, drainage and
electrical layouts, if any, designed to service such community
improvements.
(21)
Where private, individual on-site sewage disposal systems are
proposed to serve lots in a subdivision, a feasibility report of the
proposed sanitary sewage systems shall be required. See § 360-22A
for further requirements and details.
(22)
(23)Any other pertinent information the Planning Board may request.
83.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-21 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-22
1:588
§ 360-22. Additional subdivision requirements.
Design plan of proposed on-site sanitary sewage system.
Where sewage disposal is to be by individual on-site sewage
disposal systems, the definitive plan shall be accompanied by a
design plan of the proposed sanitary sewage systems pursuant to
Title V of the State Sanitary Code, approved and signed by the
Board of Health.
(1)
The plan should take into consideration the following factors:
Results of percolation tests. Such tests shall be executed in
accordance with Regulation 14.2, Percolation Test Procedures,
of Article XI of the Massachusetts Sanitary Code and the
regulations of the South Hadley Board of Health (as amended).
(a)
A map showing locations of tests on each lot and other
pertinent data as deemed necessary.
(b)
Topographic and ground level conditions, natural drainage
patterns and flood heights of nearby waterways.
(c)
From subsurface investigation and analysis, a determination of
underlying soil characteristics, absorption qualities, maximum
groundwater elevations and distance to bedrock.
(d)
Location and dimensions of each proposed on-site sewage
disposal system, together with computations used in
determining sewage leaching fields.
(e)
An evaluation of the suitability of the proposed disposal
system(s) to function properly in the given lots, and any
modifications to the proposed system(s) or precautions that
may be necessary.
(f)
(2)
A.
Sewer extension permits.
Under the provisions of MGL c. 21, § 43, an application (Form
WPC-P-1) must be submitted by the Town to the Massachusetts
Water Resources Commission, Division of Water Pollution Control,
for a permit to allow construction of any sewer extensions of a
public sewerage system, including construction plans for pumping
stations, forced mains, siphons and other appurtenances (see
appendix84).
(1)
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to furnish the Planning
Board and Town Engineer, at time of submission of the definitive
plan, preferably with the preliminary plan, or plan for more than
one building for dwelling purposes per lot, with the necessary
(2)
B.
84.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-22
1:589
§ 360-23. Approval.
data, specifications and construction plans of the proposed sewer
extension project, as required on Form WPC-P-1, and said
application form shall be subsequently completed and signed by
the Selectmen for submittal to the Division of Water Pollution
Control.
Wetlands Protection Act.
In accordance with MGL c. 131, § 40, no person shall remove, fill,
dredge or alter any bank, beach, dune, flat, marsh, meadow or
swamp bordering on any existing creek, river, stream, pond, lake
or any land under said waters or subject to flooding without filing
written notice of intention to perform said work with the local
Conservation Commission and State Department of Environmental
Protection.
(1)
In order to determine if certain proposed subdivisions, or parts
thereof, are subject to the provisions of the Wetlands Protection
Act, the Planning Board will, where it deems necessary, submit a
copy of the definitive plan or plan for more than one building for
dwelling purposes per lot to the Conservation Commission.
(2)
The Conservation Commission shall, to the extent practicable, file a
report with the Planning Board not later than 45 days after receipt
of the plan stating that the proposed plan: 1) is not subject to
the provisions of the Wetlands Protection Act, or 2) the Wetlands
Protection Act applies to certain designated areas. In the event the
Conservation Commission indicates that the plan shall be governed
by said Act, the Planning Board shall include in its decision for
approval a condition that the applicant shall obtain approval from
the Conservation Commission prior to any construction activity in
the affected areas.
(3)
C.
Review by Board of Health as to suitability of the land.
At the time of filing of the definitive plan, the applicant shall
also file with the Board of Health one print of the definitive plan,
together with other necessary documentation and reports. The
Board of Health shall report to the Planning Board, in writing,
its approval or disapproval of said plan. If the Board of Health
disapproves said plan, it shall make specific findings as to which,
if any, of the lots shown on such plan cannot be used for building
sites without injury to the public health, and include such specific
findings and the reasons therefor in such report, and, where
possible, shall make recommendations for the adjustment thereof.
Any approval of the plan by the Planning Board shall only be given
on condition that the designated lots or land shall not be built
upon or served with any utilities such as septic tanks, cesspools,
and drainage without prior consent of the Board of Health. The
(1)
A.
§ 360-22 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-23
1:590
Planning Board shall endorse on the plan such conditions as set
forth by the Board of Health and the lots and land affected by such
conditions.
If a proposed subdivision is to be served by a municipal sewerage
system, the Board of Health shall have 45 days after the plan is
filed with its office to make a report, and failure to report shall be
deemed approval by the Board of Health.
(2)
All subdivisions shall connect to the Town sanitary sewerage
system where feasible and where this system is available, and
every lot not served by the Town sanitary sewerage system shall
have an adequate and approved sewage disposal system,
satisfactory to the Board of Health, in accordance with Article XI of
the State Sanitary Code.
(3)
All subdivisions shall connect to a public or quasi-public water
supply system where such a system is available and where feasible,
and every lot not served by a public system shall have an adequate
supply of potable water approved by the Board of Health. A
laboratory test of the water quality shall be required and submitted
to the Board of Health.
(4)
Public hearing.
Before approval, modification and approval, or disapproval of a
definitive plan is given, a public hearing shall be held by the
Planning Board. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, and of
the subject matter, sufficient for identification, shall be given by the
Planning Board at the expense of the applicant by advertisement
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of South Hadley
once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication being
not less than 14 days before the day of such hearing. A copy of said
notice shall be mailed to the applicant and to all owners of land
abutting upon the subdivision as appearing on the most recent tax
list; provided, however, that when the Planning Board is also the
special permit granting authority for a special permit applicable to
the plan, the Planning Board may hold the definitive plan public
hearing together with the public hearing required by MGL c. 40A,
§ 9 and allow for the publication of a single advertisement giving
notice of the consolidated hearing.
(1)
The applicant or his representative should be present at the
hearing.
(2)
B.
Approval, modification or disapproval.
Prior to action by the Planning Board on the definitive plan, a
joint meeting shall be held with the developer, Planning Board,
the DPW Superintendent, Conservation Commission, Building
Commissioner, Water Department, Electric Light Department, Fire
(1)
C.
§ 360-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-23
1:591
Chief, Tree Warden, and Board of Health to conduct a complete
review of the proposed improvements.
After the required hearing, but within 90 days, if a preliminary
subdivision plan was filed, or 135 days, if no preliminary
subdivision plan was filed, from the date of submission, the
Planning Board shall approve, modify and approve, or disapprove
the definitive plan. The action of the Planning Board in respect
to such plan shall be by vote, copies of which shall be certified
and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by registered mail to the
applicant.
(2)
If the Planning Board modifies or disapproves such plan, it shall
state with its vote the reasons for its actions.
(3)
Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original
drawing of the definitive plan by the signatures of a majority of
the Planning Board, but not until the statutory twenty-day appeal
period has elapsed following the filing of the certificate of the
action of the Planning Board with the Town Clerk, and said Clerk
has notified the Planning Board that no appeal has been filed, or if
an appeal has been taken, that a final decree has been entered by
the court sustaining the approval of the plan.
(4)
Endorsement.
An approved plan shall not be endorsed until after the mandatory
twenty-day appeal period has elapsed, and not until the applicant
has:
(a) Posted the necessary performance guarantee;
Made the necessary corrections on the plan, if conditional
approval was given, to the satisfaction of the Planning Board;
(b)
Delivered two originals (one for recording and one for the
Board's file) and two prints of the definitive plan if no
corrections to the same were necessary. Note: If corrections
were required, 10 prints shall be delivered;
(c)
(d) Paid the necessary street inspection fee to the Town Treasurer;
Caused to be executed in a form acceptable to the Town
Counsel all deeds of easements as shown on the plan and
submission of such deeds and documents to the Planning
Board; and
(e)
Paid the special municipal account review fee if required by the
Board.
(f)
(1)
Failure of the applicant to meet the above requirements shall be
full and sufficient reason to withhold endorsement. If the applicant
fails to submit the required performance guarantees, easements
(2)
D.
§ 360-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-23
1:592
and other documentations and the endorsement of the plan by
the Planning Board is delayed more than six months, the Planning
Board, on its own motion, shall exercise its power to modify, amend,
or rescind its approval of the subdivision plan or to require a
change in the plan as a condition of said plan retaining the status
of an approved plan.
Performance guarantee. Before endorsement of the Planning Board's
approval of the definitive plan or approval of a special permit for
condominium/cluster development, the applicant shall agree to
complete the required improvements as specified in Articles VII and
VIII of these regulations for all lots in the subdivision, and such
construction and installation shall be secured by one, or in part by one
and in part by the other, of the following two methods, (1) and (2),
which may be varied from time to time:
Approval with bond or surety. The applicant shall either file a
performance bond with surety, or file a bond without surety but
with other negotiable securities approved by the Town Counsel,
or a deposit of money in an amount determined by the Planning
Board to be sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the
required improvements, plus a contingency factor. Such bond shall
be approved as to form and manner of execution as shown on the
bond agreement, and such money, if deposited, shall be deposited
in a local bank in the joint names of the applicant and the Town of
South Hadley, and said deposit book shall remain in the trust of the
Town Treasurer (see Appendix, Form D85).
(1)
Approval with covenant.
Instead of filing a bond or depositing money, the applicant
may fulfill the performance guarantee requirements by filing a
covenant (see Appendix, Form E86) executed and duly recorded
by the owner of record, running with the land, that no lot in the
subdivision shall be sold and no building erected thereon until
the required improvements, in accordance with these rules and
regulations, are constructed and installed so as to adequately
serve the lots, and approved to the satisfaction of the Planning
Board as provided hereafter.
(a)
Such covenant shall be inscribed on the definitive plan or on
a separate document referred to on the plan, and recorded in
the Hampshire County Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
(b)
When improvements have been completed to the satisfaction
of the Planning Board, the Board will then authorize in writing,
on the appropriate form, a release of conditions for recording
(c)
(2)
E.
85.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
86.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-23
1:593
in the Registry of Deeds, and the conditions relating to such
lots shall terminate.
Completion time schedule.
Release of the performance guarantee, whether by bond, deposit
of money or covenant, as previously described herein, shall be
contingent upon the completion of such improvements as required
in these rules and regulations within one year of the date of such
bond, deposit of money, or covenant.
(1)
Upon written request from the applicant, the Planning Board may,
at its discretion, grant an extension of time, and such agreement
shall be executed and affixed to the bond or covenant.
(2)
In the case of a surety company bond, such an agreement shall
not be effective until the surety delivers to the Board a written
statement that the surety agrees to the proposed alteration of the
completion schedule and that such alteration shall not relieve or
affect the liability of the surety company.
(3)
In the case of a covenant, the Board may grant final approval of the
definitive plan conditional upon the completion of the construction
of all ways and installation of utilities within a specified time period
from the date of said covenant. Failure to complete such
improvements shall automatically rescind approval of the plan.
(4)
F.
Increase of performance guarantee.
If the specified subdivision improvements in accordance with
Articles VII and VIII of these regulations are not completed within
one year of the date of bond, deposit of money, or covenant, the
Planning Board may require an estimate of the costs of the
remaining work, change the amount of the performance guarantee
proportionately, and establish a new date for the completion of said
required improvements.
(1)
Failure of the developer to complete the improvements within said
one-year period, or any extension thereof, shall not relieve the
developer from his obligation to pay for increased costs for
completing the improvements in excess of his performance
guarantee.
(2)
G.
Recording of plan.
Within six months from the date of the Planning Board's
endorsement of the definitive plan, the applicant shall cause said
plan to be recorded in the Hampshire County Registry of Deeds
or the Land Court. If the applicant delays recording of such plan
beyond the six-month period, such plan shall not be accepted for
recording by the Registry of Deeds or Land Court unless and until
it has endorsed thereon or recorded herewith and referred thereon
(1)
H.
§ 360-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-23
1:594
§ 360-24. Release of performance guarantee.
a certificate of the Planning Board, or Town Clerk, dated within 30
days of such recording, that the approval has not been modified,
amended, or rescinded, nor the plan changed. Such certificate
shall, upon application, be made by the Planning Board or Town
Clerk unless the records of the Planning Board or Town Clerk
receiving the application show that there has been such
modification, amendment, rescission, or change.
Within 10 days after the definitive plan, as approved and endorsed,
has been recorded at the Hampshire County Registry of Deeds and,
in case of registered land, with the Recorder of the Land Court,
the applicant shall notify the Board in writing of the date of such
recording.
(2)
At the time of such recording, all public easements and covenants
shall be duly documented and originals thereof transmitted to the
Planning Board for filing with the Town Clerk.
(3)
Following receipt of notification of recording, the Planning Board
shall file one print with the Building Commissioner. In accordance
with the Subdivision Control Law, the Building Commissioner, if
approval with covenant is noted on or affixed to the plan, shall not
issue any permit for the construction of a building on any lot within
the subdivision without receipt from the Planning Board of a copy
of Form F or certified statement releasing the lot(s) in question.
(4)
Partial release. The subdivider may, upon partial completion and
installation of required improvements in a subdivision as specified in
Articles VII and VIII of these rules and regulations, the security for
the performance of which was given by bond, deposit of money, or
covenant, make formal application to the Planning Board for partial
release of his performance guarantee, provided that the main-line
sewer be televised prior to occupancy permit sign-off, if occupancy is
requested prior to subdivision completion, and in accordance with the
procedures set forth herein:
Bond or surety. The penal sum of any such bond, or the amount
of any deposit held may, from time to time, be reduced by the
Planning Board, upon formal application in the manner prescribed
herein, and the obligations of the parties thereto released by said
Board in whole or in part.
(1)
Covenant.
The subdivider may request a release of conditions (see
Appendix, Form F87) for designated lots where the required
improvements have been completed for said lots to 1/4 of the
(a)
(2)
A.
87.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-24
1:595
total lots in the subdivision or a minimum of 10, whichever is
larger; or 1/2 of the total number of lots.
A new plan of the portion to be subject to the covenant may be
required.
(b)
Procedures for full or partial release. Upon the completion of
construction and installation of required improvements in a subdivision,
the security for which was given by bond, deposit of money, or
covenant, the subdivider may request a release of conditions of the
performance guarantee by: 1) sending by registered mail or by delivery
to the Planning Board and Town Clerk a written statement that he
has completed the construction and installation of ways and utilities
covered by said performance guarantee in accordance with Articles
VII and VIII of these rules and regulations, 2) attaching to the written
statement a certificate of performance (see Appendix, Form G88)
prepared by a registered civil engineer and/or land surveyor, at the
applicant's expense, stating that the necessary streets, sewers, storm
drains, water lines, together with their appurtenances and all other
necessary requirements, have been constructed and installed as
specified in these rules and regulations and in accordance with the
approved plans. Requests for final release of conditions shall be
accompanied by an "as-built plan," as required in Article VIII.
B.
Approval of release.
Before the Planning Board will release the interest of the Town in a
performance guarantee, the Planning Board shall:
Obtain in writing from the DPW Superintendent a certificate
or statement that the roadway and all underground utilities
in the subdivision shall have passed one winter season, and
that all work required by these rules and regulations under
the jurisdiction of the Town has been inspected by him and
completed in each street or streets in the subdivision serving
the lots in question, including streets, storm drainage, bridges,
sewers, shoulders, sidewalks, curbs, etc., and that the method
of construction and materials used in the performance of such
work meet with his approval.
(a)
Obtain in writing a certificate from the appropriate Board of
Water Commissioners certifying that the water supply system
was installed in accordance with its rules and regulations.
(b)
Obtain in writing a certificate from the South Hadley Electric
Light Department that the electrical supply system was
installed in accordance with its rules and regulations.
(c)
(1)
C.
88.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-24 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-24
1:596
§ 360-25. Deviation from approved plan.
If the Planning Board determines that said construction or
installation has been completed satisfactorily, it shall release the
interest of the Town in such performance guarantee and return the
bond or deposit to the person who furnished the same, or release
the covenant by appropriate instrument, duly acknowledged, which
may be recorded. If the Planning Board determines after inspection
that said construction or installation has not been completed or
wherein said construction or installation fails to comply with these
rules and regulations, the Planning Board shall send by registered
mail to the applicant and to the Town Clerk the details wherein said
construction or installation fails to comply with its rules.
(2)
Upon failure of the Planning Board to act on such an application
for release of conditions within 45 days after the receipt of the
application by the Town Clerk, all obligations under the bond shall
cease and terminate by operation of law, and any deposit shall be
returned and any such covenant shall become void.
(3)
Any such bond may be enforced and any such deposit may be
applied by the Planning Board for the benefit of the Town of South
Hadley, as provided in MGL c. 41, § 81Y, upon failure of the
performance for which any such bond or deposit was given to
the extent of the reasonable cost to the Town of completing such
construction and installation.
(4)
After approval of any definitive plan, the location and width of ways
shown thereon, or any street or way subject to the Subdivision Control
Law, shall not be changed unless the plan is amended in accordance
with the provisions set forth in MGL c. 41, § 81W and approved by the
Planning Board.
A.
In the event the applicant desires to alter or change the grade of a
street, or the size, location or layout of a storm or sanitary line or
appurtenant structure, he shall.
Provide the Board with a written statement requesting such
alteration or change; and
(1)
Provide the Board with three prints of the original definitive plan,
with the proposed changes drawn on said prints in red.
(2)
B.
No change, alteration or deviation shall be permitted unless such
change, alteration or deviation has been approved by the Planning
Board.
C.
After approval of an alteration or modification, the applicant shall cause
such approved changes to be corrected on the original drawings of the
definitive plan.
D.
§ 360-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-25
1:597
§ 360-26. Street acceptance.
Deviations from material and construction specifications shall not be
allowed except as specifically authorized by the DPW Superintendent or
appropriate agency having jurisdiction over a particular utility system.
E.
Final approval of the definitive plan does not constitute the laying out
or acceptance by the Town of any street or other public improvement
shown on the plan.
A.
Procedures for the laying out and acceptance of Town streets and ways
are under the administration of the Board of Selectmen in accordance
with MGL c. 82, §§ 22 to 24, and such procedural steps as enumerated
in the statute, including approval at Town Meeting, are mandatory for
a valid acceptance of a street.
B.
§ 360-25 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-26
1:598
ARTICLE VI
Submission and Approval of Plans for More Than One Building for
Dwelling Purposes Per Lot
§ 360-27. General.
A plan for more than one building for dwelling purposes per lot must be
submitted by the applicant to the Planning Board for consent.
§ 360-28. Submission.
§ 360-29. Contents.
The applicant shall submit nine prints of his plan and application Form
H (see appendix89), to the Planning Board, together with all other
information and documentation, such as plans, reports, maps and crosssections,
as required in these rules and regulations. The applicant shall,
simultaneously, file one print with the Board of Health along with other
necessary information and documentation.
A.
At the time of submission, a fee, in accordance with the Fee Schedule
(see appendix90), shall be paid by the applicant to cover the cost of
handling and reviewing; any additional expenses for advertising, plans,
surveys or inspections in excess of this amount shall also be paid by the
applicant.
B.
The applicant shall submit the plan for more than one building for
dwelling purposes per lot to the Planning Board office during working
hours, or to the Planning Board either by delivery at a regular or
special meeting of said Board, or by delivery or registered mail, postage
prepaid, in care of the Town Clerk. In either case, written notice (a copy
of Form H) shall be filed, by delivery or registered mail postage prepaid,
with the Town Clerk, stating the date of submission for such approval.
If the notice is given by delivery, the Town Clerk, if requested, shall give
a written receipt thereof.
C.
Receipt by the Planning Board or date of mailing of such notice, plans
and such documentation as may be required in these rules and
regulations shall constitute the effective date of submission.
D.
The plan for more than one building for dwelling purposes per lot shall
be prepared by a registered civil engineer and/or land surveyor and
shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black waterproof ink on tracing
cloth or Mylar. The plan shall be at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet,
unless otherwise specified by the Planning Board, and of a sheet size
not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches in outside dimensions. If multiple
sheets are used, they shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing
A.
89.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
90.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-29
1:599
the entire tract of land, and all plans, layouts, profiles, cross-sections
and application shall constitute the plan.
The plan shall contain the following information:
The name of the development, boundaries, zoning district, true
North arrow, date, scale, legend and title "More Than One Building
For Dwelling Purposes Per Lot."
(1)
The names and addresses of the owners of record, the applicant
and the registered civil engineer and/or land surveyor and official
seal(s).
(2)
Existing and proposed lines of streets, rights-of-way, lots,
easements and any public or common areas within and adjacent to
such tract.
(3)
Location, names and present widths of adjacent streets,
approaching or within reasonable proximity to the development.
(4)
The location, dimensions and purpose of all existing or proposed
easements, within and abutting the development.
(5)
Location of natural waterways and water bodies within and
adjacent to the development.
(6)
Significant site features such as existing stone walls, fences,
buildings, swamps, floodplains, large trees and rock outcroppings.
(7)
Sufficient data to determine readily the location, direction, width
and length of every street and way line, lot line and boundary line,
and to establish these lines on the ground.
(8)
Location of all permanent monuments and benchmarks, properly
identified as to whether existing or proposed. Bounds are required
at all intersections of street lines, angle points and changes in
curvature of street lines.
(9)
Suitable space to record the action of the Planning Board and the
signatures of the members of the Board.
(10)
A locus plan of the tract at a scale of one inch equals 400 feet
showing the exterior lines of proposed streets in the development
and their exact location in relation to two or more existing streets,
and of such accuracy to register as close as possible with the oneinch-
equals-four-hundred-feet Town street map.
(11)
A sketch plan of the applicant's contiguous unsubdivided land,
showing possible or contemplated development and street layout.
(12)
Where a storm drainage line discharges into a brook, stream or
drainage area, a profile will be shown of the brook, stream or
drainage area to determine condition and proposed method of
stabilization.
(13)
B.
§ 360-29 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-29
1:600
A topographic plan of the entire development at two-foot contour
intervals showing existing (solid line) and proposed (broken line)
topography, with proposed spot elevations at pertinent points to
show the proposed finished grading of the development.
(14)
A street layout plan on a separate sheet, 36 inches by 24 inches
in size, for each street in the development, showing exterior lines,
roadway lines, curblines, walks, parking areas, intersection angles,
points of tangency, and radii of curves. Also included on the street
layout plan shall be location, size, type of construction, elevation,
and invert of all pipes and conduits of the:
Water supply system, including wells, pumps, valves, stubs,
gates, hydrants, and similar equipment;
(a)
Storm drainage system, including manholes, catch basins and
appurtenant structures;
(b)
Sanitary sewerage system, including manholes, pumps, septic
tanks and appurtenant equipment;
(c)
Electrical supply equipment, including transformers, primary
and secondary cables, lighting fixtures and other electrical
equipment;
(d)
Other underground utility systems in the right-of-way, such as
gas, telephone and cable TV facilities.
(e)
(15)
A profile plan on the same sheet located directly below and
coordinated with the street layout plan indicating existing profiles
on the exterior lines (using lightweight lines) and proposed profile
on the center line (using heavyweight lines) of each proposed
street, at a maximum stationing of fifty-foot intervals and at a
horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet and a vertical scale of
one inch equals four feet. All elevations shall refer to Town datum.
Profiles shall show existing and proposed street grades, rates
of gradient in percentages, ground elevations at center line of
each fifty-foot station, and intersecting streets and ways shall
be clearly indicated.
(a)
The profile plan shall show vertical location of existing and
proposed storm drainage and sanitary sewer lines, slopes of
all storm and sanitary sewer lines, invert and rim elevations
of each manhole or catch basin. Such structures are to be
properly identified by number. (For identification purposes, if
necessary, water distribution system shall be in blue, sanitary
sewer system in red, and storm drainage system in orange
colors.)
(b)
(16)
A typical cross-section for the full width of the proposed street shall
be shown in accordance with the "Typical Cross-Section" illustrated
(17)
§ 360-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-29
1:601
§ 360-30. Approval, modification or disapproval.
in the appendix,91 showing foundation material, wearing surface,
crown and width of traveled way, curbing, grass strips, sidewalks,
utility locations, etc.
(18)Construction details for catch basins, manholes, endwalls, etc.
Proposed layout and design of any and all parks, pools, or similar
community improvements, including all water, drainage and
electrical layouts, if any, designed to service such community
improvements.
(19)
Where applicable, the plan of the proposed development shall be
subject to the additional requirements set forth under § 360-22.
(20)
Within 60 days from the date of submission, the Planning Board shall
approve, modify and approve, or disapprove the plan for more than
one building for dwelling purposes per lot. The action of the Planning
Board in respect to such plan shall be by vote, copies of which shall
be certified and filed with the Town Clerk and sent by registered
or certified mail to the applicant. If the Planning Board modifies or
disapproves such plan, it shall state with its vote the reasons for its
actions.
A.
If the consent of the Planning Board is granted, it shall be deemed
conditional until such time as the applicant submits a written statement
guaranteeing that adequate ways furnishing access to all buildings will
be provided in accordance with Articles VII and VIII of these rules and
regulations. Final consent shall be endorsed on the original drawing of
the final plan by the signatures of a majority of the Planning Board.
B.
In the event that ways are not constructed in accordance with the
applicant's written guarantee, then the Planning Board, on its own
motion, shall have the power to modify, amend or rescind its approval
of a plan. Written notice of any such action will be transmitted to the
Selectmen and Building Commissioner for appropriate disposition.
C.
Final consent does not constitute the laying out or acceptance by the
Town of any way or other public improvement shown on the plan.
D.
91.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-29 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-30
1:602
ARTICLE VII
Design Standards
§ 360-31. Streets and ways.
Streets and ways shown on the subdivision plan or plan for more than
one building for dwelling purposes per lot must comply with the following
requirements:
Location and alignment.
All streets and ways shall be designed so that, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, they will provide safe vehicular travel.
Due consideration shall also be given by the subdivider to the
attractiveness and design of the street layout in order to obtain
the maximum livability and amenity of the subdivision. As far as
practicable, streets should follow natural contours.
(1)
The proposed streets shall conform, so far as practicable, to the
Master Plan as adopted in whole or in part by the Planning Board.
(2)
Provision shall be made, to the satisfaction of the Planning Board,
for the proper projection of streets, or for access to adjoining
property which is not yet subdivided or developed.
(3)
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property
shall not be permitted, except where, in the opinion of the Board,
such strips shall be in the public interest.
(4)
Streets and ways shall be continuous and in alignment with existing
streets, as far as practicable, to ensure free and safe movement
of vehicular traffic. Where a subdivision borders an existing but
inadequately constructed public street, the subdivider will be
required to improve the street bordering the subdivision tract or
provide the land necessary for future improvements for that
portion bordering the subdivision. The center line of a new road
running parallel to an existing road shall be a minimum of 450 feet
from the center line of an existing road.
(5)
Temporary dead-end or cul-de-sac streets shall conform to the
provisions of alignment, width, and grade that would be applicable
to such streets if extended.
(6)
In all instances, the paved roadway, sidewalks, grass strips and
curbings shall be required as shown on the Typical Street Cross-
Section drawing (see appendix92).
(7)
The vertical alignment at grade changes or minimum stopping
sight distance at 3.5 feet above the pavement shall be 200 feet.
(8)
A.
92.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-31
1:603
Width.
The minimum widths of street rights-of-way and paved roadways
(traveled way) shall be:
Type "A" subdivisions. (Note: See Article II for definitions of
subdivision types.)
[1] Right-of-way width: 50 feet.
[2] Paved roadway width: 24 feet to 32 feet.
(a)
Type "B" subdivisions. (Note: See Article II for definitions of
subdivision types.)
[1] Right-of-way width: 60 feet.
[2] Paved roadway width: 28 feet to 36 feet.
(b)
(1)
The paved roadway width shall be measured from front to front of
berms. All berms shall be set on the roadway pavement.
(2)
The center line of the roadway shall coincide with the center line of
the right-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the Board.
(3)
Greater widths may be required by the Planning Board when
deemed necessary for present and future vehicular traffic.
(4)
B.
Grades. The minimum grades of all streets and ways shall be:
Type "A" subdivisions.
(a) No grade shall be greater than 9%.
(b) No grade shall be less than 0.5%.
(1)
Type "B" subdivisions.
(a) No grade shall be greater than 6%.
(b) No grade shall be less than 0.5%.
(2)
C.
Horizontal alignment. The minimum center-line radii of horizontal
street curves shall be:
(1) Type "A" subdivisions: 100 feet.
(2) Type "B" subdivisions: 300 feet.
D.
Intersections.
Streets and ways shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles. In no case shall street and way
intersections be less than 60°.
(1)
E.
§ 360-31 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-31
1:604
Street and way lines at all intersections shall be rounded with a
curve at each corner which has a radius of not less than 30 feet.
When the intersection of two streets varies more than 10° from a
right angle, the radius of the curve at the obtuse angle may be less,
and at the acute angle shall be greater than 30 feet.
(2)
Intersections of streets and ways shall have center-line offsets of
not less than 200 feet.
(3)
On any street where the grade exceeds 6% on the approach of the
intersection, a leveling area with a slope of less than 1% shall be
provided for a distance of not less than 50 feet measured from the
nearest exterior line of the intersecting street.
(4)
Cul-de-sac or dead-end street.
A permanent cul-de-sac or dead-end street shall be no longer than
800 feet in length unless, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
a greater length is necessitated by topography or other local
conditions.
(1)
Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be provided with a turnaround
at the end of the street having a minimum curb radius of 50 feet
and a property line radius of at least 55 feet.
(2)
In lieu of paving the entire area of the turnaround, a permanent
cul-de-sac turnaround meeting the dimensional design standards
as in Subsection F(2) above may be designed or required by the
Planning Board to have a pavement width of 24 feet to 32 feet,
beginning at the inner circle, graded, seeded and/or appropriately
planted with acceptable trees or shrubs, provided there is proper
assurance such as a deed covenant stating that lot owners are
responsible for ongoing maintenance, and that maintenance of
such planted areas will not be the responsibility of the Town.
(3)
Design of a turnaround is, in some situations, optional depending
on topographical conditions and natural features, but must by
acceptable and approved by the Planning Board and Town
Engineer. The "Y" or "T" backarounds may be used on temporary or
short cul-de-sac streets, or those with steep slopes, but should not
be used on streets greater in length than 400 feet.
(4)
A temporary cul-de-sac shall be allowed only where, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, it is essential to the reasonable development
of the subdivision and where it is part of the street or way that
eventually will be extended into adjoining property. The design
of a temporary turnaround shall be satisfactory to the Planning
Board, and clearly shown on the plan as temporary in nature, and
such property lines shall be those which would normally have been
required or used without the turnaround. Layout of the turnaround
beyond the normal street right-of-way lines shall be in the form of
an easement to the Town of South Hadley covering said premises
(5)
F.
§ 360-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-31
1:605
§ 360-32. Easements.
§ 360-33. Open spaces and protection of natural features.
§ 360-34. Compliance with Zoning Bylaw.93
No plan of a subdivision shall be approved unless all of the lots shown on
the plan comply with the Zoning Bylaw.
§ 360-35. Lots of abnormal size and shape.
included in the turnaround. When the street is extended into
adjoining property, the easement shall become null and void.
Easements for utilities across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines
shall be provided where necessary and shall be at least 25 feet in width,
except that wider easements may be required by the Board where
deemed necessary.
A.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or stream, the Planning Board may require that there be
provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of adequate
width to conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse,
drainage way, channel or stream, and to provide for construction or
other necessary purposes.
B.
The subdivider shall cause to be recorded in the Hampshire County
Registry of Deeds, by appropriate instrument (deed), any necessary
easements in the name of the Town of South Hadley for utilities,
watercourses or drainage channels, temporary turnarounds or other
purpose, and to provide for the construction and installation of such
utilities before the final bond is released. A copy of the appropriately
executed instrument shall be submitted to the Planning Board after
approval of the definitive plan, but before final endorsement.
C.
Before approval of a plan, the Planning Board may also, in proper
cases, require the plan to show a park or parks suitably located for
playground or recreation purposes or for providing light and air. The
park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the land
being subdivided and to the prospective uses of such land. The Planning
Board may, by appropriate endorsement on the plan, require that no
building be erected upon such park or parks for a period of not more
than three years without its approval.
A.
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees,
watercourses, scenic points, historic spots and similar community
assets, which, if preserved, will add to the attractiveness and value of
the subdivision and the Town.
B.
93.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 360-31 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-35
1:606
Any lots of abnormal configuration and size which are detrimental to
the purposes and intent of the Subdivision Control Law shall not be
allowed, even though they may meet the dimensional requirements of
the Zoning Bylaw.94
A.
Side lot lines should be substantially at a right angle to the street lines
or to its tangent at point of intersection of the side lot line, but in no
case shall the side lot line form an angle of less than 75° with the street
line or its tangent at point of intersection.
B.
94.Editor's Note: See Ch. 255, Zoning.
§ 360-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-35
1:607

ARTICLE VIII
Required Improvements for Subdivisions and Developments for
More than One Building for Dwelling Purposes Per Lot
§ 360-36. Street and roadway construction.
Clearing and grubbing.
No clearing or excavating shall be started on any part of the street
until the Tree Warden has designated in writing those trees which
are to remain in the tree belt. Such trees to be preserved shall be
protected during construction by fenders or boxes.
(1)
The entire area within the right-of-way of each street shall be
cleared of all stumps, brush, roots, boulders and like material,
except those trees that are intended for preservation.
(2)
No perishable matter such as stumps, trunks, or limbs of trees or
brush shall be buried within the limits of the right-of-way lines.
(3)
All loam, peat, muck and other yielding material shall be removed
from the roadway, side slopes, driveway aprons and sidewalks.
(4)
A.
Gravel foundations.
Subgrade.
Within the roadway area, including driveway aprons,
sidewalks, and grass strips, all material shall be removed to
subgrade and any unsuitable material, in the opinion of the
DPW Superintendent, below subgrade shall be removed and
shall be replaced with proper bank-run gravel and brought
to proper compaction. The depth of the subgrade will be
governed by existing conditions and shall be as specified by the
DPW Superintendent.
(a)
Where fill is required, it shall be placed in layers not deeper
than eight inches and shall be spread uniformly with the large
stones at the bottom.
(b)
Any gravel used as fill in the subbase shall be composed of
hard, durable stone and course sand, practically free from
loam and clay containing no stone having a dimension greater
than six inches, and when spread and compacted shall present
a stable foundation.
(c)
Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted with a roller
weighing not less than 10 tons and rolling shall continue until
a firm, even surface true to line and grade is achieved. Any
depressions shall be filled and rerolled and any soft or
unsuitable areas shall be removed and replaced with suitable
material and rolled.
(d)
(1)
B.
§ 360-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-36
1:609
§ 360-37. Roadway surfacing.
The subgrade shall be shaped and finish-graded at the required
depth below and parallel to the proposed pavement surface, in
conformance with the Typical Street Cross-Section.
(e)
Inspections shall be required after completion of the subgrade
(see Article IX).
(f)
Gravel base.
The gravel base course shall consist of not less than 12 inches
of well-compacted gravel placed upon the subgrade the entire
width of the roadway in layers not greater than six inches
deep.
(a)
When spreading the gravel, care should be taken to rake
forward and distribute the largest stones so they will be at the
bottom of the gravel base course and evenly distributed.
(b)
Each layer shall be thoroughly compacted with a roller
weighing not less than 10 tons, and rolling shall continue until
a firm, even surface true to line and grade is achieved. Any
depression that appears during or after rolling shall be filled
with gravel and rerolled.
(c)
The gravel used in the base course shall conform to the
specifications of the subgrade [Subsection B(1)(c)], except that
it shall contain no stones having a dimension greater than four
inches.
(d)
The gravel base surface shall be shaped and finish-graded
at the required depth below and parallel to the proposed
pavement surface, in conformance with the Typical Street
Cross-Section.
(e)
Inspections shall be required before commencement and after
completion of the gravel base (see Article IX).
(f)
(2)
The roadway and driveway aprons shall be paved the entire width,
including under the berms, and the surface treatment shall be
compacted bituminous concrete placed in two layers.
A.
The first layer or binder course shall be Class I bituminous concrete
pavement, Type I-1, binder course mix, laid at a thickness of two inches
in accordance with Section 460 of the Massachusetts Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges
(1988). The first layer or binder course must be in place at least six
months and have the approval of the DPW Superintendent before the
second layer or surface course is applied.
B.
The second layer or surface course shall be Class I bituminous concrete
pavement, Type I-1, top course mix, laid at a thickness of 1 1/2 inches
C.
§ 360-36 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-37
1:610
§ 360-38. Curbs and berms.
in accordance with Section 460 of the Massachusetts Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges
(1988).
The plant mix material shall be delivered to the site in a hot and easily
workable condition, when weather conditions are satisfactory, so that
it can be properly placed on the appropriate base. Irregularities in the
existing foundation material shall be eliminated by the use of extra
bituminous material.
D.
All bituminous concrete shall be spread by an approved mechanical
spreader in a uniformly loose layer to the full width required and
to such thickness that each course, when compacted, shall have the
required thickness and shall conform to grade and the Typical Street
Cross-Section. Hand spreading of bituminous concrete material will
be allowed only for special areas which do not permit mechanical
spreading and finishing.
E.
Each course of bituminous material shall be rolled with a self-propelled,
equally balanced, tandem roller weighing not less than five tons nor
more than 10 tons. Places inaccessible to the power roller shall be
compacted by means of hand or vibratory tampers. Any displacement
caused by the roller shall be corrected by ranking and adding fresh
mixture where required.
F.
Traverse joints shall be formed by laying and rolling against a form
of the thickness of the compacted mixture placed across the entire
width of the pavement. When the laying of the mixture is resumed, the
exposed edge of the joint shall be painted with a thin coat of hot asphalt
or asphalt cement thinned with naphtha. The fresh mixture shall be
raked against the joint and thoroughly tamped with hot tampers and
rolled.
G.
The final bituminous surface shall show no deviation greater than 1/4
inch when tested with a sixteen-foot straight edge placed parallel to the
center line of the surface course.
H.
Finished roadway and driveway apron surface less than the required
thickness or containing any soft or imperfect places will not be
approved.
I.
All roadways shall be brought up to the finish grade as shown on the
definitive plan, and all manhole covers, gate boxes, gas drips and other
access to underground utilities shall be set flush with the surface of the
road, grass strip or sidewalk.
J.
Inspections shall be required upon completion of the binder and surface
courses (see Article IX).
K.
§ 360-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-38
1:611
§ 360-39. Driveway aprons.
§ 360-40. Sidewalks.
Bituminous concrete curbs of the type and dimensions as shown on the
Typical Street Cross-Section (see Appendix95) shall be required along
both sides of the roadway, except at curb inlets or where, in the opinion
of the Planning Board, such curbs are not necessary.
A.
The berms shall be constructed of Type I-1, Class I bituminous
concrete, and laid with a berm-forming machine.
B.
The curbs shall butt against all granite curb inlets and be constructed
so as to be true to line and grade after compaction. Any mixture which
becomes defective in any way shall be replaced with a fresh mixture.
C.
Under special conditions, specially constructed berms or gutters may
be required by the Planning Board, particularly in areas of heavy slope.
D.
Bituminous concrete berms shall be applied onto the binder course of
roadway paving and the top course of pavement laid against the face of
the berm.
E.
In Type "A" subdivisions, the minimum driveway width within the rightof-
way shall be 12 feet, with at least a two-foot curb radius.
A.
In Type "B" subdivisions, the minimum driveway width within the rightof-
way shall be 30 feet, with at least a seven-foot curb radius.
B.
The rate of change of grade from property line to the pavement line
shall not be over one foot per 10 feet of distance.
C.
The nearest line of a driveway shall not be any closer than 50 feet to
the intersection of any two streets.
D.
Driveway apron construction shall consist of a twelve-inch rolled gravel
base, and the hardened surface shall be composed of the standard 1 1/2
inches of compacted binder course and one inch of compacted surface
course Type I-1, Class I bituminous concrete, rolled with at least an
eight-ton roller.
E.
A permit must be obtained from the State Department of
Transportation for all driveway entrances to a state highway, and such
driveways must conform to state standards.
F.
The gutter end of the paving of any driveway shall have a lip of
approximately one inch to 1 1/2 inches to control water flowing along
the street gutters.
G.
95.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-38 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-40
1:612
§ 360-41. Grass strips and side slopes.
§ 360-42. Bridges.
Bridges shall be designed in accordance with the design standards of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
§ 360-43. Monuments and markers.
Sidewalks of not less than four feet in width shall be constructed on
one or both sides of the street starting at the property line, when in the
opinion of the Planning Board such sidewalks are necessary.
A.
Sidewalk construction shall consist of at least eight inches of select
gravel placed over a suitable subgrade, graded to a 1/4 inch per foot
slope and rolled with a minimum five-ton roller. The sidewalk surface
shall be composed of the standard 1 1/4 inches of compacted binder
course and 3/4 inch of compacted surface course Type I-1, Class I
bituminous concrete.
B.
The property side of the sidewalk shall be set at least six inches to the
street from the property line. (See § 360-43, Monuments and markers.)
C.
Wheelchair ramps will be constructed to ADA (Americans with
Disabilities Act) standards.
D.
Where sidewalks are required, there shall be provided between the
curb or edge of the roadway a planted grass strip (see Typical Street
Cross-Section).
A.
The finished grade of such grass strips shall have a slope of 1/4 inch per
foot toward the roadway, unless unusual topographic characteristics
exist wherein greater slopes may be approved by the Board.
B.
Only those trees approved by the Tree Warden or signs or poles
approved by the Town Engineer shall be permitted in the grass strip.
C.
Where no sidewalk is constructed, the grass strip between the lot
property line and the street line shall have a slope of 1/4 inch per foot
toward the roadway, unless unusual topographic characteristics exist
wherein greater slopes may be approved by the Board.
D.
All grass strips, side slopes, and unpaved areas within the right-ofway
shall contain a top of at least six inches of good-quality loam
spread over a suitable subgrade, screened, raked and rolled with a onehundred-
pound roller. The loam shall be fertilized at a rate of 20 pounds
per 100 square yards and then seeded with lawn seed at the rate of 3.6
pounds per 100 yards and rolled. Any area which fails to show a uniform
growth of grass shall be reseeded until the entire area is covered with
a uniform growth of grass.
E.
§ 360-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-43
1:613
§ 360-44. Installation of utilities.
Monuments shall be installed and centered at all street intersections at
all angle points and curvature of streets at other points as shown on the
definitive plan. Such monuments shall also be installed at intervals of
250 feet on any straight portion of a street if such portion is 500 feet in
length or longer.
A.
Granite or reinforced concrete monuments shall be used, being not less
than four feet in length, dressed to six inches at the top with a 3/8 inch
hole drilled in the center and flared at the bottom. The hole shall be
filled with lead securely rammed in place.
B.
Iron rods, "rifle barrels" or other markers suitable to the Planning
Board shall be installed at every corner of each lot within the
subdivision. Such markers shall be at least three feet in length and their
locations shall be noted on the definitive plan.
C.
Monuments and markers shall be set vertically and suitable material
thoroughly compacted around each bound, with the tops of the
monuments and markers set flush with the finished grade.
D.
No permanent monument or marker shall be installed until all
construction which would disturb or destroy the monument or marker
is completed.
E.
All monuments and markers shall be installed before the bond or
covenant is released.
F.
General standards. The installation of utilities and underground
structures shall conform to the following general standards:
All public and private sewers, surface water drains, water and gas
pipes, electric, telephone and cable TV lines, together with their
appropriate underground structures, within the street right-of-way,
shall be placed underground.
(1)
Underground utilities shall be installed after the street has been
excavated to subgrade.
(2)
The location of the utilities shall conform to the definitive plan and
the Typical Street Cross-Section, with the minimum cover as shown
on the Typical Street Cross-Section.
(3)
Material used surrounding and supporting pipes and conduits in
the utility trenches shall be screened gravel compacted at least six
inches in diameter around pipes, unless the trenches are in ledge,
peat or heavy clay, which requires 12 inches of the compacted,
screened gravel.
(4)
Material used in backfilling utility trenches around underground
structures shall be placed in six-inch layers and thoroughly
compacted by pneumatic or vibratory tamps.
(5)
A.
§ 360-43 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-44
1:614
Gravity sewer lines shall be true to line and grade with no
horizontal or vertical curvature permitted.
(6)
No footing drains, roof drains or stormwater drains shall be
connected to the sanitary sewer system.
(7)
All lot connections shall be installed from the main structures in
the street to the exterior right-of-way line for each lot regardless
of whether there is a building thereon. In the case of a lot to be
used for a park or playground or any other purpose for which
the Planning Board deems lot connections are not necessary,
installation of such connections may be waived by the Board.
(8)
Private, on-site water supply wells shall be located a minimum of
100 feet from a leaching field, seepage pit or cesspool; 10 feet from
a sewer line; and 50 feet from a septic tank.
(9)
All underground utilities shall be properly inspected, tested and
approval given before the backfilling of trenches and placement of
gravel base courses and pavement (see Article IX for inspection
procedures).
(10)
Drainage system.
The storm drainage system shall be so designed to intercept
stormwater runoff from the entire portion of the drainage basin
that drains to or across the proposed subdivision, and provisions
shall be made for proper and adequate storm lines, structures, and
channels to accommodate upstream properties as well as affording
protection from flooding and erosion to adjacent and downstream
properties.
(1)
In determining quantities of stormwater for system design, the
rational method should be used, unless another method is shown
to be more appropriate in specific cases, but in any event, the
system should be designed for a minimum of twenty-five-year storm
frequency.
(2)
Discharge of stormwater shall be either into an existing, adequate
storm system or the nearest natural watercourse. Where necessary,
the developer shall obtain and convey to the Town drainage
easements on adjacent properties and be responsible for
installation of pipe and structures or channels at his expense.
(3)
Stormwater shall not be permitted to cross over the roadway on the
surface, and must be piped underneath the roadway.
(4)
The minimum diameter of storm drains in Type "A" subdivisions
shall be 12 inches and Type "B" subdivisions 15 inches, excluding
footing drains and subsurface connection pipes.
(5)
Catch basins shall be located on both sides of the roadway at
intervals of not more than 300 feet on continuous grades, and at
(6)
B.
§ 360-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-44
1:615
low points and sags in the roadway and near the corners of the
roadway at intersecting streets.
Maximum distance for surface runoff to flow upon the road
surfaces shall be 300 feet.
(7)
The methods of construction, and type of materials used shall
conform to the Massachusetts Department of Transportation's
Standards and Specifications, or the DPW Superintendent where
applicable.
(8)
Where stormwater discharges into an open stream or channel,
provisions shall be made for proper stabilization of the stream
channel.
(9)
As construction progresses, unforeseen groundwater conditions
may be encountered which require additional subdrains, curtain
drains and/or footing drains. These conditions include potential
problems if construction is in progress at a time of low water
table or other dry conditions. The Board, acting on the advice
of the Department of Public Works, reserves the right to require
appropriate systems, including stubs, to accommodate the
problems.
(10)
The owner will be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of
any detention ponds.
(11)
Through every phase of construction, no surface run-off will drain
onto the abutting public way or abutting private property.
(12)
Sanitary sewer system.
Wherever, in the opinion of the Planning Board, the public
sewerage system is reasonably accessible and where connection
to it is feasible, the applicant shall properly connect all lots in the
subdivision to the public sewerage system.
(1)
The minimum diameter of public sewer pipes shall be eight inches,
unless a smaller size is recommended by the DPW Superintendent.
(2)
The methods of construction and type of materials used shall
conform to the Massachusetts Department of Transportation's
Standards and Specifications, or the DPW Superintendent where
applicable.
(3)
A sewer extension permit application shall be filed by the applicant
(see § 360-22B for further details).
(4)
Where a public sewerage system connection is infeasible or
inaccessible, a private on-site sewerage system shall be designed
and constructed in conformity with Article XI of the Sanitary Code
of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, and subject to
(5)
C.
§ 360-44 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-44
1:616
§ 360-45. Street trees and planting.
Planting operations and requirements for trees and plantings contained
herein shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of
the American Nurseryman Association and the Associated Landscape
Contractors of Massachusetts.
approval and in conformity with the rules and regulations of the
South Hadley Board of Health.
If a subdivision is to be located in an area where a public sewerage
system connection is infeasible, but within five years from date
of submission of the definitive plan a public sewerage system is
planned to be installed by the Town, as confirmed by the
Selectmen, the applicant may be required, at the request of the
Planning Board, to install at his expense street sewers, structures
and laterals (i.e., dry sewers).
(6)
Sewer connection fees, in accordance with the Sewer Department's
fee schedule, shall be paid prior to issuance of a building permit(s)
for an individual lot(s).
(7)
Water systems.
Where available and feasible, all lots in a subdivision shall connect
to the appropriate water service system: Water Department, Fire
Districts No. 1 and No. 2.
(1)
All water mains, fittings, gates and hydrants shall be installed
in conformity with the specifications of the respective Water
Departments, and in accordance with the definitive plan as
approved by the Planning Board.
(2)
Where connection to a water district system is infeasible, the
applicant shall make provisions to serve every lot with an adequate
supply of potable water approved by the Board of Health.
(3)
A laboratory test of the water quality shall be required and
submitted to the Board of Health for all private on-site systems.
(4)
D.
Electrical, telephone and other wires. All electrical, telephone, fire
alarm, cable TV and other wires and cables shall be installed
underground, unless, in the opinion of the Planning Board and the
appropriate utility company, such installation is impractical or not in
the best interest of the Town. Installation of the underground electrical
distribution system shall be in accordance with the specifications and
regulations of the South Hadley Electric Light Department.
E.
Street trees.
There shall be two trees, which may be existing or newly planted,
for each lot in the subdivision.
(1)
A.
§ 360-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-45
1:617
If trees are existing trees, they must be approved as to health and
suitability by the Tree Warden, and if newly planted they must be
approved by the Tree Warden as to their species, size and location.
(2)
No dead, damaged or diseased tree existing as such at the time of
approval of the plan, and no tree injured in the course of work, shall
be permitted to stand on any lot within a subdivision, and upon
orders from the Tree Warden, the subdivider shall remove the same
at his own expense, together with the stump and roots thereof.
(3)
A partial list of acceptable types of street trees is included in the
appendix,96 and categorized according to growth size.
(4)
Large-growing trees should be spaced at intervals of 50 feet to
60 feet, medium-growing trees at intervals of 30 feet to 40 feet,
and small-growing trees at intervals of 20 feet to 30 feet. On the
side of the street where overhead wires are present, large- and
medium-growing trees should be planted within the front yard of
the individual property owner, away from such wires.
(5)
Where possible, and with the approval of the Tree Warden, the
street trees should be of different varieties. Trees shall be located
at least 10 feet from any underground utilities.
(6)
Cul-de-sac plantings. With the approval of the Planning Board, the
central radius of a cul-de-sac may be planted with perennial grass
(sod or seed), ornamental shrubs, or retention of existing vegetation.
Suitable mulch shall be used between plants for weed control.
B.
Bank plantings.
All cut and filled bankings, or portions thereof, that are susceptible
to eroding or any building lots where fill or excavation has changed
the contours such that drainage to adjoining parcels will be
affected shall be planted with low- or very-low-growing plantings,
herbaceous plants or sod grass (see list in appendix97).
(1)
Suitable mulch shall be spread liberally for weed and erosion
control.
(2)
C.
Intersection plantings. No small trees, shrubs or herbaceous plants
that tend to obstruct visibility at street intersections shall be permitted
within 100 feet of the point of intersection of the curb or exterior
roadway lines along both sides of the corner lot at the intersection.
D.
96.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
97.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-45 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-46
1:618
§ 360-46. Streetlighting.
Streetlighting shall be installed along all streets in accordance with the
Electric Light Department's specifications.
§ 360-47. Street signs.
Street name signs shall be the standard street name signs made by the
South Hadley Highway Department at the applicant's expense. Such signs
shall be erected by the applicant at each street intersection near the inside
edge of the curb, subject to approval by the DPW Superintendent. The posts
of these signs shall be buried in concrete blocks 10 inches in diameter and
24 inches in length.
§ 360-48. As-built plans.
After final approval of all the improvements in the subdivision and before
final release of the performance guarantee, the applicant shall furnish the
Board with two copies (one copy for the Board and the other for the DPW
Superintendent) of an "as-built plan" showing location and grades of road
as built, as well as all utilities as installed, including inverts of drainage and
sewerage systems, and swing ties at 60° and 120° apart for all ends and
intersections of pipes that are buried. Such plans may be Mylar or linen
copies of the complete set of definitive Plans REVISED into "as-built plans."
§ 360-49. Cleaning up.
After completion of construction and before release of the performance
guarantee, the subdivider shall remove all temporary structures, debris,
surplus materials and rubbish, and shall otherwise leave the area in a neat
and orderly appearance.
§ 360-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-49
1:619

ARTICLE IX
Administration
§ 360-50. Inspections.
At various specified stages of construction of streets and ways, utilities,
and other improvements, inspections shall be mandatory and shall
be made and certified in writing by the Department of Public Works
Superintendent, or representative of the appropriate agency involved
(e.g., Water Department, Fire Districts No. 1 and No. 2, and the Electric
Light Department).
A.
Construction of streets and installation of utilities may be phased,
provided that each section shall not be less than 500 feet.
B.
The applicant shall be responsible for engaging, at his expense, a
qualified engineer to set all lines, grades and stakes to the satisfaction
of the DPW Superintendent.
C.
In order to make arrangements for proper inspection of street
construction and installation of utilities, a seventy-two-hour notice shall
be given by the applicant to the designated individual or agency before
the following construction stages:
Before clearing and grubbing, the Tree Warden shall be notified to
designate those trees which are to be preserved in the tree belt.
(1)
The roadway shall be inspected by the DPW Superintendent upon
completion of each of the following construction stages:
(a) Subgrade (and subbase if necessary).
(b) Gravel base.
(c) Binder course.
(d) Surface course.
(2)
The installation of the sanitary and storm drainage systems and
related structures shall be inspected by the DPW Superintendent,
or Board of Health as appropriate, before the filling and
compacting of the utility trenches.
(3)
After the filling and compacting of the utility trenches, the
applicant shall have an inspection of installed drainage lines and
sewer mains performed by means of a television camera. This
inspection shall be conducted at the applicant's expense, and the
results forwarded to the DPW Superintendent.
(4)
The water system and appurtenant facilities shall be inspected by
the representative of the respective Water District.
(5)
D.
§ 360-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-50
1:621
The installation of sidewalks shall be inspected by the DPW
Superintendent upon completion of subgrade base course, as well
as permanent binder and finish course.
(6)
The installation of curbs, where required, and loaming and seeding
operations shall be inspected by the DPW Superintendent.
(7)
At the completion of all the improvements in the subdivision,
including loaming and seeding, curbs, monuments, plantings and
signs, the DPW Superintendent shall make an inspection before
final release of the performance guarantee.
(8)
Each specified construction stage shall be completed to the satisfaction
of the DPW Superintendent or appropriate agency and given in writing,
before further work shall be done. Any development which progresses
beyond an inspection stage without written approval of the DPW
Superintendent or appropriate agency shall be required to return the
construction to the status necessary to perform the required inspection.
E.
Cost of inspections shall be paid by the applicant in accordance with
the Fee Schedule (see appendix98) on a per-lineal-foot of street basis,
as measured along the street center line of the definitive plan and such
amounts shall be paid to the Town Treasurer in cash or official bank
check prior to endorsement of the definitive plan.
F.
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to engage qualified
individuals to provide engineering supervision during construction to
ensure proper construction of improvements in accordance with the
approved plan.
G.
98.Editor's Note: The appendixes are available in the Town offices and on the Town website:
www.southhadley.org.
§ 360-50 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 360-50
1:622
Chapter 400
BENEFITS
§ 400-1. Eligibility.
§ 400-2. Group insurances.
Active employees. Full-time permanent employees scheduled for 20
or more hours a week (as defined by law) are eligible for insurance
coverage. New hires eligible for insurance will qualify for health,
dental, and life insurance benefits the first of the month following
30 days from the date of hire. Premiums are paid to the provider
in advance for the subsequent month of coverage. Employees with a
separation in service are considered new hires under this policy.
A.
Retirees. Retirees can receive health insurance benefits if elected to
do so at the time of retirement. Retirees who do not choose health
insurance at the time of retirement will not be allowed back on to the
plan after their date of retirement. Retirees who are unable to have
their insurance premium deducted from their retirement benefit must
contact the Payroll and Benefits Coordinator at the time of retirement
to make payment arrangements directly to the Town. Nonpayment in
30 days will result in termination of coverage.
B.
Death of an employee or retiree.
In the event an active employee or retiree passes and they are
enrolled in an individual +1, family plan, or MEDEX plan, the
surviving spouse/dependents are eligible to remain on the Townsponsored
plan.
(1)
The surviving spouse/dependents can remain on the plan at 100%
of the premium. Payments will be due to the Benefits Office on a
quarterly basis, unless payment is made via a Town pension. (MGL
c. 32B, § 9B.)
(2)
C.
The Town presently provides the following group insurance coverage
for regular full-time employees and eligible part-time employees:
Group medical and hospital insurances are offered to eligible
employees and their families in accordance with MGL c. 32B. Such
plans are contributory with the Town paying a percentage of the
premium and the employee paying the balance.
(1)
Group life insurance is offered to each regular full-time employee
including coverage of $5,000 and AD&D with the Town paying a
percentage of the premium and the employee paying the balance.
(2)
A.
Details of insurance coverage are described in the Benefits Policy
Manual and are subject to amendment from time to time as are the
B.
§ 360-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2
1:623
§ 400-3. Hampshire County Retirement System.
Town employees who work 20 hours or more per week throughout the
year (1,040 hours per year) are required to join the Hampshire County
Retirement System. Membership is optional for elected officials. Employees
should contact the Hampshire County Retirement Board for additional
details regarding the retirement system. (MGL c. 32 and 630).
§ 400-4. Alternate retirement plan.
§ 400-5. Deferred Compensation Plan 457.
The Commonwealth SMART Plan 457 Deferred Compensation Plan is
offered to the employees of state and local governments, subdivisions of
state governments or certain eligible key employees of tax-exempt
organizations. Deferred compensation plans allow participants to save for
retirement now and pay taxes later by contributing a portion of their
salaries to the plan. Please contact Dan Moroney for more information.
(413) 335-0542 dan.moroney@empower-retirement.com.
§ 400-6. Flexible spending accounts (FSA).
Flexible spending accounts let you set aside a portion of your paycheck tax
free to pay for certain health and dependent care expenses. Contributions
are deducted from your paycheck prior to federal, state, and Medicare
taxes. No tax on your contribution saves you money. Contact information is
available in the Payroll and Benefits Office in Town Hall.
§ 400-7. Other voluntary insurance benefits.
Employees may voluntarily enroll in dental, short-term disability, long-term
disability, cancer insurances and other products. Please visit the Payroll and
Benefits Office for more information on the dental plans. Please contact
contributory amounts. In the event of a conflict between this personnel
policy and the insurance plan itself, the insurance plan shall prevail.
Effective January 1, 1992, all wages earned by new hires not eligible
to participate in either the Town or state retirement systems will be
subject to a mandatory 7.5% withholding and to the Town's deferred
compensation plan (OBRA). These funds will be invested in a
guaranteed interest account in the existing deferred compensation
program. Also effective on January 1, 1992, for new hires no additional
contribution will be made to social security, except for the 1.45%
Medicare tax which is not subject to exclusion based upon participation
in the deferred compensation program.
A.
Employees not eligible for participation in either the Town or state
retirement system or who already have made contribution since July
1, 1991, will be permitted to participate in the deferred compensation
plan in lieu of continuing to be charged the social security tax.
B.
§ 400-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 400-7
1:624
Jonathan Popp for more information on all other products. (413) 221-3483
jonathan_popp@us.aflac.com
§ 400-8. Family and medical leave; military family leave; small
necessities leave.
The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) of 1993 allows eligible
employees 12 weeks of unpaid leave (FMLA leave) per year under the
circumstances outlined below.
Employees may take leave for the following reasons:
The birth of a child and to care for the newborn child within
one year of birth;
(a)
The placement with the employee of a child (under the age of
18) for adoption or foster care and to care for the newly placed
child within one year of placement;
(b)
To care for the employee's spouse, child, or parent who has
a serious health condition (child is defined as including
biological, adopted, or foster children, stepchildren, or child
of a person with legal guardianship or who has day-to-day
responsibility to care for and financially support a child, even
if there is no biological or legal relationship);
(c)
A serious health condition that makes the employee unable
to perform the essential functions of his or her job. "Serious
health condition" is defined by law and refers to in-patient
care, and in some instances out-patient care, by a medical
provider.
(d)
(1)
Use paid leave first. Employees are required to use certain types
of accrued or available paid leave first, as part of the 12 weeks of
FMLA leave, before commencing the unpaid portion of the leave.
Employees who take leave because of their own serious illness, the
birth or placement of a child, or to care for an ill spouse, parent or
child must first use all accrued vacation, personal, and sick time.
(2)
Eligibility. To be eligible for leave under this policy an employee
must have been employed by the Town for at least 12 months,
and must have worked at least 1,250 hours during the twelvemonth
period preceding the commencement of the leave. While the
12 months of employment need not be consecutive, employment
periods prior to a break in service of seven or more years may not
be counted unless the break is for military service.
(3)
Conditions.
Twelve weeks. Employees may take no more than 12 weeks of
leave in a twelve-month period. The twelve-month period is a
rolling 12 months beginning 12 months prior to the proposed
(a)
(4)
A.
§ 400-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-8
1:625
commencement of requested leave. If both spouses are
employed by the Town, they are together entitled to a total of
12 weeks of leave for the birth or placement of a child, or care
of a sick parent.
Notice. Employees wishing to take FMLA leave must give 30
days' notice if foreseeable. If the event giving rise to the need
for leave is not foreseeable, then the employee must give such
notice as is practicable under the circumstances. Employees
must schedule planned medical treatments with due regard for
the Town's operational needs.
(b)
Certification.
Employees requesting FMLA leave must provide medical
certification to support a claim for leave for an employee's
own serious health condition or to care for a seriously ill child,
spouse, or parent. The medical certification must set forth:
the date on which the serious health condition commenced;
the probable duration of the condition; and, the appropriate
medical facts within the knowledge of the health care provider
regarding the condition. In its discretion, the Town may
require a second medical opinion and periodic recertification
at its own expense.
(a)
The new FMLA regulations provide that an employer may
contact an employee's health care provider to clarify or
authenticate the medical certification if the employee has not
cured deficiencies in the certification. Communication with
the health care provider may require the employee to provide
authorization compliant with the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA). If the employee refuses to
provide the employer with authorization and does not
otherwise clarify the certification, the employer may deny the
FMLA leave.
(b)
(5)
Reduced schedule leave. If medically necessary for a serious health
condition of the employee or his or her spouse, child or parent,
leave may be taken on an intermittent or reduced leave schedule.
If leave is requested on this basis, the Town may require the
employee to transfer temporarily to a position, with equivalent
compensation, which better accommodates recurring periods of
absence or a part-time schedule.
(6)
Benefits.
Health coverage. Employees on leave are entitled to the
continuance of group health coverage under the same
conditions they received coverage prior to the leave.
Employees who contribute to their health insurance premiums
via payroll deduction must arrange to pay the premium
contributions during the period of unpaid absence, if they wish
(a)
(7)
§ 400-8 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 400-8
1:626
to retain coverage. In the event that an employee elects not to
return to work upon completion of an approved unpaid leave
of absence, the Town may recover from the employee the cost
of any payments made to maintain the employee's coverage,
unless the failure to return to work was for reasons beyond the
employee's control.
Other benefits.
Benefits based upon length of service will be calculated as
of the last paid work day prior to the start of the unpaid
leave of absence.
[1]
Employees do not accrue sick, vacation or personal time
while on leave in excess of 30 days.
[2]
Sick leave, workers' compensation leave, injured leave,
or other absences. Employees who are out of work for
reasons that would qualify for leave under this policy,
irrespective of whether leave has been requested under
this policy, are required, upon request, to provide to the
Town the information and certifications required by this
policy. The Town shall designate all such qualifying leave
as Family and Medical Leave, which shall run against the
12 weeks allowed under this policy.
[3]
(b)
Return to work. Employees returning from FMLA leave in
accordance with this policy will be restored to their original
positions, or to equivalent positions with equivalent pay and
benefits. Employees should contact Administration and their
supervisor at least two weeks before their return date to make
arrangements. The Town may require returning employees to
obtain and/or produce medical certification that they are able to
perform all of the essential functions of the job prior to the
employee's return to work.
(8)
Small necessities leave.
The Small Necessities Act, Massachusetts General Law Chapter
149, § 52D, provides that an employee shall be entitled to a total of
24 hours of unpaid leave during a twelve-month period (the twelvemonth
period is a rolling 12 months beginning 12 months prior
to the proposed commencement of requested leave), in addition to
leave available under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993,
for the following purposes:
To participate in school activities directly related to the
educational advancement of a son or daughter;
(a)
To accompany the son or daughter of the employee to routine
medical or dental appointments, such as check-ups or
vaccinations; or
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 400-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-8
1:627
To accompany an elderly relative of the employee to routine
medical or dental appointments or appointments for other
professional services related to the elder's care.
(c)
Employees who have accumulated sick, personal, or vacation time
must use such time as part of the 24 hours before becoming eligible
for unpaid time. The Town will not provide paid leave in any
situation where it would not normally provide such paid leave.
(2)
Military family leave.
Eligible employees may take up to 12 weeks of FMLA leave in any
twelve-month period for other qualifying exigencies connected with
military service, and may take up to 26 weeks of leave in a single
twelve-month period if needed to care for a family member who is
a covered service member with a serious illness or injury incurred
in the line of duty while on active duty (military caregiver leave).
(1)
C.
Qualifying exigency leave.
Up to 12 weeks of FMLA leave is available for certain exigencies
arising out of the fact that the employee's spouse, son, daughter,
or parent is a covered military member on covered active duty or
called to active duty status in support of a contingency operation.
The exigencies that may qualify for leave are:
(a) Short-notice deployment;
(b) Military events and related activities;
(c) Childcare and school activities;
(d) Financial and legal arrangements;
(e) Counseling;
(f) Rest and recuperation;
(g) Post-deployment activities; and
Additional activities not encompassed in the other categories,
but agreed to by the employer and employee.
(h)
(1)
Qualifying exigency leave is available to a family member of a
military member in the Reserves or National Guard; it does not
extend to family members of military members in the regular
armed forces.
(2)
D.
Covered service member care leave.
Leave to care for a family member who is a covered service
member is limited to a one-time leave of up to 26 weeks within a
single twelve-month period. An eligible employee must be needed
to care for a family member injured in the course of duty while
(1)
E.
§ 400-8 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 400-8
1:628
on active duty with the military. The leave is available on a onetime
basis for an injury or incident befalling that family member.
For purposes of this leave only, the definition of family member
is extended to encompass "next of kin" to the extent not already
encompassed by the applicable definition of family member under
the FMLA.
Definition of covered service member. A "covered service member"
is a current member of the Armed Forces, including a member
of the National Guard or Reserves, who has a serious injury or
illness incurred in the line of duty on active duty that may render
the service member medically unfit to perform his or her duties
for which the service member is undergoing medical treatment,
recuperation, or therapy; or is in outpatient status; or is on the
temporary disability retired list.
(2)
Military leave.
Employees of the Town who are members of a Reserve Unit of the
Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Coast Guard, or Air Force of the United
States or Massachusetts, shall be entitled to absent themselves
from their duties, after giving due notice to their department head,
while engaged in required field training in such a unit. No such
employee shall be subjected to any loss or reduction of seniority,
vacation, or holiday privileges. Such employees shall be paid the
compensation that would have otherwise have been received
during the leave, less all monies that the employee received from
the military (excluding reimbursement of the employee's out-ofpocket
expenses) as provided in MGL c. 37, § 59.
(1)
Any employee who leaves the service of the Town for the purpose of
entering the Armed Forces of the United States shall be reinstated
in his or her former position and duties, provided that he or she
makes application for return to such service within 90 days after
he or she has received a certificate of satisfactory service from
the Armed Forces. The department head or appointing authority
shall certify in writing that such employee is able and qualified
to perform the work required and that there is work available. In
considering the factor of availability of the work, the Town shall
replace (by the returning employee) any employee with less service
who was employed for the purpose of filling the position vacated by
such returning employee. Any employee returning to the service of
the Town shall be credited with the period of such service in the
Armed Forces to the same extent as though it had been a part of
the term of service to the Town.
(2)
If the laws of the United States provide for more extensive military
leave rights than the provisions of the state statute, the federal
laws shall prevail and the greater rights shall be granted.
(3)
F.
§ 400-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-8
1:629
§ 400-9. Training.
§ 400-10. Education reimbursement.
The Town of South Hadley encourages the professional growth of its
employees through the enhancement of their educational background.
Courses for degree programs, courses for credit, noncredit courses,
certificates, and licenses may be considered for education assistance,
depending upon the relevance to an employee's current position or future
career opportunities at the Town of South Hadley.
Qualifying exigency leave. Up to 12 weeks of FMLA leave is available
for certain exigencies arising out of the fact that the employee's spouse,
son, daughter, or parent is a covered military member on covered
active duty or called to active duty status in support of a contingency
operation.
G.
The Town considers employee development an integral part of each
department head's responsibility. The objective of this policy is to
provide each employee with long-term personal growth opportunities
and the Town with qualified and promotable individuals.
A.
Department heads may request approval of administration or
appointing authority to enroll employees in outside seminars and other
educational programs designed to meet specific development
objectives. Proposed seminars or training programs should be designed
for immediate on-the-job application. The Town will pay related costs,
which are reasonable and necessary, provided that the educational
program and estimated costs are approved in advance. To be eligible
for reimbursement an employee must submit verification that s/he
successfully completed the program and provide an itemized list of
costs and expenses. All such requests for reimbursement shall be made
within two weeks of the program's completion.
B.
Administration may require attendance of any and all employees at
professional development seminars provided in-house.
C.
The eligibility requirements for education reimbursement are as
follows:
(1) The employee must be a regular status employee; and
The employee must be an employee in good standing who has been
employed by the Town for one continuous year.
(2)
A.
Reimbursement limit.
Reimbursement will be granted, up to a maximum of $3,000 per
employee per year, provided that (reimbursement is for education
and required materials):
(1)
B.
§ 400-8 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 400-10
1:630
§ 400-11. Regular part-time employee benefits.
Regular part-time employee benefits shall be as allowed and required by
law.
§ 400-12. COBRA benefits.
The employee complete an education reimbursement form and
submits a written course description to administration prior to
beginning the course;
(a)
The employee receives back an approved copy of the education
reimbursement form;
(b)
The employee successfully completes the course with a grade
higher than a "C" (original grade report must be submitted);
and
(c)
(d) The employee provides a paid copy of the education bill.
For employees who work less than 40 hours a week, this benefit
will be prorated.
(2)
Employees eligible for reimbursement from any other source
(scholarship, fellowship, veteran's program, or grant) may still seek
assistance under this program, but are reimbursed only for the
difference between the amount received from the other funding source
and the actual course cost, up to the maximum reimbursement
allowable under this policy based on the grade received. Education
reimbursement provided for under a collective bargaining agreement
supersedes this provision for employees covered by such an agreement.
C.
If an employee wishes to obtain approval for a degree program, an
acceptance letter or other documentation verifying enrollment is
required.
D.
Employees who are members of the Town of South Hadley health
insurance group and terminate employment (for reasons other than
gross misconduct) are entitled to COBRA benefits that allow the
employee to continue coverage in the group for up to 18 months at their
own expense at 102% of premium costs.
A.
Such continued coverage will be identical to the coverage provided
under the plan for active employees and their covered families, but will
cease if the premium is not paid on a timely basis or if they become
covered under another group health plan. In the case of a divorce or
legal separation, health insurance may be continued for dependents, in
accordance with the divorce/separation agreement. Continuation of this
coverage also ceases if the premium is not paid on a timely basis or if
coverage is obtained through another group.
B.
C. This provision is subject to amendment by federal law.
§ 400-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12
1:631
§ 400-13. Affordable Care Act (ACA).
The Town of South Hadley is implementing this policy and the following
procedures in order to meet its obligations under the Patient Protection and
Affordable Care Act (ACA). The Town of South Hadley is committed to being
in full compliance with the ACA. The Town of South Hadley is categorized as
a large employer under the ACA and may be subject to an Employer Share
Responsibility Payment (ESRP) if one of its full-time employees purchases
health insurance through the Massachusetts Health Connector and receives
a tax credit for that purchase. The following procedures are designed to
ensure that the Town of South Hadley will avoid, or at least minimize, any
liability for ESRPs.
If an employee separates services and is enrolled or eligible for
Medicare he or she will be eligible for COBRA Continuation Coverage
in the Town's MEDEX plan, provided that he or she has both Medicare
Part A and Medicare Part B.
D.
Look-back measurement method; measurement, administrative and
stability periods.
Pursuant to the ACA, ongoing (current) Town of South Hadley
employees who are employed for at least 130 hours of service
per month must be offered Town-sponsored health insurance for
themselves, their spouses, and dependents up to age 26. The Town
of South Hadley shall employ a twelve-month look-back
measurement method to determine eligibility for all employees.
After 12 months, the Town of South Hadley shall have up to three
months (the administrative period) to determine if any full-time
employees (total hours divided by 12 must equal 130 hours) have
not been offered Town-sponsored health insurance and to enroll
(or disenroll) them if necessary. If there are any such employees,
the Town of South Hadley shall offer them Town-sponsored health
insurance for the 12 months following the measurement period.
The twelve-month coverage is called the stability period. How many
hours an employee works during the stability period is relevant
only in determining whether he/she will be eligible for Townsponsored
health insurance coverage in the next stability period.
The measurement, administrative, and stability periods shall then
repeat themselves on an ongoing basis.
(1)
The administrative period will be the same length for all employees
and it will not serve to reduce or lengthen either the measurement
or stability periods. To prevent gaps in health insurance coverage,
the administrative period will overlap with the prior stability period
during which time an employee's classification (full-time or parttime)
will remain unchanged.
(2)
When the Town of South Hadley hires a new employee who is
expected to work on a full-time basis, the Town of South Hadley
shall offer Town-sponsored health insurance upon initial
(3)
A.
§ 400-12 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 400-13
1:632
employment. Once the employee has been employed by the Town
of South Hadley for a full standard measurement period (the same
period that applies to ongoing employees), he/she shall become
an ongoing employee and be included in the normal look-back
measurement cycle for determining eligibility.
For new employees expected to be variable hour, seasonal, and
part-time employees, the Town of South Hadley shall track their
hours of service using an initial measurement period of 12 months.
The initial measurement period shall begin on the first day of the
first calendar month following the employee's start date (or on
the first day of the first payroll period starting on or after the
employee's start date, if later). As with ongoing employees, an
administrative period of up to three months shall be employed,
along with a twelve-month stability period. Once a new variable
hour, seasonal or part-time employee has been employed by the
Town of South Hadley for a full standard measurement period
(the same period that applies to ongoing employees), he/she shall
become an ongoing employee and be included in the normal lookback
measurement cycle for determining eligibility.
(4)
Hours of service and periods of time not included in six-month
calculation.
As mentioned previously, the Town of South Hadley employee must
average at least 130 hours of service over a twelve-month period
to be entitled to Town-sponsored health insurance. The following
categories of service count toward the 130 average: each hour
worked for which employee is paid; unpaid short scheduled breaks
(not including unpaid lunch breaks of at least 30 minutes), paid
time off due to vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity (including
disability), layoff, jury duty, military duty or leave of absence.
Generally unpaid time off will not count toward the 130 hours of
service.
(1)
Certain periods of unpaid time off will not be included when
calculating the twelve-month standard measurement period. They
include: summer months for teachers and other school employees,
FMLA leave, military leave, jury duty. For these special periods
of unpaid time off, the Town of South Hadley will determine the
average hours during the measurement period, excluding the
special unpaid leave period, and will use that average as the
average for the entire measurement period.
(2)
B.
§ 400-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:633
Chapter 402
COMPLETE STREETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 255. Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 360.
§ 402-1. Findings and purpose; applicability.
§ 402-2. Scope; compliance required.
Complete streets are designed and operated to provide safety and
accessibility for all the users of Town roadways, trails and transit
systems, including pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, motorists,
commercial vehicles, and emergency vehicles, and for people of all ages
and abilities. Complete streets principles contribute toward the safety,
health, economic viability, equity and quality of life in a community by
providing accessible and efficient connections between home, schools,
work, recreation, and retail destinations by improving the pedestrian
and vehicular improvements through the community.
A.
The purpose of South Hadley's complete streets policy is to provide
accommodations for all road users by creating a road network that
meets the needs of individuals utilizing a full range of transportation
modes. To the best extent possible, the Town of South Hadley will
ensure that all plans, designs, operations and maintenance of streets
safely accommodate all users of all ages and abilities. This policy
directs decision makers to consistently plan, design, construct, and
maintain streets for the accommodation of all anticipated users,
including, but not limited to, pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists,
emergency vehicles, transit, freight, and commercial vehicles, in a
context-sensitive manner.
B.
This policy shall apply to all municipal, state, and federal (when allowed
by law) roadway repairs, upgrades, and expansion projects within the
public right-of-way and private developments requiring approval from
the Town. Procedures will be developed to ensure complete street
elements are incorporated into these activities.
C.
The Town of South Hadley recognizes that all users of all modes,
including, but not limited to, pedestrians, bicyclists, transit users,
school bus riders, motorcyclists, motorists, delivery and service
personnel, freight haulers, and emergency responders, are legitimate
users of streets and deserve safe facilities. "All users" includes users of
all ages and abilities, including those with disabilities.
A.
The Town of South Hadley recognizes that all projects (new,
maintenance, or reconstruction) are opportunities to implement
B.
§ 400-13 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 402-2
1:634
§ 402-3. Exceptions.
Exceptions to the policy are only allowed upon approval of the Town
Administrator based on recommendations by the Police Chief, Town Planner
and DPW Superintendent, or other relevant departments or authority:
§ 402-4. Best practices.
complete streets design principles. The Town will, to the maximum
extent possible, design, construct, maintain, and operate all streets to
provide for a comprehensive and integrated street network of facilities
for people of all ages and abilities.
Complete streets design recommendations shall be incorporated into
all publicly and privately funded projects, as appropriate. All
transportation infrastructure and street design projects requiring
funding or approval from the Town of South Hadley, as well as projects
funded by the state or federal government, such as Chapter 90 funds,
city improvement grants, Transportation Improvement Program (TIP),
MassWorks Infrastructure Program, Community Development Block
Grants (CDBG), Capital Funding, and other state and federal funds for
street and infrastructure design, shall adhere to the Town of South
Hadley's Complete Streets Policy. Private developers and related street
design components or corresponding street-related components,
including new subdivisions, shall adhere to the Complete Streets Policy
for the Town of South Hadley. In addition, to the extent practical,
state-owned roadways will comply with the complete streets resolution,
including the design, construction, and maintenance of such roadways
with the Town boundaries.
C.
Facilities where specific users are prohibited by law, such as interstate
freeways or pedestrian malls. An effort will be made in these cases for
accommodations elsewhere.
A.
Where cost of accommodation is excessively disproportionate to the
need or probable use or probable future use.
B.
The existing public right-of-way or adjacent land is constrained in a
manner that inhibits the addition of transit, bicycle, or pedestrian
improvements. In this case, the Town shall consider alternatives such as
lane reduction, lane narrowing, on-street parking relocation, shoulders,
signage, traffic calming, or enforcement.
C.
Where such facilities would constitute a threat to public safety or
health.
D.
Where construction and future maintenance will create significant
adverse environmental impacts to streams, floodplains, wetlands, or
historical resources.
E.
The Town of South Hadley's Complete Streets Policy will focus on
developing and maintaining a connected, integrated network that
A.
§ 402-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-4
1:635
serves all road users. Complete streets will be integrated into policies,
planning, and design of all types of public and private projects,
including new construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, repair, and
maintenance of transportation facilities on streets and redevelopment
projects.
Implementation of the Town of South Hadley's Complete Streets Policy
will be carried out cooperatively within all departments in the Town
of South Hadley, with multijurisdictional cooperation, to the greatest
extent possible, among private developers, and state, regional, and
federal agencies.
B.
Complete streets principles include the development and
implementation of projects in a context-sensitive manner in which
project implementation is sensitive to the community's physical,
economic, and social setting. The context-sensitive approach to process
and design includes a range of goals by considering stakeholder and
community values on a level plane with the project need. It includes
goals related to livability with greater participation of those affected in
order to gain project consensus. The overall goal of this approach is to
preserve and enhance scenic, aesthetic, historical, and environmental
resources while improving or maintaining safety, mobility, and
infrastructure conditions.
C.
The latest design guidance, standards, and recommendations available
will be used in the implementation of complete streets, including:
Massachusetts Department of Transportation, Project
Development and Design Guidebook.
(1)
Massachusetts Department of Transportation Separated Bike Lane
Planning and Design Guide.
(2)
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Designing Walkable
Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach.
(3)
National Association of City Transportation Officials (NACTO)
Urban Bikeway Design Guide and Urban Street Design Guide.
(4)
Federal Highway Administration Separated Bike Lane Planning and
Design Guide.
(5)
American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
(AASHTO), A Policy on Geometric Design of Highway and Streets,
as well as the AASHTO Guide for the Development of Bicycle
Facilities.
(6)
United States Department of Transportation Federal Highway
Administration's Manual on Uniform Design Controls.
(7)
(8) The Architectural Access Board (AAB) Rules and Regulations.
D.
§ 402-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 402-4
1:636
§ 402-5. Performance measures.
Complete streets implementation and effectiveness should be constantly
evaluated for success and opportunities for improvement. The Town will
develop performance measures to gauge the implementation and
effectiveness of the policies. These performance measures may include, but
not be limited to:
§ 402-6. Implementation.
Documents and plans created for the Town of South Hadley, such
as bicycle and pedestrian network plans.
(9)
A. Number of staff with complete streets training.
B. Total miles of bike lanes.
C. Total miles of roadway with a shoulder of four feet wide or greater.
D. Linear feet of sidewalk added or reconstructed.
E. Crosswalk and intersection improvements.
F. Number of crosswalks evaluated for ADA compliance.
G. Number of ADA-compliant curb ramps installed.
H. Closure of gaps in bicycle/pedestrian infrastructure network.
I. Number of bicycle racks installed.
J. Crash and personal injury data.
K. Citations for traffic violations.
L. Public participation in bicycle, pedestrian, and transit systems.
Estimate of the quantity of funds applied toward the design and
construction of complete streets measures.
M.
The Town shall seek to make complete streets practices a routine
part of everyday operations, shall approach transportation projects and
programs as an opportunity to improve streets and the transportation
network for all users, and shall work in coordination with other
departments, agencies, and jurisdictions to achieve complete streets.
A.
Implementation of this policy will be coordinated by the DPW
Superintendent and be carried out cooperatively within all departments
in the Town of South Hadley, with multijurisdictional cooperation, to the
greatest extent possible, among private developers, and state, regional,
and federal agencies.
B.
The Town will maintain a comprehensive inventory of pedestrian and
bicycle facility infrastructure that will prioritize projects to eliminate
C.
§ 402-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 402-6
1:637
Chapter 403
CRITERIA FOR LAND ACQUISITION OR ACCEPTANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Conservation Commission regulations — See
Ch. 305.
§ 403-1. Required characteristics.
In order for land to be considered for acquisition or acceptance by the
Conservation Commission, the parcel or parcels in question should have at
least one of the following characteristics:
gaps in the sidewalk network and to implement the Town's complete
streets build-out vision.
The Town shall review and either revise or develop proposed revisions
to all appropriate planning documents (master plan, open space and
recreation plan, etc.), zoning and subdivision codes, bylaws,
procedures, rules, regulations, guidelines, programs, and templates to
integrate complete streets principles.
D.
The Town shall promote interdepartmental project coordination among
Town departments with an interest in the public right-of-way in order
to make enhanced use of fiscal resources.
E.
The Town will train pertinent Town staff and decision-makers on the
content of complete streets principles and best practices for
implementing the Town's complete streets policy.
F.
The Town will seek out appropriate sources of funding and grants for
implementation of complete streets policies.
G.
A. Adjacent to other conservation or recreation lands.
Part of the Mount Holyoke Range, or have frontage on the Connecticut
River.
B.
Rare species habitat [as identified by the National Heritage and
Endangered Species Program (NHESP)].
C.
D. Public access and possible parking for a few cars.
Important water features, such as distinctive or unique wetlands,
springs, brooks, waterfalls, or vernal pools.
E.
Streamside or riverfront area, for passive recreation, habitat,
greenways, wildlife corridor.
F.
§ 402-6 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 403-1
1:638
Chapter 406
DAMAGE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Department of Public Works
regulations — See Ch. 315.
§ 406-1. Scope; when effective.
The following standards are to protect all parties, including, but not limited
to, the following: the Town of South Hadley, citizens, property owners,
taxpayers, agencies, subsidiaries, individuals, corporations/businesses,
boards and committees. It is in effect as dated.
§ 406-2. Written report of claims required.
Employees must articulate in a written report as to any claims of private
property damage. Such a claim may be made by an individual, business,
group or other public employee as well, that damage or a dangerous
situation due to the action or inaction of the Town and or its various
departments has occurred or exists.
High visual or aesthetic value, including nice views of or from the
location.
G.
Diverse landscape or habitat, such as a combination of woods, fields
and water.
H.
I. Unique or distinctive historical, archaeological, or geologic features.
J. Add to a potential greenway or trail system.
K. Preserve farmland.
Priority Natural Vegetation Community type, according to NHESP
definitions.
L.
Within the "Special Landscape Areas" boundaries as identified in the
1999 South Hadley Open Space and Recreation Plan.
M.
Within NHESP's BioMap Core Habitat or Supporting Natural
Landscape, or Living Waters Core Habitat or the adjacent riparian area.
N.
O. Protect public water supply wells or reservoirs.
P. Five or more acres in size.
§ 403-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 406-3
1:639
§ 406-3. Letter to Administrator; limitations on employee action.
The individual reporting the claim shall be directed to send a letter
describing the basis of said claim to the Town Administrator. No
affirmations or opinions of fault or responsibility in respect to the Town
should be expressed or insinuated by an employee. If such an assertion
is made by an individual employee without full authority to make such an
assertion, that employee may be held personally and financially responsible
for such a claim and any ensuing costs awarded to the claimant.
§ 406-4. Insurance coverage.
The claimant should be directed to contact the claimant's insurance
company, legal counsel or the Town Administrator's office for further
explanation. The employee will not express an opinion and/or a
determination as to cost, fault, cause or remedy.
§ 406-5. Limitations on work on private property.
No work shall be done on private property except those properties/parcels
considered to be in an easement or a right-of-way. This policy may be set
aside in the event of a state of emergency or similar circumstances called
for by the appropriate authority.
§ 406-6. Use of public equipment, vehicles, materials or tools.
No public equipment, vehicles, materials or tools will be used on private
property under the same parameters expressed in § 406-5 of this policy.
§ 406-7. Written instructions required for work on private property.
Any instruction to perform tasks on private property, other than the
exceptions expressed, must be stated in writing and signed by the Town
Administrator and Department of Public Works Superintendent.
§ 406-8. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this policy may result in discipline up to and including
termination of employment.

Chapter 407
DEFERRALS/CONTINUATIONS OF PUBLIC HEARINGS
(2) A conflict of interest does not exist, and/or the consultant does
meet the minimum qualifications, therefore, the selection made by
the Planning Board stands.
F. No decision on appeal. In the event that no decision is made within one
month (30 days) following the filing of the appeal, the selection made by
the Board shall stand.
A. On June 3, 2019, the Town of South Hadley Planning Board held a
public hearing, pursuant to MGL. c. 41, § 81Q, and MGL. c. 40A, § 9, to
consider proposed regulations governing fees. At the close of the public
hearing, the Planning Board voted to adopt regulations governing
applications, application review fees and a new schedule of fees for
review conducted by the Planning Board and its consultants on the
various types of applications which come before it.
B. Said general rules and regulations concerning application
requirements, application fees, application review fees, and fee
schedule adopted June 3, 2019, were filed with the Town Clerk on June
14, 2019.
C. On August 19, 2019, the Town of South Hadley Planning Board held a
public hearing, pursuant to MGL. c. 41, § 81Q, and MGL. c. 40A, § 9, to
consider proposed amendments to said general rules and regulations as
were adopted June 3, 2019, and filed with the Town Clerk on June 14,
2019. At the close of the public hearing, the Planning Board voted to
adopt amendments to said general rules and regulations governing
applications, application review fees and a new schedule of fees for
review conducted by the Planning Board and its consultants on the
various types of applications which come before it. Said amendments,
as adopted August 19, 2019, were filed with the Town Clerk on August
22, 2019.
§ 345-13 REVOLVING FUNDS § 407-1
65:7
§ 407-1. Procedure for requesting deferral/continuation.
Applicants (and/or their representatives) must make requests to continue a
scheduled public hearing in a timely manner.
Chapter 408
DEPARTMENTAL RECEIPTS AND TURNOVER POLICY
§ 408-1. Departmental receipts and turnover policy enumerated.
A. If such a request is received by the Office of the Planning and
Conservation Department at least 72 hours3 (excluding weekends and
Town Hall recognized holidays), the Planning Board will grant the
continuation without the applicant or their representative being
present.
B. If such a request is received by the Office of the Planning and
Conservation Department less than 72 hours4 (excluding weekends and
Town Hall recognized holidays), the Planning Board will consider the
request at the scheduled time of the public hearing but the applicant
and/or their representative must be present. If the Board denies the
request, the public hearing will proceed as scheduled and the Board
will reconsider the request after the public hearing has been reopened
and persons present for the hearing are given an opportunity to
comment on the subject of the public hearing.
C. Whenever such a request is received by the Office of the Planning and
Conservation staff, the staff will make reasonable efforts to provide
public notice of the request and how it relates to this policy. These
efforts will entail, as time and resources permit, posting of the request
on the Town's website's calendar and agenda pages, emailing the
various departments that are notified of applications for review, and
mailing of notices to the certified abutters by regular mail.
D. However, if the applicant requests such a deferral/continuation for
more than two consecutive scheduled public hearings on the
application, the applicant (or their authorized representative) shall
attend the Planning Board hearing, at which time they may request the
deferral/continuation and explain the detailed reasons why the hearing
needs to be deferred/continued. If the Board denies the request, the
Board shall immediately open the hearing. The Board will make an
exception to this requirement if the reason for the request is due to the
Town departments/consultant not having completed their review of the
application, or if one or more members of the Planning Board have
indicated they are unable to attend the public hearing, or Town Hall is
to be closed unexpectedly at that time.
3. Editor's Note: So in original.
4. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 407-1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 408-1
65:8

Chapter 414
HOUSE NUMBERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 123. Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 360.
§ 406-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 414-1
1:640
§ 414-1. Purpose; coordination with other bylaws and regulations.
This policy will outline the process to provide any new or changed addresses
to MassGIS for E911 purposes. This policy is to be utilized in conjunction
with Town Bylaw Chapter 123, Buildings, Numbering of, as well as the
Subdivision Regulations, § 360-21B(8).
§ 414-2. Procedure.
Chapter 418
INSPECTIONAL SERVICES
§ 418-1. Building Department organization.
The Building Department has three divisions: plumbing (including gas),
wiring (including electrical) and building. The department is directed and
managed by the Building Commissioner.
§ 418-2. Weekly project meetings.
All inspectors are required to attend weekly project meetings as called by
the Building Commissioner or Town Administrator.
§ 418-3. Filing of completed applications with clerk.
All completed applications submitted to an inspector regarding a building
project in the Town will be submitted directly to Building Department clerk
by the respective inspector within five working days following submission.
An exception to this timing requirement must be noted, in writing, and must
be for good cause (which may include an instance where the inspector was
absent from work).
If an address is generated through either the bylaw process or
subdivision notification, or if an address is changed, the department
making this determination must report this information to the Town's
"addressing authority" as determined by the Town Administrator.
Currently the "addressing authority" is the Building Commissioner.
A.
The person assigned as "addressing authority" will compile a listing
with the new or changed address, the map and parcel and the LOC ID
for the Assessors, if known.
B.
This listing will be delivered to the Assessors, who will facilitate
submittal to MassGIS at the following e-mail address:
notify911address@state.ma.us.
C.
D. MassGIS requests these changes to be sent in as they occur.
§ 414-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-4
1:641
§ 418-4. Log-in numbers for applications.
All applications will be assigned a log-in number with a designation code for
the appropriate division and/or action.
§ 418-5. Application fees.
All application fees will be processed (recorded and submitted) during the
week in which the fee was received, with the log-in number printed in the
memo line or otherwise clearly displayed on the check. All fees submitted
will be secured immediately in a lock box or locked file. Because the log-in
information must be recorded on the check, no cash may be accepted.
§ 418-6. Applications requiring multiple permits.
No permit will be considered or issued if an additional permit from another
division may be required. The Building Commissioner has systemic
authority on whether a permit is required for all divisions.
§ 418-7. Outside work by inspectors prohibited.
Unless permitted by law, no inspector shall accept outside work within the
Town of South Hadley. This legal provision covers and includes any firm or
corporation in which an individual may have a financial interest.
§ 418-8. Projects where permission is in question.
All projects known to any inspector where the existence of a permit or
application for a permit is not obvious, is unclear, or is in question must be
brought up at the Building Department weekly meetings to enable the Town
to provide consistent enforcement of regulations and procedures.
§ 418-9. Inspector logs.
§ 418-10. Record of hours worked.
All inspectors must keep a log of all work performed, including their
schedule. The log is intended for the purpose of establishing consistent
enforcement by the Town should any applicant or individual ever
challenge or question the manner in which the Building Department is
performing its required services. The inspector logs must indicate the
location where work was performed, the nature of the work performed,
and the hours associated with the work performed.
A.
Logs of work performed must be made contemporaneously and
submitted to the Building Commissioner each week.
B.
All Town employees are also required to record their hours worked for
purposes of wage and hour law compliance.
A.
§ 418-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 418-10
1:642
§ 418-11. Additional rules and regulations.
All other procedures, policies, ordinances, laws, local rules, or regulations
relevant to the Building Department and the role of the inspector must be
followed.
Chapter 427
LIBRARY POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Library Trustees — See Ch. 335.
The time sheets or submittals must be signed off by the Building
Commissioner or his/her designee. Administration also has authority to
sign off on time.
B.
§ 418-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 418-11
1:643

ARTICLE I
Staff Personal Appearance and Professional Conduct
[Approved 2-1-1988]
§ 427-1. Personal appearance. [Amended 11-15-1999]
§ 427-2. Professional conduct.
While at work, all staff members, in both public and nonpublic
departments, are to present a businesslike appearance in both dress
and cleanliness.
A.
Neatness and cleanliness are essential. Avoid extremes so attire befits
the dignity of the profession. Good taste and judgment are expected at
all times.
B.
C. Anyone unsure of what is appropriate should consult with the Director.
It is the responsibility of the staff to create and maintain a friendly,
welcoming, courteous, helpful, and pleasant atmosphere. Every patron
is entitled to equal and competent service. Patrons awaiting service or
assistance take precedence over all other work assignments. Every staff
member is expected to comply with this policy and be alert to patron
needs.
A.
Proper self-restraint and tact should be exercised at all time. Any
criticism or complaint should be referred to the Director. Punctuality
is required. Employees are expected to be ready for work at the
designated time and not merely be in the building or visiting with fellow
staff members. All conversations, be they with the public or fellow
staff, should be kept within bounds and not become mere visiting.
This includes telephone calls. Although whispering is not required, a
reasonable volume should be maintained so as not to disturb the public
or fellow staff.
B.
While on duty, eating, chewing gum, and discussion of personal affairs
is an unprofessional breach of good taste. Everyone is expected to be
meticulous in avoiding any careless or personal use of library time or
property.
C.
§ 427-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-2
1:645

ARTICLE II
Collection Development Policy
[Approved 12-3-2007]
§ 427-3. Collection purpose.
The South Hadley Public Library exists to provide total library service
for the entire community through the development and effective use of a
collection of books and other materials specifically selected to satisfy the
informational, recreational, educational, and cultural needs of library users.
§ 427-4. Service priorities.
The provision of popular materials and services is considered the top
priority of the library. Patrons constantly seek materials in a variety
of formats, including books, magazines, newspapers, audiovisual,
electronic, and other media formats. With the availability of libraries
in the public schools and Mount Holyoke College, the public library's
obligation to support formal learning and curricula is reduced. In
addition to materials and regular library services, programs such as
children's storytime sessions and special events, the summer reading
program, adult discussion groups and other programs sponsored by the
library strive to meet the needs and interests of the library's users.
A.
It is the library's goal to furnish a comfortable and safe facility with
adequate space to house both materials and services. The library also
strives to provide an adequate number of trained staff to assist patrons
in using the library to their full potential and to contribute to the
development of library collections and services. The library
accomplishes these goals through:
(1) Purchasing appropriate materials with available funds.
Participating in the Central/Western Massachusetts Automated
Resource Sharing System (C/WMARS) network centrally serving
multi-type libraries in western and central Massachusetts.
(2)
Supplementing the collection by borrowing materials for patrons
through interlibrary loan coordinated by the Western
Massachusetts Regional Library System (WMRLS).
(3)
Using the Regional Reference Service provided by WMRLS to
answer questions that are beyond the library's capacities.
(4)
(5) Participating in resource sharing efforts with area libraries.
Offering programs and special events on a variety of topics to
encourage reading, recreational, and learning pursuits.
(6)
Applying for grants to augment collections and services for which
there is high demand or demonstrated need.
(7)
B.
§ 427-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-5
1:647
§ 427-5. Scope of collection.
§ 427-6. Responsibility for collection.
The Library Board of Trustees retains the final authority concerning the
library's selection policy. The Board delegates the charge of administering
the policy to the Library Director. The Director, in turn, may delegate the
duty for selection, weeding, and maintenance to specific staff members
based on their areas of responsibility, expertise, and interest. However,
the decisions these staff members make concerning the collection will be
subject to review by the Library Director, who must answer to the Trustees
for collection development.
§ 427-7. Intellectual freedom.
Acknowledging the library's priorities described above, it is the goal of
the library to provide a collection that meets the demand for current
and popular materials while providing a balance of older, still relevant,
items. Through collection development, that includes both acquiring
and discarding materials, the library strives to maintain a collection
of materials that is current, authoritative, well used, in good physical
condition, and available in a variety of media formats. The library
does not collect textbooks, scholarly books and periodicals, or other
resources that are deemed more appropriate for the school, academic,
or special library. Because the library participates in resource sharing
regionally, statewide, and nationally through entities such as WMRLS
and C/WMARS, it does not attempt to purchase all items requested by
patrons. Infrequently requested and specialized items that are beyond
the scope of the collection are instead borrowed through interlibrary
loan, or patrons are referred to other libraries that own the material.
A.
The adult collection includes books, magazines, movies, music,
electronic resources, and other appropriate materials. The collection
serves older teens, adults, and senior citizens. Books include fiction
and nonfiction in hardcover, paperback, and large-print formats. The
library maintains a collection of popular magazines and newspapers
and retains limited back issues for most titles. The audiovisual
collection includes movies, music, and other popular media formats.
B.
The youth collection includes books, magazines, movies, music,
electronic resources, and other appropriate materials. The collection
serves children from infants through the early teen years. Books
include picture books, beginning readers, juvenile fiction and
nonfiction, chapter books, and graphic novels in hardcover and
paperback formats. The youth department also maintains a collection
of age-appropriate magazine titles.
C.
Children are encouraged to responsibly use the adult collection when
appropriate and vice versa.
D.
§ 427-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 427-7
1:648
§ 427-8. Selection criteria.
The library subscribes to the principles of freedom of expression as
stated in the Bill of Rights of the United States Constitution, specifically
in regard to the right to publish and read diverse opinions. As a public
institution the library is committed to the principles of intellectual
freedom and is cognizant of its obligation to provide as wide a spectrum
of materials as possible. Furthermore, the library endorses the
Freedom to Read, Freedom to View, and the Library Bill of Rights
and their interpretations issued by the American Library Association.
Included in these statements is the commitment to honor the rights
of the individual to use the library regardless of age, race, religion,
national origin, or social and political views.
A.
Librarians are responsible to direct patrons toward appropriate
materials, but will not restrict the use of the collection based upon
the age of the user. The library takes the position that the risk of not
providing access to information and ideas is greater than the risk of
providing it. Therefore, the library staff will not act as in loco parentis.
B.
Responsibility for the materials children borrow, or library computers
used, rests entirely at the discretion of parents and guardians.
C.
The library reserves the right to control the use of rare and/or fragile
items in the collection, such as local history materials, to the extent
required to preserve them from harm.
D.
The Library Director and delegated staff are responsible for the
selection of library materials. Staff members make recommendations
based on their experience and knowledge of library services, their
familiarity with the community's needs, and their knowledge of the
existing collection.
A.
Materials are judged on the basis of the work as a whole, not on a part
taken out of context. By using the following criteria for acquisitions,
gifts, and withdrawals, the library strives to strengthen its collection
through a fair and balanced selection process:
(1) Popular interest and demand.
(2) Critical reviews; professional journals; publishers' catalogs.
(3) Reputation, popularity, or significance of author.
Accurate coverage of contemporary or historical topics, issues, and
personalities.
(4)
(5) Currency of information.
Relation to existing collection; the balance of opinions, including
minority views.
(6)
(7) Artistic expression, originality, imagination, and presentation.
B.
§ 427-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-8
1:649
§ 427-9. Gifts.
All donated materials are reviewed as part of the selection process, using
the same above criteria as other acquisitions. Gift materials become the
unrestricted property of the library and may be added to the collection, sold
in a book sale, or discarded where appropriate. The library provides gift
receipts but does not appraise or give value to materials for tax purposes.
§ 427-10. Withdrawal of materials (weeding).
§ 427-11. Suggestions for addition or reconsideration of library
materials.
(8) Ability to reach the intended audience in a comprehensible manner.
(9) Cost, including maintenance, in relation to demand.
(10)Permanent value as a standard work.
(11)Quality of manufacture, durability, and condition.
(12)Technical merit and ease of use.
Availability through other resources, including interlibrary loan
and the internet.
(13)
In order to maintain a collection that is current, in good condition,
well used, relevant to community interests and reliable, materials are
withdrawn on a systematic and continuing basis.
A.
Materials are discarded when they are judged to be dated or obsolete,
inaccurate, seldom used, in poor condition, or otherwise no longer
appropriate for the collection. The availability of shelf space is also,
unfortunately, a major consideration. Titles withdrawn due to loss,
damage, or theft are not automatically replaced. The criteria used in
selection also apply to the process of weeding. Materials withdrawn
from the library will be disposed of in a manner consistent with their
quality and condition. Some materials may be sold for the benefit of the
library. Materials judged to be too dated, inaccurate, or unattractive
will be discarded.
B.
Back issues of periodicals are kept for a specified period of time and
then recycled. The period of storage time for each periodical is
determined by the continued need for the title to be available in the
library. Space limitations may preclude some periodicals from being
kept for extended periods of time.
C.
Community involvement is a key principle in the development of the
library's collection. Patron suggestions for new acquisitions are always
welcome, as "popular demand" is an integral part of the selection
criteria. Many materials not owned by the library can be obtained
on loan from other institutions. Suggestions for the purchase of new
A.
§ 427-8 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 427-11
1:650
materials should be in writing, or a computer printout, and include
as much publishing information as possible. The suggestion should
also include the patron's name and contact information. The selection
criteria listed above will be applied to the request.
Patrons may also voice their concerns over the inclusion of specific
materials within the collection. The Board of Library Trustees believes
that censorship is a purely individual matter and declares that while
anyone is free to reject material of which one does not approve, one
cannot exercise this right to restrict the freedom of others. The
Trustees and Library Director will remove no materials from the library
except under a formal reconsideration request. Any library patron in
good standing may request the reconsideration of materials owned by
the library. The steps for a formal request are as follows:
The customer will fill out and sign a "Request for Reconsideration"
(appended) or submit an equivalent written and signed statement.
(1)
The document will be forwarded to the Library Director, who will
attach his/her comments and forward this information to the
Library Trustees for discussion at their next regularly scheduled
meeting.
(2)
The Trustees and Library Director will discuss the issue in depth
regarding use of the material within the library and make a formal
recommendation.
(3)
The patron who submitted the statement will receive a written
response within 21 days of the Board's decision.
(4)
B.
§ 427-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-11
1:651

ARTICLE III
Local History Collection Policy
[Approved 12-3-2007]
§ 427-12. Supplement to collection policy.
This policy supplements the library's Collection Development Policy.99
§ 427-13. Role and scope of collection.
§ 427-14. Acquisitions.
The South Hadley Public Library preserves and provides access to
the history of South Hadley and envisions that all patrons interested
in local history will have access to appropriate materials resulting in
better knowledge of the community. The historical materials included
in the Local History Collection are part of the community's collective
heritage, holding permanent value. It is the responsibility of the library
to preserve these resources for current research and future
generations.
A.
The purpose of this collection is to collect and preserve materials that
document the history of the Town of South Hadley and its citizens,
including other geographical areas as they pertain to the history and
development of the Town. The library primarily collects paper-based
primary and secondary resources such as books, pamphlets, official
reports, maps, works of local authors, photographs and unpublished
diaries and manuscripts. Materials must be accurate, suitable for
community need or interest, and serve a public rather than personal
interest.
B.
An active effort is made to add to the collection through the acquisition
of materials from donors, private dealers, auctions, publishers, and
other reliable sources. Private donations may require a signed donation
form. All acquisitions become the unrestricted property of the South
Hadley Public Library.
A.
Staff, space, and budget limitations are considerations when adding
new materials. Materials that fall beyond the scope of the collection,
need repair costing more than their intellectual value, or require
special shelving or storage because of a unique format will not be
collected. All materials must be free of dirt, mold, moisture, and pests,
and must be in good or repairable condition.
B.
The South Hadley Public Library reserves the right to remove materials
deemed unsuitable to the collection. Materials may be moved to the
circulating collection, offered to another institution, sold, or discarded.
C.
99.Editor's Note: See Art. II of this chapter.
§ 427-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-15
1:653
§ 427-15. Organization.
Materials that are not donated together as a single collection may be
dispersed among the historical collection according to subject or personal
name. Individual files may be organized by type of documents or
chronological order.
§ 427-16. Preservation and access.
§ 427-17. Cooperative agreements.
The South Hadley Public Library may enter into cooperative arrangements
with other organizations in order to preserve historical materials and/or
make them more widely available.
§ 427-18. Exceptions.
The Library Director, or a delegated staff member, has the authority to make
exceptions to this policy when benefiting the library and community.
Preservation of library materials is an integral part of the development
of the collection. New acquisitions will not be available to the public
until proper archival storage arrangements are made. Materials may be
removed from the library and placed in off-site archival storage if the
building conditions or public use threatens the condition of the item.
A.
The Local History Collection is available to researchers and the general
public during regular library hours. Certain restrictions are in place to
protect the future viability of rare and/or fragile materials. Part of the
collection is kept in staff-only areas; patrons must speak to the senior
staff person on duty to gain access. Other materials are shelved in
the multi-purpose room. Materials do not circulate, although duplicate
copies of some items can be found in the circulating collection. To
measure use, researchers may be asked to sign a register when using
any historical resource. Photocopying is allowed only at the discretion
of the senior staff person. Due to staff limitations, detailed research
assistance is not available.
B.
§ 427-15 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 427-18
1:654
ARTICLE IV
Confidentiality of Library Records; Patron Privacy Policy
[Approved 12-3-2007]
§ 427-19. General policy.
The South Hadley Public Library respects the right of library users to
privacy and confidentiality, in accordance with MGL c. 4, § 7, cl. 26 and MGL
c. 78, § 7, which state that circulation and registration records identifying
the names, addresses, e-mail addresses, and telephone numbers of library
users, and the materials borrowed, are not public records. The intellectual
pursuits of individuals using library materials or library computers are
considered confidential information.
§ 427-20. Confidentiality of information.
In accord with the law, the policy of the library is not to reveal the
borrowing records, holds, or fine records to any person other than the
owner of the library card. The library does recognize that it may be
necessary for a parent or legal guardian to be provided with information
about a minor's library records (e.g., when a child's library materials have
incurred fines or are lost). In these cases, the parent or legal guardian who
is financially responsible for the child's library materials will be supplied
with the pertinent information.
§ 427-21. Personal identification number.
Patrons are encouraged to obtain a personal identification number (PIN)
through the C/WMARS online catalog so that they can access their
borrowing record privately from home, work, or a library computer.
§ 427-22. Use of library computers.
The library respects the rights of users to privacy and confidentiality in
their use of library computers. The library will not release the names of
persons using internet computers or information accessed during individual
computer sessions except as required by law.
§ 427-23. Subpoena required for release of information.
No records can be made available to any inquiries, governmental or
otherwise, unless a subpoena has been served by a court of competent
jurisdiction and the library administration has consulted with Town Counsel
to determine if it is proper to release the requested information.
Such records shall not be made available to any individual or agency
except pursuant to such process, order, or subpoena as may be
authorized under the authority of, and pursuant to, federal, state, or
local law relating to civil, criminal, or administrative discovery
procedures or legislative investigative power.
A.
§ 427-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-23
1:655
§ 427-24. Patriot Act.
The USA Patriot Act supersedes state law and expands the federal
government's authority for access to library records and documents to
investigate matters of national security. It also expands federal law
enforcement's authorization to track telephone and electronic
communication. This law also prohibits library staff from informing patrons
if federal agents have obtained records in their name.
§ 427-25. Referral of requests to Director.
Library staff should refer all formal requests for circulation, registration, or
computer records to the Library Director.
Upon receipt of such process, order, or subpoena, the Director will
notify the Chair of the Library Trustees and consult with Town Counsel
to determine if such process, order, or subpoena is in proper form and
if there is a showing of good cause for issuance. If the process, order,
or subpoena is not in proper form or if good cause has not been shown,
such defects must be corrected.
B.
§ 427-23 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 427-25
1:656
ARTICLE V
Circulation Policy
[Approved 12-3-2007]
§ 427-26. Library cards; minors.
§ 427-27. Loan periods.
§ 427-28. Loan limits.
Limits are placed on the quantity of materials borrowed as follows:
Any resident of Massachusetts may be issued a South Hadley Public
Library card. Residents of towns within the C/WMARS network are
encouraged to get a library card from their home library. Out-of-state
residents who work in South Hadley, or are from the immediate area,
are welcome to get a library card and use the facility. Library cards are
registered for a three-year period and must be updated with verified
information after expiration. Students and faculty from Mount Holyoke
College and other area institutions may apply for a card entitling them
to borrowing privileges during their school year. Proof of address is
required in all instances. There is no charge for library cards; however,
lost cards may be charged a fee to cover the cost of replacement.
A.
Children are encouraged to get their first library card after they have
reached five years of age. Parents and guardians are responsible for
returning materials borrowed on a minor's card and are financially
responsible for any fines or fees accumulated on the library card of a
minor in their care. It is the responsibility of parents/guardians, not the
library staff, to monitor proper use of the library and its resources by
children.
B.
All movies, magazines, and periodical item types checked out to patrons
circulate for seven days, with one renewal for seven days. It is
recommended that library staff do not override the renewal limit.
Exceptions may be made for teachers, homebound patrons, or other
extenuating circumstances; in this case see the Library Director or
Circulation Supervisor.
A.
Most other material checked out circulates for 21 days, with one
renewal for 21 days. It is recommended that library staff do not
override the renewal limit except as noted above.
B.
Material that is circulated mainly within the South Hadley library, such
as museum passes and equipment loans, will have varying loan periods
based on the restrictions of each item.
C.
A. Music compact discs: limit 20 items per library card.
B. Movies: limit 10 items.
C. CD-ROM and other software: limit 20 items.
§ 427-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-28
1:657
§ 427-29. Interlibrary loans (ILL).
§ 427-30. Fines; blocking further loans.
§ 427-31. Lost book payment policy.
D. Audio-books (books on tape, CD, etc.): limit 20 items.
E. Per library card: limit 50 total items checked out at any given time.
Maximum number of system-wide holds and ILL requests a patron may
have on his/her record at one time: 20.
F.
"Interlibrary loan" is defined as a "library to library" loan. This section
applies to material checked out to an established library, usually an
institution that is not a member of the C/WMARS library network.
A.
Materials will circulate for 35 days with no renewal. South Hadley staff
may extend the loan if requested.
B.
No daily fines will accumulate, but replacement invoices will be
generated for lost material. Borrowing libraries are responsible for
lending and retrieving the materials to and from their local patrons. The
borrowing library is responsible for payment for lost materials.
C.
Books and other circulating print and audio material accrue a $0.10
daily overdue fine with a $3 maximum fine per item.
A.
Movies (DVD and VHS tape item types) accrue a $1 daily fine with a
maximum fine of $5 per item.
B.
Patrons are blocked by the system when:
(1) Their registration expires.
The patron owes $10 or more in fines, replacement costs, and/or
fees.
(2)
(3) The patron has billed material.
(4) The patron has more than 50 items checked out.
C.
Blocked library cards may not be used at this library or any other
member library of the C/WMARS network.
D.
Material that has been checked out to the patron on the C/WMARS
system, is 28 days or more overdue, and has been billed by the system is
considered "lost." A replacement invoice/bill is generated by C/WMARS.
Patrons may return the lost item or pay their bill at any circulating
C/WMARS library. Local residents may speak to the South Hadley
Circulation Supervisor or Library Director about replacing the material
with a comparable item. All payments for lost South Hadley materials
will be paid by cash or check/money order made out to the "South
A.
§ 427-28 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 427-31
1:658
Hadley Public Library" and placed in a secure location with other fine
payments. Staff should clear the patron's record by choosing the "Mark
Lost Item" option from the circulation system, then processing the fine
payment.
Payments for non-South Hadley materials will be made to the owning
library using the following procedure:
Patron comes into the South Hadley Public Library to resolve a lost
book charge from another library.
(1)
South Hadley staff accepts payment for lost material in the form of
a check or money order. Patron makes the check or money order
out to the owning library of the material. For a list of library names,
consult the Massachusetts Public Library Directory or C/WMARS
directory.
(2)
South Hadley staff note patron barcode number on the check in the
memo area. Staff verifies patron address on the check and in the
library card record. Note: It is important that the address on the
check and in the system is accurate.
(3)
South Hadley staff clears the lost book from the patron's record by
making a payment on the replacement cost of the item. A printout
of this transaction is made. Note: If a printout is not possible, then
library staff includes a note with the check listing the lost item
information.
(4)
The printout is placed with the check and mailed to the owning
library.
(5)
B.
§ 427-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-31
1:659

ARTICLE VI
Internet Acceptable Use Policy
[Approved 3-3-1997; amended 10-4-1999; 12-2-2002; 11-10-2003;
10-3-2006]
§ 427-32. Findings; use by minors; limitations on access.
§ 427-33. Rules of conduct.
The library views access to the internet as a privilege that has
accompanying rules. The following are rules of conduct for using the
internet in the South Hadley Public Library:
The internet allows users to connect to networks of resources outside
the library. It is one of many information sources available for library
patrons. The library encourages patrons to take advantage of this free
service.
A.
The South Hadley Public Library does not monitor and has no control
over the information accessed through the internet, nor does the library
have complete knowledge of what is on the internet. Information on the
internet may be reliable and current or it may be inaccurate, out-ofdate,
or unavailable at times. Patrons access the internet at their own
discretion. The South Hadley Public Library cannot be held responsible
for the content of the internet. The library does not control patron
access to materials or protect patrons from information they may find
personally offensive or inappropriate.
B.
As with other library materials, a child's use of the internet is the
responsibility of the parent/legal guardian. Parents/Legal guardians are
responsible for ensuring their own minor children's safety and security
when using electronic mail, chat rooms, and other forms of direct
electronic communication. Parents/Legal guardians should discuss
their expectations for the use of the internet with their minor children.
The decision as to whether a minor child may use the internet is up to
the parent/legal guardian, not a governmental authority.
C.
Staff will assist patrons with internet use as time and experience
permit. Staff will be glad to get patrons on the "Information
Superhighway" but as there are literally thousands of web sites, staff
cannot be experts on every one of them.
D.
Internet access will be available on a first-come/first-served basis, with
up to one hour allotted to each patron. The library reserves the right to
limit internet access at certain peak usage periods (e.g., after school,
vacations, summer months), or grant additional time, in order to
provide fair and equal access to all. The library reserves the right to
institute an internet sign-up sheet or time management software.
E.
A. Internet computers will not be used for any illegal activity.
§ 427-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-33
1:661
§ 427-34. E-mail.
The South Hadley Public Library does not offer e-mail accounts to patrons
but existing e-mail accounts such as those through Hot Mail or Yahoo!
can be accessed through the library's internet computers. The library does
not accept responsibility for the privacy of cached (temporarily stored)
messages left after a patron is finished using the internet.
§ 427-35. Printing.
For printing, each page costs $0.10. Prompt payment is requested. The
library reserves the right to alter the price structure at any time.
§ 427-36. Violations of internet policy or rules of conduct.
Library staff is authorized to take prompt and appropriate action to enforce
the rules of conduct and/or to prohibit the use of the internet by patrons
who fail to comply with the internet acceptable use policy as stated or
implied herein. Misuse of the computer or internet access as described
above will result in the loss of computer privileges for up to 30 days.
Subsequent violations may result in a permanent ban from internet access.
Appeals for reinstatement must be made in writing to the Library Director,
who shall have 45 days to respond.
Users will not violate MGL c. 272, § 31, the Harmful to Minors Statute,
which prohibits dissemination of material which is harmful to minors or
which is obscene; or dissemination or possession of child pornography.
B.
Disclosing, using, or disseminating personal identity information about
minors is prohibited.
C.
D. Users will respect copyright laws and licensing agreements.
E. Installation, downloading, or modification of software is prohibited.
F. Downloading to the library computer's hard drives is prohibited.
Alteration or destruction of library computers, data or attached
equipment in any way is prohibited.
G.
H. Users will not attempt to access restricted files or networks.
Users will not attempt to disrupt library computers or networks in any
way.
I.
J. Users will respect the privacy of others.
Users will not engage in libelous or slanderous activities or send
threatening, harassing or defamatory materials or messages.
K.
Inappropriate or disruptive behavior in the library or on its grounds will
not be tolerated.
L.
§ 427-33 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 427-37
1:662
§ 427-37. Disclaimer of liability.
The South Hadley Public Library, including the Trustees and the staff, and
the Town of South Hadley are not liable for any negative consequences
that may result from using the South Hadley Public Library's computer
terminals. The above assume no responsibility and are not liable for any
direct or indirect damages arising from the use of information found on
the internet, or any communications sent through the library's computers.
Patrons use the library's computers and the internet at their own risk.
§ 427-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-37
1:663

ARTICLE VII
Meeting Room Policy and Rules of Use
[Approved 6-7-2010; amended 11-3-2014]
§ 427-38. Purpose.
The South Hadley Public Library's Board of Library Trustees has
established this policy to ensure fair and equitable use of the library's
meeting spaces. Meetings being held at the library must not interfere with
regular library services or programs.
§ 427-39. Guidelines.
All meetings must be open to the public. Library meeting space is
primarily for nonprofit organizations, groups, and individuals
presenting civic, educational, and cultural programs to the public.
Private, closed, and/or family functions are not permitted.
A.
There is no fee for nonprofit use of the rooms. For-profit use of the
room (e.g., sales, direct marketing, public promotion of a commercial
interest, consulting, private tutoring, etc.) is subject to a fee of $50 for
up to two initial hours, $25 for each additional hour. Checks should be
made payable to the "South Hadley Public Library."
B.
One person from each group must assume responsibility for the
meeting and provide contact information when reserving a room.
Information about the organization and a description of the program
being offered are required.
C.
All meetings must provide free admission to the program. Merchandise
related to the program may be sold as long as purchase is neither
mandatory for admission nor required to participate in the program.
Nonprofit groups may request voluntary, free-will donations from
participants to defray the cost of speakers and presenters.
D.
Because the library is a public meeting space, meetings being held at
the library will be listed on a public calendar of library activities.
E.
In order to make meeting space widely available to a variety of groups,
limits may be placed on the number of times a single organization may
use the meeting spaces in a calendar year.
F.
Local businesses and associations may use the room for infrequent
business meetings, provided that direct public marketing and sales do
not take place.
G.
Requests for meeting space are reviewed by the Library Director for
compliance with library and Town policies. A Meeting Room Request
Form may be used by the staff to track meeting room requests.
Requests must be approved before space is reserved.
H.
§ 427-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-39
1:665
§ 427-40. Meeting spaces.
§ 427-41. Group responsibilities.
Individual political candidates may not use the meeting rooms for
campaign purposes.
I.
Library programs (including those coordinated by the Friends of the
Library), Town-sponsored programs, and school-sponsored activities
will be given priority in reserving the rooms.
J.
Most public meetings will be scheduled in the Trustees Conference
Room (capacity: 24) and the Community Meeting Room (capacity: 120).
These rooms are also available during non-library hours. Arrangements
for after-hours use of the rooms require the approval of the Library
Director, and a member of the booking group must be trained by library
staff in properly securing the building.
A.
The Story and Craft Room may be reserved for youth-oriented activities
during normal library hours following the guidelines of this policy.
B.
The two Quiet Study Rooms on the library's second floor are available
primarily on a drop-in basis. These rooms may be reserved for
infrequent small group meetings during normal library hours following
the guidelines of this policy.
C.
The exterior lawn, patio, and pergola areas on the library property are
considered meeting spaces for outdoor programming, and use of those
spaces will follow the guidelines of this policy.
D.
Presenters and attendees are subject to all library rules, regulations,
and policies, including those for behavior and children's safety. Youth
groups and activities must have adequate adult supervision.
A.
Group members are responsible for setting up the room as needed for
their meeting. Staff will assist by providing access to the necessary
furnishings.
B.
Light refreshments may be served in the Community and Trustee
Rooms. There is a small pantry in the Community Room; groups using
the pantry need to request it to be unlocked. Groups serving
refreshments must remove all leftover food and drink and deposit all
trash into receptacles. The room should be left clean and orderly after
use.
C.
Requests to use the library's media equipment (projector, screens, DVD
player, etc.) should be made at least two weeks in advance. Equipment
may only be operated by a person experienced or trained by library staff
in its use.
D.
A group using the meeting room must hire a police officer at its own
expense if, in the opinion of the Library Trustees, Library Director,
E.
§ 427-39 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 427-41
1:666
§ 427-42. Compliance; enforcement.
or law enforcement authorities, the presence of a police officer is
advisable for public safety and/or order.
The library is not responsible for items left in the building by meeting
participants.
F.
Damage or theft of library property or materials must be paid for by the
organization or person responsible for reserving the room.
G.
There is no smoking and no serving of alcoholic beverages in the
building or on the library property.
H.
The library will deny meeting space to any group or individual that
discriminates on the basis of race, color, creed, gender, religion,
handicap, or sexual orientation.
I.
Verbal or written cancellation of a meeting room reservation is required
at least two business days in advance. Repeated failure to notify the
library of a cancellation in the scheduled use of a meeting room may
result in the denial of any future requests by the sponsoring
organization.
J.
Any required permits or licenses are the responsibility of the meeting
group, not the library.
K.
Use of the library facility does not in any way constitute or imply
endorsement of the information being presented or displayed.
A.
Failure to observe this policy may result in groups being denied access
to meeting space for a time period determined by the Library Director.
B.
The Library Director is responsible to enforce this policy in a fair and
equitable manner. The Library Trustee Chair and Library Director may
make exceptions to this policy that benefit the library and Town of
South Hadley.
C.
§ 427-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-42
1:667

ARTICLE VIII
Patron Behavior Policy
[Approved 12-3-2007]
§ 427-43. Purpose; enforcement.
The purpose of the Patron Behavior Policy is to establish guidelines for
behavior in order to provide all patrons with a comfortable and safe
environment in which to use the library. The rules below will be firmly and
courteously enforced by the library staff and, if necessary, the South Hadley
Police Department.
§ 427-44. Scope.
The library premises include the library building, the land surrounding it,
the sidewalks and the parking areas.
§ 427-45. Prohibited activities.
The following activities are not allowed in the library:
A. Smoking (MGL c. 270, §§ 22) and chewing tobacco.
B. Use of rollerskates, skateboards, sports equipment, or similar devices.
Creating a disturbance by making noise, talking loudly, or engaging in
other disruptive conduct (MGL c. 272, § 41).
C.
Interfering with another person's right to use the library or with the
library staff's performance of their duties.
D.
Threatening behavior, including, but not limited to, violence, threats of
violence, and possession of weapons.
E.
F. Loitering and/or blocking access to entryways, aisles, stairs, etc.
Bringing animals into the library, except those needed to assist a
disabled person.
G.
H. Playing audio equipment so that others can hear it.
Misusing the rest rooms (i.e., using them as a laundry or washing
facility).
I.
Unauthorized soliciting or canvassing of any kind in the library or on
the premises.
J.
K. Entering areas posted "Staff Only" without permission.
Use of the library telephone for personal business, other than for a child
to call a parent/caregiver.
L.
M. Running.
§ 427-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-45
1:669
§ 427-46. Food and beverages.
Food and beverages are not allowed in the library, except at designated
times or in designated areas.
§ 427-47. Damaging library property.
Those who damage or deface library materials or property may be
prosecuted (MGL c. 266, § 100). Parents are liable for damage done by a
child under the age of 18 (MGL c. 231, § 85).
§ 427-48. Theft; unauthorized use of library card.
Theft of library materials, use of false identification to obtain a library
card, or use of another person's library card without his/her permission are
against the law and can be prosecuted (MGL c. 266, § 99).
§ 427-49. Children using facilities.
Parents/Guardians are responsible for their children's (under 18) behavior
and welfare in the library. They will be notified if their children are left
in a vulnerable situation or require supervision due to disruptive behavior.
Children under the age of 10 should not be in the library without an
adult caregiver. The library staff may contact the South Hadley Police
Department if a young child is left unattended at the library. The library is
not responsible for the welfare of children who are left unattended in the
library.
§ 427-50. Adults in children's area.
For the safety of children in the library, adults unaccompanied by children
are asked to remain in the adult areas of the library unless they are actively
using the materials or services in the children's area for purposes not
served by the adult area of the building.
§ 427-51. Clothing.
Persons without shoes and shirts will not be allowed in the library.
§ 427-52. Equipment and parcels.
A patron may be required to leave athletic equipment, large parcels, or
other belongings deemed inappropriate with library staff until ready to
leave the building.
§ 427-53. Hygiene.
Patrons may be required to leave the library if their personal hygiene
interferes with the ability of other patrons to use and/or enjoy the facility.
N. Sleeping.
§ 427-45 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 427-54
1:670
§ 427-54. Penalties.
Patrons confronted with violation(s) of any of the above rules should
immediately inform a member of the library staff.
A.
Any patron not abiding by these rules shall be asked to leave the
library premises. Library staff will contact the South Hadley Police
Department, if necessary.
B.
The Library Director will deny any patron who repeatedly violates
the library rules, or who is disruptive, or who engages in criminal
behavior on the library premises the privileges of access to the library
for a period of at least 30 days. Any patron whose privileges have
been denied may have the decision reviewed by the Library Board of
Trustees.
C.
The posting of these rules does not prohibit the enforcement of any
applicable federal law, Massachusetts statutes, or Town ordinances, as
necessary.
D.
§ 427-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-54
1:671

ARTICLE IX
Children's Safety Policy
[Approved 12-3-2007; amended 9-8-2009]
§ 427-55. Findings and purpose.
The South Hadley Public Library wants the facility to be a warm and inviting
place for children to develop a love of reading, books, and libraries. The
library offers many programs and services for children. However, children
left unattended may become disruptive. Young, unattended children are not
safe at the library. The staff cannot know if the children are leaving the
building with parents or with strangers.
§ 427-56. Rules of conduct.
This policy has been established in order to foster an environment where
the safety of children and their ability to use the library will not be
compromised. Children are expected to adhere to the same rules as stated
for all library patrons, with the following additions:
All children under the age of 10 should be accompanied by a parent or
other adult who is responsible for the child. Unattended children are a
safety concern for all library users.
A.
At the discretion of a responsible adult, a child age 10 or older may
be left unattended for the period of time needed to select materials,
complete a homework assignment, or attend a program. The child must
know how to reach the responsible adult in case this need should arise.
Children should not be left for excessively long (more than two hours)
periods of time; the library does not provide day-care services.
B.
Children and their adult caregivers should be aware of the closing times
of the library and the schedule of specific programs. Children waiting
for rides should remain near the entrance doors to avoid the hazards of
the parking lot. The library may call the police to escort children who
have been left in the building after closing hours.
C.
The parent/guardian is responsible for ensuring appropriate behavior
of his/her children in the library. Disruptive behavior, including
shouting, running, pushing, or other rowdy, rambunctious activities,
will not be tolerated. Library staff will ask disruptive children to leave
the building in an orderly manner. In the case of unaccompanied
children under 10 years old, a parent/guardian will be called to pick
them up. If children do not leave the building after being asked, the
South Hadley Police may be called to remove them.
D.
Parents with children in strollers are strongly encouraged to use the
handicap entrance near Technical Services for easy access to the
building.
E.
§ 427-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-56
1:673
§ 427-57. Child abuse or neglect.
Suspected abuse or neglect of a child will be reported to the South Hadley
Police Department. According to Massachusetts law and the Department of
Social Services regulations, these terms are defined as follows:
ABUSE — The nonaccidental commission of any act by a caretaker which
causes or creates a substantial risk of harm or threat of harm to a child's
well-being or the commission of a sex offense against a child as defined by
the criminal laws of the commonwealth.
NEGLECT — The failure of a caretaker, either deliberately or through
negligence, to take actions necessary to provide a child with minimally
adequate food, clothing, shelter, medical care, supervision or other
essential care.
The multi-purpose room is usually available for children to congregate.
Sitting on the stairs, gathering in the doorways, improper use of the
rest rooms, and related behavior is not allowed.
F.
Children should not bring food or beverages into the building. The
exception is when food is served as part of a Children's Room program
or celebration. Small snacks may be finished in the multi-purpose room,
with trash disposal in the proper receptacles.
G.
Bicycles, scooters, and other equipment should be left outside the
building. Bikes and scooters should be locked to the bicycle rack with
appropriate safety chains.
H.
Computers in the Children's Room and throughout the library building
are not intended for use by children age five or under. It is the
responsibility of a parent or caregiver to ensure appropriate use of the
computers and other electronic library resources by young children.
Pounding on keyboards and other potentially damaging activities are
not permitted. Parents will be financially responsible for damage
caused by their children.
I.
Library staff are not trained to treat injuries or administer first aid. In
the case of an injured unattended child, the library staff will attempt
to contact the parent or caregiver. In the case of a medical emergency,
911 will be called to respond and the parents will be notified, in that
order.
J.
Certain library services and materials (e.g., museum passes, historical
materials, etc.) may be restricted to adult patrons only. Children
needing these materials for school assignments may be granted
permission to use these services under the supervision of a responsible
adult.
K.
Children have almost unlimited access to the library's resources.
Parents and guardians, not library staff, are responsible for the use
of appropriate books, movies, and computer resources. Adults are
encouraged to actively participate in their children's use of the library.
L.
§ 427-56 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 427-57


Chapter 429
LOT SPLITS AND SUBDIVISION POLICY
§ 429-1. Lot splits and subdivision policy enumerated.
A. Occasionally monies are received for copies, abutters' lists, etc. All
monies received are to be recorded on the log sheet which accompanies
the cashbox. The log sheet records the date, the amount received and
the description of the documents provided.
B. Turnovers of monies received should be done at a minimum of once per
week unless no monies have been received. At no time should there be
an amount greater than $5 in the Assessors' cashbox.
C. When a turnover is processed, the amount of the turnover is calculated
on the log sheet and the balance in the cashbox shall be reconciled to
confirm the remaining funds in the cashbox is accurate.
D. A receipt for the turnover shall be issued by the Treasurer and signed
by both the Treasurer's designate and the Assessors' employee
responsible for the turnover.
E. Any discrepancies in the funds received are to be reported to the
Associate Assessor and the Treasurer, in writing, immediately.
A. Assessors value land based on its configuration as of January 1 for the
fiscal year starting on the next July 1.
B. Plans are approved and/or endorsed by the Planning Board throughout
the year. These are for the ensuing fiscal year.
C. The Massachusetts Department of Revenue publishes an instruction
manual which provides guidance on procedures to value lot splits and
subdivisions. These instructions state that Assessors may assess as
separate lots contiguous land described in one or more deeds and
owned by the same person based on the division of the land shown on a
subdivision plan approved by the Planning Board or a plan endorsed by
the Board as not requiring subdivision approval [an Approval Not
Required (ANR) plan]. This avoids having to apportion the tax and liens
if the owner of the land sells any of the lots. While better practice is to
rely on recorded plans, Assessors may rely on any approved or
endorsed plan, even if not recorded by January 1.
D. Also, pursuant to Boston v. Boston Port Development Q., 308 Mass. 72
(1941), the Assessors made their assessment in accordance with a plan
in their files which had not been recorded as of the assessment date.
The Supreme Judicial Court upheld the assessments. Relying on Boston
Port, we think that when a subdivision plan has been approved by the
Planning Board, the Assessors may assess the land as individual parcels
even if the plan has not been recorded as of the applicable January 1.
§ 408-1 REVOLVING FUNDS § 429-1
65:9
Chapter 431
MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX ABATEMENT FILING POLICY
§ 431-1. Authority to abate.
Pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 60A, § 1, the authority
to abate an excise tax lies with the Board of Assessors. This authority may
only be exercised within the limitations of and consistent with the specific
circumstances which are set forth in the statute.
§ 431-2. Procedure.
§ 431-3. Abatement restrictions.
The Assessors only have authority to abate the originally assessed excise
taxes. Any late fees, interest, demand notice fees, etc., cannot be abated per
Massachusetts General Laws.
E. Based on the above-stated sources, the Assessors in the Town of South
Hadley will create separate lots when a plan is endorsed or approved by
the Planning Board, whether or not the plan is recorded with the
Registry of Deeds. These lots will be separately assessed as of the
applicable January 1.
A. The Assessors have jurisdiction to abate any motor vehicle excise tax
for which a timely application is filed and meets qualifications. In
conformance with Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 60A, § 1, and
as referenced in the Massachusetts Department of Revenue's Motor
Vehicle and Trailer Excise Manual, the Board requires a signed
application with each request for abatement. This application, along
with supporting documentation, can be filed via mail, email or fax. If a
person requests submission via fax, the office will inform the taxpayer
that they must contact the Assessors' office by telephone to receive a
unique filing receipt number for their application process to confirm the
office has indeed received the fax documents. This is to ensure the
Assessors' office received the fax, since the Assessors' office shares a
single fax machine with the other Town departments.
B. If a person wishes to hand deliver the documentation, the application
can be signed in the office during the transaction. The application and
documentation will be checked and confirmed to be complete while the
applicant is in the office.
C. If the proper application form is not submitted, the abatement cannot
be processed and the submitter will be notified. If any other
documentation submitted with an application form is inadequate, the
documents will be sent back to the submitter with a written explanation
identifying the necessary steps and/or documentation that is needed to
complete the transaction.
§ 429-1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 431-4
65:10
§ 431-4. Online access to Manual.
Massachusetts Department of Revenue's Motor Vehicle and Trailer Excise
manual: http://www.mass.gov/dor/docs/dls/publ/misc/mv-bklt.pdf
Chapter 439
PERSONAL PROPERTY POLICIES
§ 431-4 REVOLVING FUNDS § 431-4
65:11

ARTICLE I
Business Model Use Policy
[Adopted 3-14-2015]
§ 439-1. Business model use policy enumerated.
A. Pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 59, § 29, notice is
given to all persons subject to taxation to provide a true list of their
personal estate in that town not exempt from taxation. This list is to be
provided annually on a form prescribed by the Commissioner of
Revenue.
B. For compliance with this statute, annually, on or about December 31,
the Assessors' office mails out a Form of List to all business entities
(individuals, partnerships, associations, trusts, LLCs and corporations)
they are aware of within the jurisdiction for reporting back the personal
estate held as of January 1.
C. If a return is not filed, pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 59, § 36, Assessors shall ascertain as nearly as possible the
particulars of the personal estate, as owner or otherwise, of any person
not supplying a list (under MGL c. 59, § 29), and shall estimate its value,
according to their best information and belief.
D. To be fair and equitable to similar businesses, the Assessors shall apply
a business model in estimating the fair cash value of a business's estate
when a value is being estimated under MGL c. 59, § 36.
E. The following business models shall be used to estimate the value of an
account when a Form of List is not returned or not complete:
(1) Home improvement.
(2) Home business: consulting.
(3) Home business: web/design/imaging.
(4) Landscaper.
(5) Salon.
(6) Salon with nails.
(7) Stylist.
(8) Tradesman: electrician.
(9) Tradesman: mechanic.
(10) Tradesman: plumber.
F. Pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 59, § 37, such
estimate shall be entered in the valuation book, and, except as provided
§ 439-1 REVOLVING FUNDS § 439-1
65:13
in § 61, shall be conclusive upon any person not seasonable bringing in
such list, unless he shows a reasonable excuse for the omission.
G. A penalty shall be applied to those accounts that do not make a return
pursuant to the personal property penalty policy.
§ 439-1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 439-1
65:14
ARTICLE II
Penalty Policy
[Adopted 3-14-2015]
§ 439-2. Penalty policy enumerated.
A. Pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 59, § 29, notice is
given to all persons subject to taxation to provide a true list of their
personal estate in that town not exempt from taxation. This list is to be
provided annually on a form prescribed by the Commissioner of
Revenue.
B. In compliance with State Tax Form 2, FORM OF LIST, Return of
personal property subject to taxation, a penalty may be assessed for not
filing, filing late or not complying with an audit.
C. As stated on this form: "If you do not file a return for the fiscal year and
comply with audit requests for books, papers, records and other data,
the assessors cannot abate for overvaluation of the personal property
for that year. If your return is not filed, or you do not comply with audit
requests, on time, the assessors can only abate if you show a reasonable
excuse for the late filing or the tax assessed is more than 150% of the
amount that would have been assessed if the return had been timely
and properly filed. In that case, only the amount over that percentage
can be abated."
D. The Assessors shall apply a penalty of 10% per year when no filing is
made to a maximum of 100% penalty.
§ 439-2 REVOLVING FUNDS § 439-2
65:15

ARTICLE III
Fire District Percentage Allocation Policy
[Adopted 8-8-2016]
§ 439-3. Fire District percentage allocation policy enumerated.
A. In regards to personal property, for certain utilities, an allocation of
value between districts must be made. This is typically utilized for
centrally valued telephone companies, gas and other utilities or
wireless phone companies.
B. Based on the average percentage of land area, parcel counts, valuation
including exempt properties and valuation excluding exempt
properties, and the percentage share on length of roads, the valuation
allocation is determined to be:
(1) Fire District #1: 67% of value; and
(2) Fire District #2: 33% of value.
C. This will remain in effect until such time that another analysis of the
same data provides a difference in the allocations.
§ 439-3 REVOLVING FUNDS § 439-3
65:17

Chapter 441
PERSONNEL POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 39.
Policy on closing Town facilities — See Ch. 77,
Art. I.
Benefits — See Ch. 400.
Social media policy — See Ch. 453.
Town-owned vehicles — See Ch. 472.
Workplace Policy Manual — See Ch. 478.
§ 427-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 427-57
1:675

ARTICLE I
Purpose, General Provisions and Definitions
§ 441-1. Purpose; employment at will.
It is the purpose of this Personnel Policy Manual (Manual) to establish and
maintain a uniform system for managing personnel matters and to comply
with applicable employment laws. The policies and procedures set forth in
this Manual prescribe the terms, conditions, and standards of personnel
operations for the Town of South Hadley (the "Town"). These policies do
not create a contract between the Town and any employee or group of
employees. All employees are employed at will unless covered by separate
contract rights set forth in individual contracts or collective bargaining
agreements.
§ 441-2. Scope of coverage.
All Town departments and positions in the Town service for which
compensation is paid (whether full-time, part-time, seasonal, casual,
special, civil service or others) shall be considered as being within the scope
of coverage unless otherwise stated, and shall be subject to, and have the
benefits of this Manual with the following exceptions and/or limitations:
§ 441-3. Administration.
Elected officers and persons appointed to fill vacancies in elective
offices.
A.
B. Positions under the direction and control of the School Committee.
C. Members of boards, commissions, committees and authorities.
Persons retained in a professional consulting capacity, to perform
specialized services or conduct temporary and/or special inquiry, study
or investigation.
D.
Volunteer personnel and any other personnel appointed to serve
without pay.
E.
A collective bargaining agreement with conflicting provisions prevails
over the terms of this Personnel Policy Manual unless said collective
bargaining agreement states otherwise.
F.
In any instance where these policies conflict with federal, state, or local
laws as they may apply to Town employees, such laws shall be deemed
to prevail.
G.
The Town's Selectboard shall be responsible for the administration
of the provisions of the Manual and may designate an employee or
a person on a contractual basis to manage and act as the Human
Resources Officer for daily administration of the personnel system.
The Selectboard may establish, rescind, or amend such administrative
A.
§ 441-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-3
1:677
§ 441-4. Definitions; classes of employees.
procedures as it may consider necessary for the implementation of
these rules. Such procedures and any amendments thereto shall
become effective upon being approved by resolution of the Selectboard
and filed with the Town Clerk.
Administration, appointing authorities and department heads are
responsible for the day-to-day administration and compliance with
these policies. Administration shall jointly review these policies as
needed to determine whether or not any amendments or revisions
should be brought to Town Meeting.
B.
As used in this Policy Manual, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATION — The Town Administrator or the Assistant Town
Administrator.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Selectboard, Town Administrator or
any board, commission, committee or department head so empowered
by statute, bylaws, charter, ordinance, or directive, which has the
power to appoint an employee to any nonelective position.
EMPLOYEE — Any person paid and employed by the Town, including
persons who are on authorized leaves of absence.
LENGTH OF SERVICE — The continuous service of an employee
(uninterrupted except for required military service and for authorized
vacation, sick leave, and other approved leaves) while in the
employment of the Town of South Hadley calculated in years, months,
and days from the most recent date of hire.
TOWN APPOINTEE — Any person appointed to a position, committee or
volunteer that is not compensated or entitled to any benefits contained
here within, unless otherwise described by Town bylaws.
A.
The Selectboard has established the following classes of employees:
CASUAL/SEASONAL EMPLOYEE — An employee who works a
nontraditional schedule. A casual/seasonal employee may not work a
regularly established workweek. A casual/seasonal employee's hours
may vary from week to week. Casual/seasonal employees are not
entitled to benefits. This category may include employees receiving a
stipend for a specific task or responsibility as set by Town enabling
legislation or bylaw. Stipends will be set annually.
HOURLY EMPLOYEE — Nonexempt employees will be paid for the
actual number of hours worked during a pay period times the hourly
rate and will receive overtime pay in accordance with the Fair Labor
Standards Act ("FLSA").
INTRODUCTORY PERIOD — Will be determined and included in the
conditional offer of employment by Administration. Initial trial or
probationary period served by employee and subject to dismissal and/
B.
§ 441-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-4
1:678
or review by Administration before becoming a regular employee.
Introductory period may be modified by Administration in writing.
REGULAR FULL-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee who has completed
an initial introductory period and works an established schedule of at
least 40 hours per week. Regular full-time employees are presumptively
eligible for all employee benefits as defined in this Manual as allowed.
Said benefits are subject to change from time to time in accordance
with these and other policies. (See Benefits Policy Manual.100)
REGULAR PART-TIME EMPLOYEE — An employee who has completed
an initial introductory period and works a minimum of 19.5 hours per
week, but less than full time, on a regular year-round schedule. Regular
part-time employees are presumptively not eligible for employee
benefits except as approved by Administration.
SALARIED EXEMPT EMPLOYEE — Exempt employees, who are paid
on a salary basis, will be paid by dividing the annual salary rate by
the number of pay periods per year. Salaried exempt employees are
required to be available for a minimum of 80 hours per pay period
(two weeks) or as needed to complete work in a timely manner. These
employees are not availed overtime pay.
SALARIED HOURLY EMPLOYEE (NONEXEMPT) — Employees who
work 80 hours over a two-week pay period and whose annual salary
is divided into hourly increments may be availed overtime with prior
Administration approval on a pay period basis. Scheduled work hours
must be approved by his or her Supervisor.
STIPEND EMPLOYEE — An employee who receives a set fee for a
specific service. All stipends must be set and approved by
Administration.
TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE — An employee holding a job of limited or
specific duration arising out of a special project, position vacancy
pending appointment, abnormal workloads, emergency, or other
reasons established by Administration. Temporary employees may work
either full-time or part-time work schedules. In general, this period
does not exceed six months without Administration approval.
Employees are not eligible for employee benefits except as approved by
Administration.
100. Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Benefits.
§ 441-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-4
1:679

ARTICLE II
Compensation Policy
§ 441-5. Policy statement.
The policy of the Town is to establish job descriptions for all positions
and to establish proper relationships between positions based on the level
of responsibilities assumed. Administration will set the minimum
qualifications required to perform each job. Compensation will be set and
reviewed by Administration within budgeted allowance.
§ 441-6. Position descriptions.
§ 441-7. Review of descriptions.
Administration shall review the work of all positions periodically or as
needed and adjust as necessary to provide services to the citizens of South
Hadley.
§ 441-8. Compensation plan.
§ 441-9. Starting rates.
Administration will determine all starting rates based on comparatives,
qualifications and best practices.
Administration shall maintain up-to-date descriptions for each job or
position describing the specific duties, requirements and
characteristics of each, in sufficient detail as to make available the
necessary information to ensure a fair evaluation and/or reevaluation.
These descriptions shall not be interpreted as being a complete or
limiting definition of job requirements and it is expected that the
employee will perform any duties assigned by those delegated to
supervisory functions. Position descriptions may be amended at the
discretion of Administration.
A.
All material, information forms or descriptions may be obtained by
request to the Human Resources Department or at
HR@southhadleyma.gov.
B.
Unless otherwise provided in these policies, all employees shall be
employed and paid in accordance with rates established by
Administration.
A.
Administration shall have the authority to make and approve changes
in employee compensation resulting from promotions, demotions, and
transfers, or because of business necessity, or changes within the
approved budget.
B.
§ 441-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-10
1:681
§ 441-10. Performance-based evaluations.
Performance-based evaluation will be offered to all employees and will
utilize a continuous review process. Any increases for performance will
be included in the planning process for the subsequent fiscal year and be
awarded appropriately.
§ 441-11. Rate of pay for reclassification.
An employee whose position is reorganized and assigned additional
responsibilities will be compensated at an appropriate rate set by
Administration.
§ 441-12. Right to transfer employees.
Administration may transfer employees between departments based upon
the needs of the municipality. Administration may assign supervisory
responsibilities as deemed necessary over employees.
§ 441-13. Pay for temporary assignment outside classification.
Administration may grant a pay increase whenever the duration of a
temporary assignment exceeds 15 consecutive days.
§ 441-14. Pay checks.
§ 441-15. Wage garnishments.
The Town employs direct deposit and its use is mandatory for all
employees. No payroll deductions, other than legally required
deductions, will be made from the employee's pay check without the
employee's written approval. An employee who leaves his/her
employment with the Town shall be paid all wages due (including
earned holiday and vacation pay) on the following regular pay day. Any
employee discharged from employment must be paid in full on the day
of his/her discharge.
A.
All employee remuneration or compensation will be paid by direct
deposit. All employees will have electronic access to their pay history
through Employee Forward.
B.
Garnishment action against an employee's wage or salary is permitted
by law in Massachusetts. Federal laws also permit the preferential
attachment of wages by the Internal Revenue Service for delinquent
federal taxes and child support before other garnishments.
A.
When notice of a garnishment, levy or attachment action taken or to be
taken against any employee is first brought to the attention of the Town,
the Town Treasurer will complete the required informational forms.
Any questions or requests for additional information on the part of the
employee should be addressed to Human Resources. This information
will only be released to an employee, in a confidential manner.
B.
§ 441-10 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-15
1:682
The Town of South Hadley complies with applicable provisions of the
Department of Labor relative to wage garnishments. Additional
information is available from the Treasurer's Office.
C.
The Town reserves the right to recoup wages in the case of
overpayment and/or recovery of unearned wages.
D.
§ 441-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-15
1:683

ARTICLE III
Recruitment and Appointment
§ 441-16. Recruitment policy.
The Town is an equal opportunity/affirmative action employer. Procedures
relating to the recruitment and selection of employees shall be in
accordance with Massachusetts General Law Chapter 151B and federal
anti-discrimination laws. Furthermore, the following policy was affirmed
and adopted by the South Hadley Selectboard on October 28, 2014. The
recruitment of employees shall also be in accordance with any appropriate
rules and regulations, state or federal laws and in keeping with any existing
collective bargaining agreements. This policy does not supersede or modify
civil service law, MGL c. 150E, or current collective bargaining agreements.
To the extent, if any, that a portion of this policy is in conflict with a
controlling law or contractual provision thereof, this policy provision would
not apply.
§ 441-17. Scope.
This policy applies to all employees, all positions.
§ 441-18. Eligibility.
All persons shall be eligible to apply for employment with the Town, subject
to any statutory requirements or limitations.
§ 441-19. Recruitment and applications.
General.
The appointing authorities shall be responsible for the selection of
personnel. All recruitment efforts shall be performed through the
Town's Human Resources Department.
(1)
The Town Administrator shall have the discretion to use any
appropriate means of recruiting personnel, including, but not
limited to: use of employment agencies; employee referrals; use
of trade and other professional journals. Department managers
may make suggestions regarding advertising and posting job
opportunities.
(2)
A.
Notice of vacancies.
Department heads shall, upon the identification of a vacancy or
upon the authorization of a new position, notify Human Resources
of the vacancy. Resignations must be accepted by the appointing
authority. The job vacancy will be reviewed by the Human Resource
Director, the Department Manager and the Town Administrator.
The existing job description will be reviewed and updated if
necessary and include: the job title, essential functions of the
(1)
B.
§ 441-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-19
1:685
position, qualifications, salary and wages, hours of work and
reporting relationships.
The Town Administrator with Human Resources shall review and
approve all job vacancies prior to commencement of recruitment
activities.
(2)
A proposed closing date for applications and application
instructions will be created and an applicant vetting team will
be appointed by Administration to conduct interviews and make
a recommendation to the appointing authority. The panel should
endeavor to recommend the most qualified candidate but may
recommend more than one candidate if it feels it is in the best
interest of South Hadley.
(3)
Posting. Advertising should be adequate to ensure that a sufficient
number of qualified applicants apply for available vacancies. The Town
will also post notices of vacant positions for five business days in
prominent work locations and in accordance with existing collective
bargaining agreements where applicable.
C.
Advertisement of job vacancy. The Town may advertise job vacancy
notices on the Town of South Hadley's website or other media
appropriate to recruit qualified candidates at least 15 days prior to the
closing date for applications. Job advertisements shall be accomplished
in accordance with the Town's affirmative action policy for employment.
D.
Applications.
All candidates applying for employment or new positions in the
Town shall complete and electronically sign an official employment
application on the Town's website prior to the end of the working
day of the closing date specified for the position announcement.
(1)
Applications received from former employees shall be subject to
the same standards as set forth in this section. However, the former
employee's work performance when previously employed by the
Town and circumstances surrounding the person's separation from
previous employment with the Town shall be considered in the
review of applications.
(2)
E.
Examinations. Following a conditional offer of employment, the Town
Administrator or other appointing authority may require an
examination as one part of the selection process. Examinations may
be written, oral, practical, medical, or any combination thereof and
shall be relevant to the requirements of the position. In those instances
where pre-employment examinations are required for a position, notice
of the examination will be included in the posting, shall apply to each
applicant and shall be administered in a manner consistent with legal
obligations. Pre-employment polygraph testing will never be required.
F.
§ 441-19 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-19
1:686
§ 441-20. Appointments.
All appointments shall be made in writing by the Town Administrator or
other appropriate appointing authority. The written notice of appointment
shall include the salary, the starting date, any unique or unusual conditions
of employment and appropriate additional information, including any
required or prescribed probationary period. Copies of the letter of
appointment shall be provided to the appropriate departments and a copy
shall be placed in the employee's personnel file.
§ 441-21. Pre-placement medical examination.
References. A candidate's former employers, supervisors, and other
references shall be contacted as part of the selection process. All
reference checks and investigations shall be completed prior to the
offer of employment unless a specific law requires such a check to be
performed following a contingent offer of employment.
G.
CORI checks. If a conditional offer of employment is made, the
applicant will be asked to complete a supplemental form requiring the
disclosure of the candidate's criminal record and authorizing the Town
to seek and obtain the candidate's criminal record. Such form will be
made available by the Human Resources Director. Determinations of
suitability for a position based on a review of an eligible candidate's
criminal record will be made by the Town Administrator and will be
consistent with applicable law, regulations and Town policy.
H.
Application records. The application and related documents submitted
shall be maintained by Human Resources in the employee's personnel
file. Human Resources shall maintain all application records for the
period required by law. Human Resources, to the extent possible, shall
maintain the confidentiality of all applications.
I.
All persons selected for labor service employment with the Town, after
receipt of notice of appointment and prior to the starting date of
employment, shall undergo a medical examination relating to essential
functions of the position. All other positions shall be reviewed by the
Human Resources Director to determine whether a pre-placement
physical is needed. The examination shall be at the expense of the
Town and performed by a physician or medical institution selected or
approved by the Town Administrator.
A.
The examining physician shall advise as to whether or not, in the
opinion of the physician, the applicant is able to perform the essential
functions of the duties of the position for which the appointment has
been made with or without a reasonable accommodation. If unable
to perform the essential functions of the position for which the
appointment has been made, the Town Administrator or other
appointing authority shall engage in the interactive process regarding
reasonable accommodations. If an individual is not qualified for the
position and/or if no reasonable accommodation is possible, the
B.
§ 441-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-21
1:687
§ 441-22. Failure to report.
An applicant who accepts an appointment and fails to report to work on
the date set by the Town Administrator or other appointing authority, shall,
unless excused, be deemed to have declined the appointment and the offer
of employment shall be withdrawn.
individual offer of employment can be withdrawn. If the applicant fails
to engage in the interactive process or refuses an offer of an
accommodation, it may be treated by the Town as a rejection of the
offer of employment.
§ 441-21 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-22
1:688
ARTICLE IV
Introductory Period
§ 441-23. Extensions, evaluations and dismissals.
§ 441-24. Benefits during introductory period.
The introductory period can be extended by approval of Administration.
Requests for extensions from managers/department heads should be in
writing and for a set period of time.
A.
At the completion of the introductory period, the employee's
performance will be evaluated to determine if s/he qualifies for
continued employment.
B.
Upon approval of the Administration, the employee shall advance to
regular employment status and be deemed eligible for those Town
benefits provided to regular employees.
C.
D. Any dismissal will be provided in writing.
An employee may also be removed by Administration if it is discovered
that information submitted in connection with the appointment process
was falsified or omitted.
E.
Except as otherwise specifically provided, all regular full-time and
regular part-time employees serving an introductory period shall
receive no benefits; provided, however, that upon successful completion
of the introductory period, all benefits that are conferred on the basis
of continuous creditable service shall be deemed to have accrued from
such employee's first day of service. No benefits shall be paid if an
employee is terminated prior to, or at the end of, the introductory
period.
A.
During the introductory period, employment with the Town is
considered to be at will, subject only to rights conferred by an
employment contract, Administration or other external source of rights.
B.
§ 441-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-24
1:689

ARTICLE V
General Hours of Work and Attendance
§ 441-25. Attendance.
§ 441-26. Work schedule.
The regular full-time hours of employment each week shall be at least
40 hours or an average of 80 hours over a two-week pay period with
supervisor's approval of schedule. One example of a regular work day for
nonexempt Town Hall employees would be 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. with one
hour for lunch (unpaid). Employees assigned to departments not in Town
Hall shall work the schedule of their specific department.
§ 441-27. Overtime pay.
All nonexempt employees are eligible to receive overtime compensation at
the rate of 1 1/2 times their regular rate of pay for hours worked in excess
of 40 hours per work week in accordance with federal law. Employees
classified as executive, administrative or professional based on definitions
in the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) are exempt from overtime pay and
therefore not covered by this policy.
§ 441-28. Payment during facility closings.
Unless Administration orders the closing of a Town facility (other than the
public schools) or the stoppage of non-school Town operations pursuant
to Chapter 77, Article I, Facility Closings, of the general Town bylaws, all
employees shall report to work as scheduled. If an employee is unable
Regular and punctual attendance is an essential function of every Town
position. Employees must record actual hours worked on a daily basis.
These time records shall be submitted electronically to the department
head for review and approval each day. The department head and/or the
employee's immediate supervisor shall inspect an employee's submittal.
A.
The Town may implement other forms of recording attendance as
technology allows.
B.
Whenever an employee is unable to report for work as scheduled, the
employee shall, prior to the start of his/her shift, personally contact his/
her supervisor and/or department head and report that he/she will be
late or absent, and state the reason for same. E-mail, text and voice
mail messages are acceptable forms of notification.
C.
Whenever possible, every effort shall be made to schedule
appointments during non-working hours. For required appointments
which cannot be scheduled outside of working hours, time will be
adjusted within the two-week pay period, or time away may be used in
two-hour increments for absences.
D.
§ 441-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-28
1:691
to attend work due to circumstances related to the emergency the
Administration may allow adjustments to the work schedules.
§ 441-28 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-28
1:692
ARTICLE VI
Standards of Conduct
§ 441-29. Policy.
§ 441-30. Professional courtesy.
Everyone is expected to treat fellow employees with courtesy and respect,
and to do their part to make any experience with the Town a success. If
differences do occur, they should be resolved in a professional manner.
Behavior that is abusive or hostile is inappropriate and may result in
discipline up to and including termination.
§ 441-31. Employee personal property.
Employees are responsible for all personal property brought on Town
premises. Employees should use best judgment in regard to their personal
belongings. The Town is not responsible for the loss of personal items in the
workplace.
§ 441-32. Conflicts of interest.
All employees must take the mandated conflict of interest test online
through Mass.gov (see Town Clerk for instructions) and a record of the
completed test must be on file with the Town Clerk. Test must be taken by
all new employees upon hire and maintained every other year for current
employees.
§ 441-33. Smoking.
Under the Massachusetts Smoke-Free Workplace, MGL c. 270, § 22,
smoking is expressly forbidden in all Town-owned buildings and vehicles.
§ 441-34. Town property.
Town employees are prohibited from engaging in any conduct which
could reflect unfavorably upon the Town. Employees are expected to
keep in mind that they are public employees and are to conduct
themselves in a manner which in no way discredits the Town, public
officials, or fellow employees.
A.
Employees must wear the Town-provided ID badge or have it available
when at work.
B.
The use of Town property, equipment and vehicles for any personal use
whatsoever is prohibited and is a violation of Massachusetts state law.
A.
No employee of the Town of South Hadley shall take or remove any item
from any Town property, including but not limited to furniture, fixtures,
building material, books or anything of value to their own possession
or participate in the resale of any Town property for personal financial
benefit.
B.
§ 441-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-34
1:693
§ 441-35. Use of Town telephones and cell phones.
§ 441-36. Solicitation.
No solicitation of any employee or department is permitted unless expressly
given permission by Administration.
§ 441-37. Uniforms and special clothing.
At the Town's determination, employees may be required to wear uniforms,
protective gear, or other types of special clothing; however, the Town will
provide the uniform, protective gear, special clothing, or a clothing
allowance for those employees whose work requires that special clothing
be worn. The Town reserves the right to determine what uniforms are to be
worn, who will wear uniforms, what protective gear is required, and how
such gear will be worn or used. At the termination of employment, the Town
requires that all uniforms and protective gear be returned.
§ 441-38. Safety.
This includes discarded items delivered to any agency or department,
including, but not limited to donated items, discarded item, trash or
"lost and found" items.
C.
Material or items for sale by the municipality with remittance back
to the municipality must be reviewed and authorized by the Assistant
Town Administrator/Procurement Office.
D.
Town telephones, cell phones and phablets are for business calls and
not for personal use. Personal calls should only be made or received
infrequently and should in no case interfere with the employee's
productivity and performance of his or her duties. Employees needing
to use the phone for personal or other non-work-related reasons shall
notify their supervisor in advance. All personal toll calls are the
responsibility of the employee and shall not be charged to the Town.
A.
Use of personal cell phones during work time for personal calls is
likewise limited to emergency calls and, to the extent possible, should
only be used during breaks.
B.
The Town prohibits the use of cell phones while driving. Making or
receiving calls, text messaging, checking for messages, accessing the
internet, etc. is prohibited.
C.
It is the policy of the Town of South Hadley that every employee is
entitled to work under safe working conditions in all occupations. Every
reasonable effort will be made to provide and maintain a safe and
healthy work place, safe equipment, proper materials, and to establish
and insist upon safe methods and practices at all times.
A.
Accidents which injure people, damage machinery or equipment and
destroy materials or property cause needless suffering, inconvenience
B.
§ 441-34 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-38
1:694
§ 441-39. Town vehicle policy.101
and expense. All injuries, re-injuries, aggravations of existing
conditions, and property or equipment damage shall be immediately
reported by the employee to his/her department head. The employee
shall submit a written report of the accident, injury, and/or damage to
his/her department head within 24 hours. The department head must
immediately report any incident resulting in personal injury or property
damage to Administration.
Any safety rules and regulations developed are to be considered
mandatory in nature and applicable to all employees.
C.
It is a basic responsibility of everyone to make safety realization a part
of his/her constant concern. Employees are obligated to observe the
rules of conduct and safety and to properly use the safety equipment
provided.
D.
If any employee notices an unsafe working condition, s/he should report
such condition immediately to his/her supervisor.
E.
If an employee must use a personal vehicle for Town business, claims
for mileage, parking, and tolls must be submitted in writing;
reimbursements shall be made monthly. Mileage will be reimbursed at
the IRS standard mileage rate.
A.
The use of Town vehicles will be restricted to municipal business only
unless express written approval is granted by Administration. Personal
use of Town vehicles is prohibited. Employees will be taxed at the end
of the calendar year per IRS guidelines.
B.
101. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 472, Vehicles, Town-Owned.
§ 441-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-39
1:695

ARTICLE VII
Personnel Records
§ 441-40. Maintenance of records; access.
Administration shall maintain adequate records, including detailed
personnel records of all employees. Each department, committee and
board of the Town shall furnish Administration with all facts, figures
and other information pertaining to the employees of the Town under
their respective jurisdiction, as Administration shall require.
A.
The following written information or documents shall be included in
an employee's personnel record: name, address, date of birth, job title
and description, rate of pay and any other compensation paid to the
employee, starting date of employment, the job application of the
employee, resumes or other forms of employment inquiry submitted to
the employer by the employee, all employee performance evaluations,
including but not limited to, employee evaluation documents, written
warnings of substandard performance, lists of probationary or
introductory periods, waivers signed by the employee, copies of dated
termination notices, and any other documents relating to disciplinary
action regarding the employee. (MGL c. 149, § 52C)
B.
Employees are responsible for notifying their supervisor of any changes
in address, telephone number, or name change, personal e-mail address
etc., and if needed for benefits, changes in dependents and marital
status.
C.
An employee has the right to examine his/her personnel record within
five business days of making a written request. The review shall take
place at work and during normal business hours. Additionally, an
employee may obtain a copy of his or her personnel record within five
business days of a written request for such a copy. The Town reserves
the right to charge an employee a reasonable fee for copying the
documents. In no event shall the personnel record be removed from its
designated area without the express permission of Administration.
D.
No information or material derogatory to an employee shall be filed in
a personnel record without the knowledge of the individual employee.
An employer shall notify an employee within 10 days of placing any
information in the employee's personnel record that "has been used
or may be used, to negatively affect the employee's qualification for
employment, promotion, transfer, additional compensation or the
possibility that the employee will be subject to disciplinary action."
(MGL. c. 149, § 52C)
E.
If an employee disagrees with any information contained in his or her
personnel file, the employee shall have the right to submit a written
statement explaining the employee's position which shall become part
of the employee's personnel record. The employee's statement shall be
F.
§ 441-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-40
1:697
§ 441-41. Work accidents and required reporting procedures.
included when said information is transmitted to a third party as long
as the original information is retained as part of the file.
All medical information pertaining to an employee shall be maintained
in a file for that employee that is physically separate from the
employee's personnel file.
G.
For active or terminated Town employees, no individually identifiable
information contained in the personnel file or medical records of any
employee shall be disclosed to non-Town officials without written
authorization of such employee except where the information is limited
to the verification of dates of employment and the employee's title or
position, and wage or salary. Information in an employee's personnel
or medical file may be shared with or reviewed by the employee's
supervisor, department head, or other appropriate individual on a needto-
know basis.
H.
The exceptions to this limitation are where information is given
pursuant to a proper subpoena, a government audit, an apparent
medical emergency, a union collective bargaining agreement, an order
of a government agency or otherwise provided by law.
I.
If an employee is injured while working for the Town, the employee
must immediately inform the department head in writing on a Townapproved
form. It is important that every injury, regardless of the
degree or severity, be reported. All injuries must be reported
immediately so that necessary reports may be completed. Workers'
compensation laws provide benefits for employees injured on the job.
Medical expenses and the amount of compensation to which an
employee is entitled for lost time are set by state law.
A.
If medical attention for the injury is required, proper medical
certification in an acceptable format shall be required before the
employee returns to work.
B.
§ 441-40 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-41
1:698
ARTICLE VIII
Employee Job/Position Changes
§ 441-42. Separations.
Employee separations generally fall into one of the categories identified
below.
§ 441-43. Resignation.
An employee may resign from the Town service in good standing by
submitting notice of resignation in writing, including the effective date of
resignation, to his or her department head at least 14 calendar days in
advance. Administration may permit a shorter period of notice because of
extenuating circumstances. Department heads and exempt personnel are
encouraged to give as much advance notice as practicable. Resignation
must be accepted by the appointing authority.
§ 441-44. Lay-off.
When a position must be discontinued or abolished because of a change in
duties, reorganization, lack of work, or lack of funds, the Town will:
§ 441-45. Discharge.
A discharge occurs when an employee is involuntarily separated from
employment due to misconduct, inability to perform essential functions of
the job, or any other lawful reason articulated by Administration.
§ 441-46. Nonrenewal.
Nonrenewal is separation from Town employment through the mechanism
of Town management's decision not to continue a contract or other
employment relationship past its previously established term. In the case
of appointed employees, an appointee's employment ends at the expiration
of his/her term unless s/he is reappointed for an additional term. The Town
Administrator, Selectboard, or other appointing authority authorized by the
Town's General Bylaws, has the discretion to determine whether or not
to appoint or reappoint such individual. Nonrenewal does not necessarily
imply any misconduct or fault on the part of the employee who is not
renewed.
Make lay-off determinations to ensure that the employees retained are
the best qualified for the positions that remain.
A.
B. Provide reasonable notice to affected employees.
C. Engage in impasse bargaining when required.
Maintain a recall list to permit employees to be considered for
vacancies for up to one year from lay-off.
D.
§ 441-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-47
1:699
§ 441-47. Job abandonment.
Town management may interpret an employee's absence without leave
as abandonment of the position by the employee. Subject to its specific
circumstances and the provisions of this Manual, this absence may be
grounds for separation from employment.
§ 441-48. Conditions of separation.
§ 441-49. Payment of earned compensation and leave upon
separation.
Employees who separate from the Town service in good standing shall
receive payment for all earned salary and accumulated vacation leave
subject to normal deductions and any indebtedness. The Hampshire County
Retirement Plan administrators will be notified if the employee is a member.
§ 441-50. Unemployment compensation.
The Town pays the cost established by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
to provide unemployment compensation for its employees. For more
information contact Human Resources.
At the time of separation, all records, assets, or other items of Town
property in the employee's custody shall be transferred to his/her
department head. In the event of a shortage in the above, an amount
representing the value of unreturned property shall be calculated and
collected through appropriate action, including deducting said amount
from the employee's final paycheck.
A.
All information regarding separating employees must be forwarded
promptly to Human Resources including signed letters of resignation.
B.
§ 441-47 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-50
1:700
ARTICLE IX
Holidays
§ 441-51. Holidays granted with pay.
The following holidays shall be granted with pay for eligible employees:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
President's Day
Patriot's Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving Day
Day after Thanksgiving
Christmas Day
A.
Eligible employees will be paid for the above listed holidays, provided
that the following conditions are met:
The employee must have worked the full scheduled shift on the last
scheduled work day prior to and the next scheduled work day after
such holiday unless the absence is due to a previously approved
vacation or personal day. Sick leave will only be acceptable if
approved by Administration in consultation with the Department
Head.
(1)
(2) The employee must not be in any unpaid status.
B.
If any of the above listed holidays fall on Sunday, the following Monday
shall be considered the holiday; if on Saturday, the preceding Friday
will be considered the holiday. Administration reserves the right to
adjust holiday schedules.
C.
§ 441-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-51
1:701

ARTICLE X
Leaves of Absence
§ 441-52. General policy.
§ 441-53. Procedure for requesting leave.
§ 441-54. Absences without leave; accrual of leave during absences.
Leave is any authorized absence during regularly scheduled work hours
that is approved by Administration. Leave may be authorized with or
without pay and shall be granted in accordance with these rules on the
basis of the work requirements of the departments and, when practical,
the personal needs of the employee. Failure on the part of the employee
on leave to report promptly at its expiration or within a reasonable time
after notice to return to duty may result in separation.
A.
If an income replacement benefit (IRB) policy is offered to any
bargaining units, nonunion employees will be availed the same
resource.
B.
All leaves, including vacation and personal leave, but excluding sick or
injured leave, must be requested from and approved by Administration
or appointing authority prior to the beginning of the leave. In the case
of a request for sick leave, the employee shall notify his/her department
head.
A.
Requests for leave without pay must be made in writing to the
department head and submitted for approval to Administration for final
approval. Requests for unpaid leave must include the reasons for such
request and the time requested. The Town reserves the right to require
an employee to exhaust all accrued leave before taking an unpaid leave
of absence. A nonexempt employee will not be paid for any absence
from scheduled working hours unless such absence is approved in
advance. Deductions from the pay of exempt employees will be in
accordance with the FLSA and state law. No insurance benefits will be
provided for approved unpaid leave except those that are required as
part of FMLA. All unpaid leave beyond FMLA must be placed on COBRA
for continuation of insurance benefits. (See Benefits Policy Manual.102)
B.
The absence of an employee from work that is not authorized by a
specific grant of leave of absence under the provisions of these rules
shall be deemed an absence without leave. Nonexempt employees will
be docked pay for absences without leave. Any employee who is absent
without leave may be subject to disciplinary action.
A.
Employees on administrative leave or any other paid or unpaid leave do
not accrue any paid leave.
B.
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Benefits.
§ 441-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-55
1:703
§ 441-55. Vacation leave.
§ 441-56. Sick leave.
Vacation leave with pay will be granted at the beginning of the fiscal
year.
Length of Continuous Full-Time
Creditable Service
(years)
Vacation Leave
(days per year)
Less than 5 10
Between 5 and 10 15
Between 10 and 20 20
20 or more 25
A.
Vacation carry-overs are not permitted, unless allowed and approved
by Administration with a sixty-day prior notice (before May 31) to
Administration. The Town would pay up to 40 hours of vacation time to
employees within 60 days of close of the subsequent fiscal year.
B.
Approval of vacation leave. All vacations shall be taken at times
satisfactory to the department head and Administration. Administration
may request at least a two-week lead time for any request greater than
two days.
C.
Separation from service. In the event of a discharge, unused vacation
must be paid on the last day of employment. In the event of layoff,
retirement, or voluntary resignation with proper notice, an employee's
accrued vacation leave, not to exceed one year's vacation accrual, shall
be paid in the next regular pay check at the time of separation.
D.
General.
Sick leave shall be allowed only in the case of actual illness, or
injury, which incapacitates the employee from the performance of
his or her duties. Under certain circumstances sick leave may also
be used for illness or injury in the employee's family.
(1)
Administration may grant up to an additional 15 days for an illnessrelated
absence if requested.
(2)
Regular full-time employees will receive 10 sick days at the
beginning of the fiscal year. A maximum cap of 180 sick days will
be allowed.
(3)
A regular part-time employee shall accumulate sick leave credits
in the same proportion that his/her part-time service bears to fulltime
service.
(4)
A.
B. Certification of illness.
§ 441-55 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-56
1:704
§ 441-57. Workers' compensation.
Workers' compensation leave, as distinguished from sick leave, shall mean
paid leave given to an employee due to absence from work caused by an
accident, injury, or occupational disease or illness that occurred in the
course of and arose out of the performance of his/her duties. Employees
Human Resources may require that the employee obtain a medical
certification from the employee's own physician for absences
greater than three days. The certification shall include:
The date and nature of the employee's illness or injury or the
preventive or rehabilitative care sought by the employee;
(a)
(b) The date(s) the employee was examined or treated; and
(If applicable) The dates on which the employee was disabled
from performing his/her work, when the employee can resume
work, what specific restrictions (if any) are applicable, and the
length of time said restrictions shall apply.
(c)
(1)
The medical certification must be filled out in a legible manner
and signed by the employee's licensed attending physician or other
health care provider.
(2)
It shall be the employee's obligation to ensure the Town receives
the medical certification in a timely manner. Failure to provide such
certificate shall be sufficient to deny such leave and it may be
retroactively recouped by the Town.
(3)
Medical examination. Administration may also require that the
employee undergo a medical examination at the Town's expense, by a
doctor designated by the Town when returning to work.
C.
Abuse of sick leave. Abuse of sick leave shall result in disciplinary
action up to and including discharge.
D.
Accumulated sick leave. An employee shall not be entitled to
compensation in lieu of accumulated sick leave, except as provided
below.
E.
Retirement benefit (sick leave). An employee with 20 or more years
of continuous service to the Town may notify Administration of his
or her intention to retire and, if he or she so notifies Administration
in writing 12 months before retiring (unless the employee is unable
to give one year notice due to bona fide sickness or disability) the
employee may receive 25 days of accumulated sick leave pay as a onetime
severance payment upon retirement. To be eligible, the employee
must have accumulated a minimum of 180 days of sick leave at the
time the written notice of retirement is received by Administration. This
benefit shall not be available for employees hired after March 30, 2013.
F.
§ 441-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-57
1:705
of the Town are covered by workers' compensation or other statutory
provisions and are paid stated amounts due to injuries sustained on the job.
§ 441-58. Jury duty.
An employee shall be granted a leave of absence for jury duty with regular
pay. Such leave shall only be during that part of the day that appearance
is required. Fees received in connection with said service for days when
such employees receive regular pay must be immediately turned over to the
Town. When such employee is properly excused by the court, he/she shall
report back to work.
§ 441-59. Bereavement leave.
§ 441-60. Personal leave.
Regular employees shall be entitled to up to two days off with pay per
fiscal year for legal, business, household, family or other personal matters
during working hours, subject to prior approval of the department head.
Employees requesting such leave shall fill out a Town approved form at least
five working days in advance of the commencement of the requested leave,
except in case of a bona fide emergency.
§ 441-61. Leave of absence without pay.
Administration may grant a leave of absence without pay for personal
reasons for periods beyond those allowable with pay with appointing
authority approval. Leave of absence without pay shall not be granted for
more than three months except for military leave. Further extensions of
three months may be granted by Administration if unusual circumstances
warrant it or it is mutually advantageous to the Town and employee. No
benefits will be provided except as required under FMLA or MMLA.
§ 441-62. Parental leave.
Regular employees shall be granted a leave of absence with pay for
a period of up to three working days when a death has occurred in
their immediate family (father, mother, brother, sister, grandparents,
father-in-law, mother-in-law, spouse, domestic partner, child, stepfather,
stepmother, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, stepchildren, grandchildren, or
one for whom the employee has the verified status of legal guardian)
upon request to their department head for attendance at the memorial
service and for a period of bereavement.
A.
Regular employees will be granted a one-day leave of absence for the
death of a relative that is not a member of their immediate family and
any other of equal relationship.
B.
Bereavement leave shall only be paid for days on which the employee
was regularly scheduled to work and would not have been absent for
any other reason.
C.
§ 441-57 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-62
1:706
The Town provides an unpaid leave of absence of up to eight weeks
to eligible full-time employees who have completed a three-month
probationary period and who want to take time off to fulfill family
obligations. Employees are eligible for parental leave if:
The leave is for the purpose of childbirth, adoption of a child under
age 18, adoption of a child under age 23 if the child is mentally
or physically disabled, or placement of a child with the employee
pursuant to a court order;
(1)
The employee is employed full time and has completed a
probationary period of three consecutive months of service; and
(2)
The employee communicates to Jennifer L. Wolowicz, Assistant
Town Administrator i) the date the employee wishes to begin the
leave at least two weeks before the date, if the reason for the
leave is foreseeable, and ii) whether he or she intends to return
to work at the end of the leave of absence. If the reason for the
leave is unforeseeable, the employee must request leave as soon as
possible.
(3)
A.
While the employee is out on parental leave, the employee must notify
Jennifer L. Wolowicz as soon as practical about any requested change
in the employee's leave schedule, intent to return to work, or requested
change in the anticipated date of return to work.
B.
Any leave of absence that is taken under this policy will be unpaid.
However, employees have the option to use any accrued sick, vacation,
or other paid time off concurrently with their leave so that the employee
can be paid during the time he or she is out of work on leave.
C.
A leave of absence taken under this policy will not affect the employee's
right to receive the same vacation time, sick leave, bonuses,
advancement, seniority, length of service credit, benefits, plans or
programs that the employee was eligible to receive immediately before
the parental leave began. The Town will comply with all aspects of the
law regarding job restoration. The period of leave will run concurrently
with other statutory leave for which the employee is eligible and which
covers the employee's period of leave.
D.
If two employees request parental leave for an event concerning the
same child, the two employees will be granted a total of eight weeks
of leave between the two employees if the employees meet all of the
requirements for leave under this policy. The employees must work
with Jennifer L. Wolowicz to determine a feasible leave of absence and
return schedule for both the Town and the employees.
E.
Additional time for leave may be available under other laws for an
employee's serious health condition that makes the employee unable
to perform his or her job, or as a reasonable accommodation for a
qualified disabled person. The qualifications required to be eligible for
the additional leave may be different than the qualifications required
F.
§ 441-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-62
1:707
to be eligible for parental leave. If an employee needs additional leave
for the reasons stated above, employees should consult with Jennifer
L. Wolowicz about their eligibility for additional leave. If an employee
is granted more than eight weeks of parental leave, the Town does not
guarantee the employee will be restored to the same or similar position
unless the leave is concurrently covered by the Family and Medical
Leave Act (FMLA) and the employee is eligible for FMLA. Under the
FMLA, a full-time female employee giving birth may be entitled to an
unpaid maternity leave of up to 12 weeks. The parental leave replaced
the Massachusetts Maternity Leave Act (MGL c. 149, § 105D).
§ 441-62 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-62
1:708
ARTICLE XI
Disciplinary Action
§ 441-63. Types of discipline.
The type of disciplinary action taken will vary with the severity of the
situation and may include the following measures: oral reprimand, written
reprimand, probation, suspension without pay, and discharge.
§ 441-64. Reasons for disciplinary action.
Disciplinary action may be imposed upon an employee for conduct or
actions which interfere with or prevent the Town from effectively and
efficiently discharging its responsibilities to the public as well as for any
improper conduct by an employee. The following shall be sufficient cause
for disciplinary actions. The list is illustrative only and shall not be
considered to include all reasons for disciplinary action:
§ 441-65. Disciplinary authority.
Activities prohibited by the Town bylaws, rules and regulations, charter,
ordinance, or state law.
A.
Use, possession, sale, or distribution of alcohol, narcotics, or other
controlled substances during working hours, on Town property or in
connection with the operation of Town equipment.
B.
C. Failure to meet prescribed standards of work.
Unauthorized absence or abuse of leave privileges or any other
employment benefit.
D.
Abuse or destruction of Town records, equipment, materials, or other
property.
E.
F. Any conduct unbecoming an employee of the Town.
G. Please see § 441-33.
Administration with input from Human Resources will determine
whether an employee's behavior warrants discipline. Disciplinary
decisions are not subject to appeal.
A.
The decision not to reappoint an individual whose term has expired
is not necessarily based on a disciplinary action and is not subject to
appeal.
B.
§ 441-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-65
1:709

ARTICLE XII
Employee Grievance Procedure
§ 441-66. Establishment of procedure.
Employee complaints concerning the administration of these policies shall
be presented as follows.
§ 441-67. Complaints.
§ 441-68. Investigation.
§ 441-69. Appeals.
Any employee who believes s/he has a valid grievance, including any
claim of mistreatment or discrimination under applicable laws, should
file a grievance with Human Resources, South Hadley Town Hall, 116
Main Street, Room 103, South Hadley, MA 01075; phone: 413-538-5017
(ext.129). If Human Resources is the source of the complaint, or there
are other compelling reasons that prevent bringing the problem to the
attention of this individual, then the employee may report the grievance
to the Town Administrator.
A.
B. A grievance should be made in writing.
C. A grievance may be denied if it is not reasonably timely.
A. Human Resources will undertake such investigation as is necessary.
In conducting the investigation, Human Resources will keep
information as confidential as possible, and disseminate it on a needto-
know basis only. Others involved in the investigation in any capacity
must also respect the privacy of those involved by keeping information
learned during the course of the investigation confidential.
B.
After reviewing the grievance and/or conducting an investigation
Human Resources will schedule a meeting with the employee making
the complaint to discuss his or her concerns and, where appropriate,
advise the employee of the results of the investigation.
C.
If the employee is dissatisfied with the handling or result of the
investigation, the employee should bring the matter immediately to the
Town Administrator, preferably in writing, stating the reasons for that
dissatisfaction.
A.
B. In all cases, the decision of the Town Administrator will be final.
§ 441-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-69
1:711

ARTICLE XIII
Drug-Free Workplace Policy
§ 441-70. Purpose.
It is the policy of South Hadley to provide employees with a working
environment that is free of the problems associated with the use and abuse
of controlled substances and alcohol. The use of controlled substances and/
or alcohol is inconsistent with the behavior expected of employees and
subjects the Town to unacceptable risk of workplace accidents or other
failures that would undermine the Town's ability to operate effectively and
efficiently.
§ 441-71. Employee conduct.
In accordance with the Federal Drug Free Workplace Act (41 U.S.C. §§ 8101
through 8106) the Town of South Hadley strives to provide a drug-free
work environment. The following principals govern our drug-free workplace
policy:
Employees are prohibited from the manufacture, possession, use,
distribution, or purchase of controlled substances and intoxicants on
Town premises and from working under the influence of alcohol, illegal
drugs or intoxicants.
A.
Any employee who is charged or convicted of any violation of any
criminal drug statute occurring on Town premises or during work time
shall notify the Assistant Town Administrator within five days of the
date of such charge or conviction.
B.
Violation of the drug-free workplace policy will result in discipline, up
to and including discharge.
C.
Employees are encouraged to seek treatment of alcoholism and/or
other drug abuse and addiction illnesses. Treatment for alcoholism and/
or other drug use disorders may be covered by the employee benefit
plan. However, the ultimate financial responsibility for recommended
treatment belongs to the employee.
D.
Any employee who asks for treatment or who is diagnosed as being
drug dependent will be given the same consideration and offer of
assistance that is presently given to all employees with any kind of
disease or medical problem. Although employees are encouraged to
seek treatment for a substance abuse/dependency problem, seeking
treatment does not preclude the Town from pursuing appropriate
disciplinary action.
E.
The individual employee is responsible for deciding whether to request
diagnosis and accept treatment for drug dependence. Individuals who
refuse to accept referral for diagnosis or treatment will be handled
just like any other employee whose job performance is declining.
Administration will determine whether, when and under what
F.
§ 441-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-71
1:713
§ 441-72. Additional resources.
circumstances an employee may be re-employed after an instance of
substance abuse.
Each employee is responsible for promptly reporting to his/her
supervisor and the Assistant Town Administrator any use of prescribed
drugs which may affect the employee's judgment, performance or
behavior.
G.
For additional information please contact the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health. The address is:
250 Washington Street
Boston, MA 02108-4619
(617)624-6000
A.
B. The website for the Department of Public Health is www.mass.gov/dph.
§ 441-71 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-72
1:714
ARTICLE XIV
Equal Employment Opportunity/Affirmative Action Policy
§ 441-73. Purpose.
The Town of South Hadley (Town) is committed to promoting
nondiscrimination, diversity, and equal opportunity, and, if necessary,
affirmative action in all of its policies regarding employment and provision
of services. The employment policies and practices of the Town are to
recruit, hire and promote employees on the basis of qualifications, and
ability, without discrimination because of membership in a protected class,
and to treat them equally with respect to compensation and opportunities
for advancement, including but not limited to job assignment, supervision,
training, upgrading, promotion, transfer, layoff, recall from layoff,
termination, and other terms and conditions of employment.
§ 441-74. Discrimination prohibited.
In order to provide equal employment and advancement opportunities for
all individuals, no employee or applicant shall be discriminated against on
the basis of race, color, age, gender, ethnicity, sexual orientation, gender
identity or expression, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, disability,
veteran's status (including Vietnam-era veterans), criminal background,
genetic information or other legally protected status. This policy of
nondiscrimination applies to all employment practices and procedures and
all other aspects of the employment relationship.
§ 441-75. Affirmative action.
The Town recognizes that specific affirmative action may be necessary to
help ensure equal opportunity and to provide equitable remedies consistent
with the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and all civil rights
laws that pertain to affirmative action and nondiscrimination and apply to
the Town. The Town's affirmative action policy is meant to further these
interests and goals. Provisions in applicable laws providing for bona fide
occupational qualifications and business necessity will be adhered to by the
Town where appropriate.
§ 441-76. Implementation.
The Town shall make its personnel aware that it is the responsibility of
each member of management to give the nondiscrimination policy full
support through direction and personal example. The Town shall inform
employees of the desired workplace environment which is conducive to
nondiscrimination, diversity, and equal opportunity. The Town recognizes
the importance of union cooperation and will work with union
representatives regarding the goals of this policy. Nothing in this policy
statement is intended to supersede any legal or contractual right(s) of Town
employees.
§ 441-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 441-77
1:715
§ 441-77. Complaints.
An employee who believes that he or she has been treated in a manner
that violates this policy and/or federal, state, or local employment laws
should report the matter immediately to the Human Resources Department.
Employees can raise concerns and make reports without fear of unlawful
retaliation.
§ 441-77 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 441-77


Chapter 451
REAR ACREAGE LAND VALUATION POLICY
§ 451-1. Rear acreage land valuation policy enumerated.
A. Building lots, also known as prime sites, are valued by "base lot size,"
which is 43,560 square feet (one acre). Sites that are considered prime
are those that are improved or potentially developable.
B. Any acreage over the base lot size is considered rear acreage or
remaining land.
C. Remaining land is valued per acre as excess residual land. This land
pricing unit remains unchanged at $3,500 per acre. Additional
conditions may be applied to this pricing on a case-by-case basis to
recognize any detriments or enhancements to the excess land.
§ 439-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 451-1
65:18

Chapter 453
SOCIAL MEDIA
§ 453-1. Scope and authority.
§ 453-2. Regulations.
This policy applies to all social media tools, including, but not limited to,
Facebook and Twitter. These open forums are meant to allow residents
and other participants to participate in community conversations and
receive information from the municipality.
A.
If you choose to comment it should be acknowledged that you are
personally responsible for the comments you make or information you
submit. We ask that you keep your comments civil and within the
boundaries of appropriate public language.
B.
The Selectboard reserves the right to remove any posts and take
further steps necessary to maintain a civil discord on all social media
sites. Any such removal of material or other monitoring will be
performed by an administrator designated by the Selectboard.
C.
A. Do not post material which is commercial or political in nature.
B. Do not post obscene, graphic, threatening, violent or racial comments.
Posts that are hateful, abusive, vindictive, or threatening to an
individual, group or organization are not allowed.
C.
Any commercial postings will be removed, including advertisements,
prizes, promotions, financing or other such matters. Posts attempting
to defraud or mislead the public will be removed and referred to the
proper agency for investigation.
D.
Any post which suggests or implies an illegal activity will be removed
and reported to the proper authority.
E.
Comments related to litigation, contract negations or administrative
proceedings which may adversely affect, cause prejudice or otherwise
degrade the public process for the municipality, other parties or
individuals will be removed.
F.
Apparent spamming or trolling will be removed and the party may be
blocked.
G.
Use of trademark material, images or copyrighted material is
forbidden. Images posted should be the property of the user.
H.
I. Do not post documents of any kind.
J. Do not posts lists, rosters, organizational charts or directories.
§ 441-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 453-2
1:717
§ 453-3. Violations and penalties; appeals.
Any party suspected to be a chronic violator of this policy or otherwise
threatening the purpose of this policy will be permanently banned. An
appeal to the full Selectboard may be allowed for a permanently banned
user, if the Selectboard so chooses. However, the party requesting such
an appeal must present and give access to all postings, materials and/or
hard drives requested by the Selectboard 30 days prior to the hearing.
The Selectboard may request a forensic audit of the equipment at the
appellant's expense.
§ 453-4. Quality of information.
All information posted to social media is considered to be in the public
domain. The Town of South Hadley does not necessarily authenticate or fact
check material posted by users and subsequently does not vouch for the
veracity of any posts from users.
Chapter 457
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 179.
Tree bylaw — See Ch. 223.
Zoning — See Ch. 255.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 360.
§ 457-1. Findings.
Trees are recognized as an asset to the community, providing a more
healthful and beautiful environment in which to live. Trees and other
vegetation provide oxygen, shade, protection from wind, glare, noise and
provide natural privacy to neighbors, wildlife habitat, aesthetics and a
priceless psychological counterpoint to the man-made setting. Preserving
trees is economically beneficial in attracting new residents, visitors and
industry.
§ 457-2. Removal procedures.
The Town recognizes that a property owner may wish to remove a
nonhazardous public shade tree. The Town of South Hadley defines public
shade trees under MGL c. 87. Public shade trees shall not be removed other
than by or on behalf of the Town. If a property owner wishes to remove a
tree that the Tree Warden does not deem a hazard, the following steps shall
be taken:
The Town of South Hadley reserves the right to remove any material
and block any user.
K.
§ 453-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 457-2
1:718
§ 457-3. Applicant responsibilities.
The property owner must submit a completed tree removal permit
application to the Tree Warden.
A.
The Tree Warden shall hold a public hearing. The cost of the legal
notice for the hearing shall be paid by the property owner, unless the
Tree Warden is already posting a legal notice for the removal of other
Town trees. In this case, the property owner's tree shall be included in
the legal notice and the property owner shall not be responsible for any
portion of the cost of the notice.
B.
If, at the hearing, no person objects to the removal of the tree, the
property owner shall be allowed to remove the tree. The property
owner will be responsible for all applicant responsibilities and tree
replacement requirements as described below in the nonhazardous tree
removal policy.
C.
If, at the hearing, any person objects to the removal, in accordance with
MGL c. 87, the Tree Warden cannot grant approval to remove the Town
tree. The property owner may appeal to the Selectboard.
D.
An appeal for removal of a tree shall be submitted to the Selectboard
in writing. The appeal shall state the reason(s) the applicant wishes to
remove the tree.
E.
If the Selectboard approves the removal of the Town tree, the property
owner will be responsible for all applicant responsibilities and tree
replacement requirements as described below in the nonhazardous tree
removal policy.
F.
Any applicant that is granted permission to remove a nonhazardous
public shade tree will be responsible for all expenses associated with
the removal of the tree and stump, including, but not limited to:
(1) Any additional permits or notifications that may be required.
The cost of complete tree removal, disposal of wood, stump
removal or grinding, and backfilling of stump hole, including loam
and reseeding of lawn areas.
(2)
(3) The cost of police details.
(4) Repair of street surface and shoulder.
(5) Repair and restoration of utility services.
(6) Performance bond if required by the Tree Warden.
A.
All tree work shall be performed in compliance with ANSI Z-133 and
International Arboriculture and Tree Care Industry Association
standards. The tree removal contractor must be approved by the Tree
Warden as to equipment, qualifications and experience. Certificates
B.
§ 457-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-3
1:719
§ 457-4. Tree replacement requirements.
§ 457-5. Authority of Tree Warden.
Nothing contained in this policy shall prohibit the Tree Warden from
refusing to permit the removal of nonhazardous public shade trees. The
Tree Warden may refuse to grant a permit for the removal of a
nonhazardous tree if, in his or her opinion, the tree is of historic or scenic
value; is of a size or species not commonly found along the roadways of
of insurance, including workers' compensation, bodily injury, property
damage and liability, satisfactory to the Town requirements shall be
submitted to the Town prior to starting work.
Before the start of any work or arrival of equipment or materials, the
contractor shall arrange a preconstruction conference with the Tree
Warden. At said conference, the Tree Warden will identify trees and
shrubs that are to be protected or removed. The Tree Warden may
require the installation of fencing, mulches or temporary surfaces to
protect surrounding vegetation and Town infrastructure.
C.
For every nonhazardous public shade tree removed by a property owner
the Town requires replacement(s) according to the provisions below.
DBH of Removed Tree
(inches) Replacement Tree(s)
3 up to 12 1
13 up to 24 2
25 up to 36 3
Greater than 36 4
Note: DBH = diameter at breast height, defined as 4.5 feet above
ground level.
A.
The property owner shall choose one of three options to satisfy the tree
replacement requirements:
Provide and plant replacement trees according to the quantities
described above. Replacement trees shall be at least two inches'
DBH. The replacements shall be a species that is appropriate to
the site and approved by the Tree Warden. The Tree Warden shall
inspect replacements prior to planting to ensure they are in
satisfactory condition.
(1)
Make a payment to the Town's Tree Planting Account. The amount
of the payment shall be computed by multiplying $125 times the
required number of replacement trees.
(2)
A combination of planting(s) and payment to the Tree Planting
Account.
(3)
B.
§ 457-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 457-5
1:720
South Hadley; has significant wildlife value; or is an unusually healthy or
significant specimen.
Chapter 460
TOWN PROPERTY, USE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town property — See Ch. 77. Town-owned vehicles — See Ch. 472.
§ 457-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 457-5
1:721

ARTICLE I
Town Common and Gazebo
[Adopted 8-18-2009]
§ 460-1. Purpose.
The purpose of these regulations is to help assure public safety and good
order in the use of the Town Common and Gazebo as public resources of the
Town. At the same time, the regulations are intended to confirm the Town's
commitment to the public in permitting use of these resources.
§ 460-2. General usage policy.
§ 460-3. Activities requiring prior approval.
The Town Common is a public area for use by the public. As such,
no individual or organization using the Town Common shall prevent
anyone from entering onto the Town Common space. Likewise, an
admission fee or charge shall not be required from anyone in order to
enter upon the Town Common.
A.
Individuals and organizations using the Town Common and/or Gazebo
shall be responsible for any damage incurred by or as a result of their
use. As well, individuals and organizations are responsible for ensuring
that all refuse generated by their use is collected and disposed of
properly. If the Town's Department of Public Works is needed to restore
any portion of the area to its condition prior to usage, the individual or
organization responsible will be billed for these services.
B.
Individuals and organizations are responsible for obtaining all permits
if necessary, including, but not limited to, a permit from the Building
Inspector for temporary displays or structures, or a permit from the
Board of Health for the sale of foods.
C.
Alcoholic beverages and the smoking of tobacco products are
prohibited.
D.
Approval from the office of the Selectboard is required to use the Town
Common and/or Gazebo for the following activities or events:
Activities or events which include the sale of goods and/or services,
or any other commercial transaction. Individuals or for-profit
businesses/organizations shall not hold events or conduct activities
which are for the purpose of generating profit. Nonprofit
businesses/organizations may do so; however, the Town may
require an organization to present a copy of its nonprofit status as
approved by the Federal Government or the commonwealth prior
to granting approval.
(1)
(2) Activities or events which involve 25 or more participants.
A.
§ 460-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-3
1:723
§ 460-4. Reservations.
Activities or events which are to be publicized or advertised prior
to the activity or event.
(3)
To gain approval for such activities or events, individuals and
organizations shall submit a request in writing to the office of the
Selectboard. The Town reserves the right to not approve any activity
that it may deem inappropriate with the intended use and purpose
of the Town Common and Gazebo, or which may cause harm to the
inhabitants of the Town.
B.
Individuals and organizations seeking to reserve part or all of the Town
Common and/or Gazebo shall submit a request in writing to the office
of the Selectboard. Requests must be submitted at least two weeks
prior to the requested date of use, and each request must specify the
date, time and duration of the reservation, and the area to be reserved.
Requests shall be honored on a "first-come, first-served" basis.
A.
The honoring of a request to reserve part or all of the Town Common
and/or Gazebo does not imply approval from the office of the
Selectboard for the activity or event. Such approval, if necessary, must
be obtained separately.
B.
Requests to reserve part or all of the Town Common and/or the Gazebo
for more than one date shall be reviewed by the office of the
Selectboard. While the reservation for the initial date shall be honored
on a "first-come, first-served" basis, reservations for the subsequent
dates may not be granted if the Town deems that doing so unduly
restricts the use of the Town Common and/or Gazebo by other
individuals and organizations.
C.
§ 460-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 460-4
1:724
ARTICLE II
Town Hall
[Adopted 8-18-2015]
§ 460-5. Reservation of rooms.
§ 460-6. Nonprofit and not-for-profit use of rooms.
§ 460-7. Businesses and for-profit use of facilities.
Rooms in the Town Hall will be made tentatively available upon
electronic application being received by the Selectboard office. If no
electronic means are available, requesting parties may submit an
application in writing directly to the Selectboard office, Room 109. The
room reservation will be considered and notification will be made to the
requesting party as to status (approval/denial) in a timely manner.
A.
Once processed, the confirmation will be posted on the website
calendar as soon as possible. Administration reserves the right to
cancel any confirmation and notify the contact of cancellation 24 hours
prior to the date, if necessary. All applications should be received at
least 30 days before the event date.
B.
The highest priority status will be given to a Town of South Hadley
appointed (ad-hoc or standing) board(s), commission(s), authority(s),
and committee(s). Departments will have the next level of priority, with
regional, state and federal requests to follow.
C.
There will be no fee for use by the above groups, but there must be an
individual (chair, member or staff) assigned primary responsibility for
the building. The "assigned party" must be approved by Administration.
D.
Groups external to any of the above-listed divisions of government may
request by electronic application to use Town Hall meeting spaces. All
requests must be reviewed and approved by the Town Administrator
or his/her assignee. A fee may be assessed for any reasonable costs
related to the use. An "assigned party" must sign and accept
responsibility for returning the room used to its previous form and
condition, and will be responsible for any fees outstanding. The
assigned party must turn off lights and lock all doors before leaving the
building, and other duties as directed by Administration. The assigned
party must be the last to leave, and if there are any concerns or
incidents while he/she is acting in this capacity (and Town Hall offices
are closed), he/she should report it immediately to the South Hadley
Police Department, (413) 538-8231.
A.
Any group or organization charging a fee or receiving remuneration
in conjunction with the event will be assessed a reasonable fee. This
does not preclude a fee for events offered free and open to the public,
as reasonable. The Town of South Hadley reserves the right to be
indemnified by the individual or organization.
B.
§ 460-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 460-7
1:725
§ 460-8. Definitions.
As used in this policy, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSIGNED PARTY — A responsible person deemed by the Town
Administrator.
FEES — Any cost associated with the requested function/meeting,
including, but not limited to, police or fire personnel, janitorial, porter
services or other costs associated with the event.
INDEMNIFICATION — Appropriate and recognized insurance as required.
LOCAL LICENSING AUTHORITY (LLA) — The Town of South Hadley
Selectboard.
ROOMS — Selectboard Meeting Room, Town Hall Auditorium, Room 1
(lower level), or other space as may be considered appropriate by
Administration.
Businesses, and profit-based events, will be assessed costs related to
any and all necessary monitoring. In addition, there will be a service
fee of $100, and there will be a staff person appointed to oversee
the function and act as the "assigned party." This person will be an
employee of the Town and will be compensated at the appropriate rate,
which will also be charged to the event applicant.
A.
The organization, individual, or company will provide the Town of South
Hadley with indemnification and appropriate insurance as requested by
Administration.
B.
No alcohol may be served without the proper licensure and insurance
accepted and approved by the Local Licensing Authority. No food may
be served without approval from Administration, and the proper
licensure and approval from the South Hadley Health Director. These
requirements can be modified or waived by the South Hadley
Selectboard at any time.
C.
Additional approvals as required by law may be necessary from the
local Fire District, Building Commissioner and/or other regulatory
agencies. Administration suggests full disclosure as to the activities, so
Administration may properly suggest to the applicant which agencies
have some jurisdiction. Administration does not take any responsibility
for nor will the Town accept any cost related to those inspections,
requirements or permits.
D.
No equipment may be brought into Town Hall without review of the
existing infrastructure's ability to properly accommodate said
equipment. Any Town Hall equipment to be used must be listed in
the application and approved as part of the process. No Town Hall
equipment may be removed from the premises without approval and
unless being used for a public purpose.
E.
§ 460-7 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 460-8
1:726
Chapter 472
VEHICLES, TOWN-OWNED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel policies — See Ch. 441.
§ 472-1. Purpose and applicability.
This policy is meant to provide an outline of the assignment criteria and
administrative policies/procedures governing individual/department use of
Town-owned vehicles. This policy does not cover specific vehicles outlined
in policies of the South Hadley Police Department that are more specific
than this policy.
§ 472-2. Scope.
This policy applies to all Town vehicles and pertains to all Town employees.
§ 472-3. Definitions.
As used in this policy, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSIGNED TAKE-HOME VEHICLE — A Town vehicle that is used by an
employee for Town business and for regularly commuting to/from work.
ASSIGNED WORKDAY VEHICLE — A Town vehicle assigned to a
department but not to a specific employee and not used for an employee to
commute to/from work.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — An employee who has primary responsibility
to respond to emergencies which require immediate response.
WORK STATION — The office or site to which a Town employee reports to
perform normally scheduled work.
§ 472-4. Policy statement.
The Town wishes to restrict the number of Town-owned vehicles being
used by employees to commute to/from work to only those times when
it is in the best interest of the Town. The use of Town vehicles for
take-home increases operational costs, adds mileage to Town vehicles,
increases wear and tear on vehicles, and decreases the useful life of the
pool of vehicles available to address the needs of the Town.
A.
Use of personal vehicles is preferred over the assignment of take-home
vehicles for conducting Town business before and after normal working
hours. Employees will submit for approval by their supervisor for this
B.
§ 460-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-4
1:727
§ 472-5. Take-home vehicle authorization.
type of travel and will be reimbursed at the IRS standard mileage rate
allowance.
Assignment of a Town vehicle shall not be made for the convenience
of employees, nor as substitute compensation for any employee. The
Town Administrator (or his designee) must authorize the assignment
of a take-home vehicle. The assignment must be for the efficient and
effective delivery of vital services on an after-hours basis, or for other
purposes to meet the needs of the Town.
C.
Use of Town vehicles for personal purposes is prohibited, other than
travel to/from work.
D.
To receive a take-home vehicle assignment one of the following two
criteria must be documented on the Take-Home Vehicle Authorization
Form:103
Emergency response. A take-home vehicle may be assigned to a
Town employee who is called out and has primary responsibility
to respond to emergencies which require immediate response to
protect life or property; and:
Cannot use another form of transportation to respond to the
emergencies; and
(a)
Cannot pick up a Town-owned vehicle at designated sites
without significantly impacting the employee's ability to
respond to the emergency in an appropriate time frame.
(b)
(1)
Special equipment vehicles. Take-home vehicles may be assigned
if an employee needs specialized equipment or a special vehicle to
perform Town work outside the employee's normal work schedule.
Communication access shall not be considered, by itself, as a
valid reason for a specifically assigned vehicle.
(a)
Employees must have the primary responsibility to respond to
calls and to be available to respond when requested.
(b)
Specialized vehicles or equipment cannot be used for personal
use.
(c)
(2)
A.
In limited instances, and normally for a limited duration, the Town
Administrator may approve a take-home vehicle that does not strictly
meet this justification criterion.
B.
103. Editor's Note: A copy of the Take-Home Vehicle Authorization Form is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 472-4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 472-6
1:728
§ 472-6. IRS reporting requirements.
Employees assigned a take-home Town vehicle will have their taxable gross
increased by an amount that represents the value of this "non-cash taxable
fringe benefit" as outlined in IRS Publication 15-B, Employer's Tax Guide to
Fringe Benefits. The employee who is assigned a Town take-home vehicle
shall receive a copy of the Take-Home Vehicle Fringe Benefit Form for use
when completing his/her personal income tax forms.104
§ 472-7. Authority for making assignments; annual review;
employee requests.
The Town Administrator (or designee) has final approval authority for
all take-home vehicle assignments. All assignments expire at the end of
the fiscal year and must be reviewed and authorized for the assignment
to continue.
A.
Department heads must review their department operations to
determine if operational needs meet the criteria set forth in this policy
for a take-home vehicle assignment. By May 15 of each year,
department heads must review this information and complete a new
Take-Home Vehicle Authorization Form for any assignment they are
requesting to continue.105 Department heads must continually review
their department operations so that if the need for a take-home vehicle
is no longer necessary, the assignment ends and the employee's payroll
reflects the termination of the assignment.
B.
Employees.
Employees requesting a take-home vehicle assignment must meet
one of the following criteria:
If emergency response is being used as the justification, there
must be an explanation as to why alternative forms of
transportation cannot be used to respond to the emergencies
and why a Town vehicle cannot be picked up in a designated
Town parking lot.
(a)
If special equipment is used as the justification, the following
information must be provided:
[1] Description of necessary equipment;
Explanation of why a Town vehicle is required to transport
the special equipment;
[2]
[3] How the equipment is being used;
(b)
(1)
C.
104. Editor's Note: A copy of the Take-Home Vehicle Fringe Benefit Form is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
105. Editor's Note: A copy of the Take-Home Vehicle Authorization Form is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 472-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 472-7
1:729
§ 472-8. Town vehicles assigned to departments.
Why the vehicle cannot be picked up in a designated Town
parking lot; and
[4]
Description of the type and nature of the emergency that
requires the use of such equipment.
[5]
Employees shall submit completed Take-Home Vehicle
Authorization and Take-Home Vehicle Fringe Benefit Forms to their
department head or the Town Administrator, if the employee is
a department head, for review and submit them for approval to
the Town Administrator.106 All forms must be resubmitted and
approved at least annually, or when an employee's job assignment
changes.
(2)
Employees shall:
Maintain a valid Massachusetts driver's license (provide a
photocopy of said license);
(a)
(b) Provide off-street overnight parking at the employee's home;
Comply with operator responsibilities, accident reporting
requirements and other procedures;
(c)
Not transport any non-Town employees in the vehicle, except
when conducting official Town business;
(d)
Only use the vehicle for business and commuting to and from
work, with de-minimus personal use (brief stop, on the way, for
a personal errand);
(e)
Be personally responsible for any traffic citations received
while driving a Town vehicle, and promptly pay any fines.
(f)
(3)
It is the employee's responsibility to immediately report any loss,
lapse or suspension of license and under no circumstances should
said employee operate a Town vehicle under either of these or
similar circumstances.
(4)
The Town Administrator shall have final approval of all Take-Home
Vehicle Authorization and Take-Home Vehicle Fringe Benefit Forms.
Violation of this policy will result in discipline, which may include
termination.
D.
Departments are assigned a certain number of Town vehicles for
conducting Town business during the workday, but not for employees
commuting to and from work.
A.
106. Editor's Note: Copies of said forms are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 472-7 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 472-8
1:730
Chapter 478
WORKPLACE POLICY MANUAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Closing of Town facilities — See Ch. 77, Art. I.
Personnel policies — See Ch. 441.
Social media policy — See Ch. 453.
§ 478-1. Domestic violence leave.
As of July 31, 2014, Massachusetts' new Domestic Violence Leave Law
requires employers with 50 or more employees to give up to 15 days of leave
to domestic violence victims. An Act relative to domestic violence (the Act)
is a comprehensive domestic violence bill. It mandates leaves of up to 15
days for employees if the employee or a family member of the employee is
a victim of domestic violence and needs time off to address issues directly
related to the domestic violence. The Act went into effect immediately upon
passage. In addition to its workplace provisions, it creates new criminal
offenses relative to domestic violence, boosts domestic violence prevention
efforts and provides support to domestic violence victims and their family
members.
The most economic alternatives for short-distance (same-day) business
trips are privately owned vehicles and assigned workday vehicles.
Employees using their own vehicles will be reimbursed under the
Town's Travel Policy or the employee's CBA.107
B.
What leave does the law provide?
(1) Up to 15 days of leave in any twelve-month period.
The employer has the sole discretion to determine whether the
leave shall be paid or unpaid.
(2)
The employer may require an employee seeking leave to exhaust all
annual vacation, personal and sick leave available to the employee
prior to requesting or taking leave.
(3)
A.
When is a leave triggered? An employee is entitled to leave if:
The employee, or a family member of the employee, is a victim of
domestic violence.
(1)
The employee is using the leave from work to address issues
directly related to the domestic violence against the employee or
family member of the employee.
(2)
B.
107. Editor's Note: See Ch. 441, § 441-39, Town vehicle policy.
§ 472-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-1
1:731
The employee is not the perpetrator of the domestic violence
against such employee's family member.
(3)
What constitutes domestic violence? "Domestic violence" is defined as
"abuse" against an employee or the employee's family member by:
A current or former spouse of the employee or the employee's
family member.
(1)
A person with whom the employee or the employee's family
member shares a child in common.
(2)
A person who is or has cohabited with the employee or the
employee's family member.
(3)
(4) A person who is related by blood or marriage to the employee.
A person with whom the employee or employee's family member
has or had a dating or engagement relationship.
(5)
C.
What constitutes abuse? "Abuse" includes:
(1) Attempting to cause or causing physical harm.
(2) Placing another in fear of imminent serious physical harm.
Causing another to engage involuntarily in sexual relations by
force, threat or duress or engaging or threatening to engage in
sexual activity with a dependent child.
(3)
Engaging in mental abuse, which includes threats, intimidation or
acts designed to induce terror.
(4)
Depriving another of medical care, housing, food or other
necessities of life.
(5)
(6) Restraining the liberty of another.
D.
What qualifies for a leave request? Leave may be used for the following:
To seek or obtain medical attention, counseling, victim services or
legal assistance.
(1)
(2) Secure housing.
(3) Obtain a protective order from a court.
(4) Appear in court or before a grand jury.
(5) Meet with a district attorney or other law enforcement official.
Attend child custody proceedings or address other issues directly
related to the abusive behavior against the employee or family
member of the employee.
(6)
E.
§ 478-1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 478-1
1:732
§ 478-2. Employee appearance.
§ 478-3. Harassment and sexual harassment.
Who is a family member? An employee's family member includes a
spouse, domestic partner, individuals having a child in common, parent,
child, sibling, grandparent or grandchild.
F.
How is leave administered?
Similar to the FMLA, employees must request the leave in advance
from Human Resources (unless there is a threat of imminent
danger).
(1)
Employers may require an employee to provide documentation
evidencing that the employee or the employee's family member has
been a victim of abusive behavior.
(2)
In the case of a scheduled leave, the employee must provide the
same amount of notice as is required by the employer's other leave
policies.
(3)
In the case of unscheduled leave, an employee (or employee's
representative) must notify the employer within three work days
that the leave was taken or is being taken pursuant to the law and
an employer may not take negative action against the employee for
an unscheduled absence if within 30 days from the unauthorized
absence, the employee provides sufficient documentation
evidencing the need for the leave.
(4)
The form of documentation that an employer must accept as
sufficient evidence is specifically listed in the language of the
legislation. All information related to the employee's leave must be
kept confidential by the employer and may only be disclosed in very
specific circumstances.
(5)
The documentation provided to the employer may only be
maintained in the employee's employment record for as long as
required for the employer to make a determination as to whether
the employee is eligible for leave.
(6)
G.
Employees are expected to observe business standard dress code for
appropriate and professional appearance commensurate with job
responsibilities.
A.
Department heads are responsible to determine appropriate
appearance.
B.
C. Administration may allow appropriate casual dress.
It is the goal of the Town to promote a workplace that is free of
discriminatory harassment (harassment) of any type, including sexual
harassment. Harassment or bullying on the basis of age, race, color,
A.
§ 478-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-3
1:733
national origin, sex, religion, sexual orientation, genetics, military
status, ancestry, or disability is prohibited by state and/or federal law
and will not be tolerated by the Town. Discriminatory harassment
consists of unwelcome conduct, whether verbal or physical, that is
based on a characteristic protected by law.
All Town employees are responsible for insuring that the workplace is
free from all forms of harassment. This policy applies to all employees
and officers of the Town. Supervisory and managerial employees must
not condone acts of harassment by their subordinate employees, by
other Town employees, by visitors to Town offices, or by employees
of Town vendors and contractors. Harassment of employees occurring
in the workplace, or in other settings in which employees may find
themselves in connection with their employment, is unlawful and will
not be tolerated. Retaliation against persons complaining about
harassment or sexual harassment, or retaliation against individuals for
cooperating with an investigation of a harassment complaint, is also
unlawful and is prohibited by this policy. Harassment in retaliation
for formal or informal participation in filing an internal or external
complaint of discrimination or otherwise raising a concern regarding
discrimination will also not be tolerated.
B.
Harassment defined.
Harassment in general. Harassment is unwelcome verbal or
physical conduct, directed at an individual based upon age, race,
color, national origin, sex, religion, sexual orientation, genetics,
military status, or disability, which disrupts or interferes with
another's work performance, or which creates an intimidating,
offensive, or hostile environment. A pattern of harassment cannot
be defined by a single incident.
(1)
Sexual harassment:
In Massachusetts, the legal definition for sexual harassment is
this:
"Sexual harassment means sexual advances, requests for
sexual favors, and verbal, or physical conduct of a sexual
nature when:
a) Submission to or rejection of such advances, requests
or conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term
or condition of employment or as a basis for
employment decisions.
b) Such advances, requests or conduct have the purpose
or effect of unreasonably interfering with the
individual's work performance by creating an
intimidating, hostile, humiliating or sexually offensive
work environment."
(a)
(2)
C.
§ 478-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 478-3
1:734
Under this definition, direct or implied requests by a
supervisor for sexual favors in exchange for actual or promised
job benefits such as favorable reviews, salary increases,
promotions, increased benefits, or continued employment
constitutes sexual harassment. The legal definition of sexual
harassment is broad and in addition to the above examples,
other sexually orientated conduct, whether it is intended or
not, that is unwelcome and has the effect of creating a
workplace environment that is hostile, offensive, intimidating
or humiliating to male or female workers may also constitute
sexual harassment.
(b)
Prevention of harassment. The Town subscribes to the concept of a
safe work environment and supports the prevention of harassment.
Prevention efforts include, but are not limited to: informing employees
of this policy on an annual basis, training employees regularly,
communicating the sanctions imposed for violating this policy, and
providing a reporting hierarchy within which to report incidents of
harassment without fear of reprisal. Because the Town of South Hadley
takes allegations of harassment seriously, the Town will respond
promptly to complaints of harassment. Where it is determined that
inappropriate conduct has occurred, the Town will act to eliminate the
conduct and impose such corrective action as is necessary, including
discipline where appropriate.
D.
Persons covered. This policy prohibits harassment of all employees,
including nonsupervisory, supervisory, management and executive
personnel, volunteers and all applicants for employment.
E.
Procedure.
Complaint.
Any employee who believes that he or she has been subjected
to harassment prohibited by this policy has a responsibility
to report the harassment as soon as possible to Human
Resources, South Hadley Town Hall, 116 Main Street, Room
103, South Hadley, MA 01075; phone: 413-538-5017 (ext.129).
If Human Resource personnel is the source of the harassment,
or there are other compelling reasons that prevent bringing
the problem to the attention of this individual, then the
employee may report the harassment to the Town
Administrator. Human Resources is also available to provide
information about the Town's policy on harassment, as well as
the complaint process.
(a)
A complaint may be made verbally or in writing. The Town may
require that a verbal complaint be reduced to writing with the
assistance of Human Resources, or other person designated by
the Town.
(b)
(1)
F.
§ 478-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-3
1:735
Any supervisor, manager or other employee who becomes
aware of harassment prohibited by this policy must
immediately report it to Human Resources.
(c)
Investigation.
All complaints of harassment will be investigated promptly and
impartially by the Assistant Town Administrator or by another
qualified individual selected by the Town.
(a)
An individual conducting an investigation into a complaint of
harassment will keep information as confidential as possible,
and disseminate it on a need-to-know basis only. Others
involved in the investigation in any capacity must also respect
the privacy of those involved by keeping information learned
during the course of the investigation confidential.
(b)
Ordinarily, as circumstances permit, the Town's investigation
will include private interviews with appropriate individuals,
such as the complainant, the employee alleged to have
committed harassment, and with witnesses, if any.
(c)
As soon as practicable after the completion of the
investigation, the official responsible for conducting the
investigation will, to the extent appropriate, advise the
employee who brought the harassment complaint and the
employee accused of harassment of the results of the
investigation.
(d)
If either employee is dissatisfied with the handling or result
of the investigation, the employee should bring the matter
immediately to the Town Administrator, preferably in writing,
stating the reasons for that dissatisfaction.
(e)
(2)
Action. Anyone who is found, after investigation, to have engaged
in harassment prohibited by this policy will be subject to
disciplinary action up to and including discharge from employment.
This policy shall not limit the authority of the Town to take
disciplinary action against an employee who engages in
inappropriate conduct, regardless of whether it satisfies the
definition of harassment or sexual harassment under this policy.
(3)
Retaliation prohibited. No one who brings a harassment complaint
in good faith will be subject to any adverse employment action
for doing so, regardless of whether the complaint is ultimately
determined to have merit. Any employee, including supervisors
and managers, who retaliate against an employee for making a
complaint of harassment will be subject to disciplinary action,
which may include termination of employment. Retaliation should
be reported to management using the procedure set forth in this
policy for complaints of harassment. The Town will take all
reasonable steps to protect the complainant.
(4)
§ 478-3 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 478-3
1:736
§ 478-4. Municipal building pet policy.
State and federal remedies. In addition to the above, if you believe
you have been subjected to harassment of any type, you may file a
formal complaint with either or both of the government agencies set
forth below. Using our complaint process does not prohibit you from
filing a complaint with these agencies. Each of these agencies requires
that claims be filed within 300 days of the alleged incident or when the
complainant became aware of the incident.
The United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC).
JFK Federal Building
475 Government Center
Boston, MA 02203
(617)565-3200
(800)669-4000
www.eeoc.gov
(1)
The Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination (MCAD).
Boston Office:
One Ashburton Place, Room 601
Boston, MA 02108
(617)994-6000
Springfield Office:
436 Dwight Street, Room 220
Springfield, MA 01103
(413)739-2145
(2)
G.
The Town of South Hadley is responsible for assuring the health and
safety of all employees and all visitors to Town-owned facilities. In
keeping with this objective, the Town of South Hadley does not permit
employees to bring household pets to their workplace. Visitors to
municipal buildings are not allowed to bring their pets into the building,
as well. Animals may pose a threat of infection and may cause allergic
reactions in employees and/or visitors. Some employees and/or visitors
may feel threatened or be distracted by the presence of animals. In
addition, the Town of South Hadley wishes to prevent pets from fouling
the office space or damaging municipal property.
A.
An employee and/or visitor who requires the help of a service animal
(defined by 28 CFR 36.104 as "any dog that is individually trained to do
work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability")
will be permitted to bring a service animal to the office, provided that
the animal's presence does not create a danger to others and does not
impose an undue hardship upon the municipal operation.
B.
§ 478-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-5
1:737
§ 478-5. Technology use.
The term "technology" covers a wide range of processes used for
communicating information within our society. Computers form one
element of this broad term but it also includes video resources, cameras
and recording devices, telephones, cell phones and smart phones,
tablets and various social media outlets and tools. Town computers,
computer files, e-mail systems, Internet access, telephones, cell phones
and smart phones, software and/or other technology furnished to Town
employees are the property of the Town of South Hadley. All technology
provided by the Town shall be for Town business only. Employees may
use the Internet service provided by the Town during their nonworking
hours, provided that they adhere to all of the following regulations.
All information and communications on Town equipment is considered
Town/public information and may be viewed at any time by
management.
The users of the Town's network are responsible for respecting
and adhering to local, state, federal and international laws. Any
attempt to break those laws through the use of the network may
result in litigation against the offender by the proper authorities
and where appropriate, disciplinary action. If such an event should
occur, the Town will fully comply with the authorities to provide any
information necessary for the litigation process.
(1)
To the extent an employee uses his/her personal device to create
Town records, those records must be transferred to the Town
network/system as soon as possible. Employees who use their own
personal technology device(s) to conduct Town business must
provide the Town with access to these records and/or device(s)
should the need arise.
(2)
Duplication or installation of unauthorized software is prohibited.
Software that is not purchased/licensed by the Town is considered
unauthorized.
(3)
This policy applies to every employee, board member (elected or
appointed), contractor or remote user who is provided access to the
Town's computers and network resources.
(4)
Any unauthorized, deliberate action, which damages or disrupts a
computing system, alters its normal performance, or causes it to
malfunction, is a violation, regardless of system location or time
duration.
(5)
A.
The following technology and computer-related activities are prohibited
but not limited to:
Use of systems and/or networks in attempt to gain unauthorized
access to remote systems or to connect to other systems, in
violation of the physical limitations of the local/remote system.
(1)
B.
§ 478-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 478-5
1:738
Unauthorized use of network "sniffers" or other network analysis
tools.
(2)
(3) Decryption of system or user passwords.
(4) The copying of system files.
Illegal duplication of software or violation of copyright law by
the duplication or sharing of software, or the distribution of
copyrighted materials.
(5)
(6) Intentional attempts to "crash" network systems or programs.
Attempts to use a password, access a file, or retrieve a stored
communication that is not normally accessible to the employee.
(7)
The willful introduction of computer "viruses" or other disruptive/
destructive programs into the Town's network or into external
networks.
(8)
Use of abusive or objectionable language or content in either public
or private messages.
(9)
Activities that are libelous and/or amount to sexual, racial or other
forms of harassment.
(10)
Using a Town e-mail address when posting to public forums, e.g.
blogs, social media sites, wikis and discussion lists for personal use.
(11)
(12)Excessive use of social networking sites for personal use.
Use of cameras or digital/audio recording devices to capture or
record content without the permission or knowledge of the
subject(s) being recorded.
(13)
Creating and/or distributing to members of the public, nonpublic
information or files, such as draft reports, confidential information
or information without proper authorization and, where necessary,
proper protection.
NOTE: If any of the above-prohibited uses is required for a legitimate
business reason, an exception may be requested in writing to
management, and the request will be reviewed to determine whether an
exception should be granted.
(14)
Internet access and use.
Internet access through the Town-provided network is intended
for business use, including finding vendor information, government
information, research, and communicating with colleagues and
residents for government-related purposes. All Internet usage will
be monitored.
(1)
C.
§ 478-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-5
1:739
The Town allows users the privilege of Internet access for limited
personal use, such as looking at home pages and sending e-mails
to friends. This privilege of personal use of the Internet is subject
to the terms and conditions established by the Town herein, and as
they may be amended from time to time, and may be withdrawn
in the future, with or without cause, in the discretion of Town
management.
(2)
Town-owned technology resources may be used for personal
purposes on a limited basis, provided that the following
requirements are met:
(a) No marginal cost to the Town.
(b) No interference with work responsibilities.
(c) No disruption to the workplace.
(3)
Any personal use of the Internet must be on the employee's own
time.
(4)
At no time may the Internet be used for any type of commercial use,
or to transact nongovernmental business. The use of the Internet
to solicit or proselytize others for commercial ventures, religious
or political causes or outside organizations or for personal gain is
prohibited. At no time may users access inappropriate web sites,
such as those hosting pornography, obscene materials or gambling
enterprises.
(5)
The use of any element of the Town's computer system, including
Internet access, for the receipt or transmission of information
disparaging to others based on race, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, age, disability, or religion is not permitted under any
circumstances.
(6)
Users are not permitted to download executable files from the
Internet unless previously approved by the network administrator.
(7)
Copier use. Copiers are for the use of Town employees, solely for official
business. Personal use is a violation of the MA Conflict of Interest Law.
D.
Electronic mail (e-mail) access and use.
E-mail is an effective tool for sharing and disseminating
information. Since the Town's e-mail system is linked to Internet
systems, users can communicate with colleagues in state agencies,
vendors and residents. This electronic communication promotes
better information exchange between peers and residents.
(1)
As with all of the Town's assets, the e-mail system is intended to
be used for work-related purposes, and in ways consistent with
the Town's overall policies. The system may not be used in any
way that is disruptive to the operation of the Town or offensive to
(2)
E.
§ 478-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 478-5
1:740
others. E-mail and Internet access should be used in such a way
that all transmissions, whether internal or external are accurate,
appropriate, ethical and lawful.
The use of e-mail for the transmission of information disparaging to
others based on race, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, age,
disability, or religion is not permitted under any circumstances.
Likewise, e-mail is not to be used to solicit or proselytize others
for commercial ventures, religious or political causes or outside
organizations, or personal gain (including, but not limited to, chain
letters and/or requests for donations).
(3)
The use of broadcast mail (sending the same message to a group
of employees) places stress on the e-mail system and has the
potential for generating undesirable volumes of junk mail or spam.
Therefore, it should be used selectively for only work-related
reasons, and with appropriate supervisory approval.
(4)
Confidential information should never be transmitted or forwarded
to outside entities or individuals not authorized to receive such
information, or to Town employees having no business reason for
having/receiving such information.
(5)
The privacy and confidentiality of e-mail transmissions cannot be
assured. E-mail transmissions may be subject to disclosure through
legal proceedings or otherwise through various laws which may be
held to apply to such transmissions.
(6)
Expectation of privacy.
Authorized Town personnel must have unrestricted access to email
and related information stored on Town-owned computer and
other electronic equipment. This access is required for reasons that
include retrieving business-related information, troubleshooting
hardware and software problems, preventing unauthorized access
and system misuse, deterring use that is contrary to the Town's
policy, ensuring compliance with software copyright and
distribution policies, and complying with legal and regulatory
requests for information.
(1)
The Town reserves the right to monitor, review and retrieve any
information stored on or transmitted with Town equipment,
including retrieving and reading e-mail messages or any other
computer files, and monitoring Internet traffic. E-mail messages
and other use of the Town's computers are not confidential and may
be considered to be public records under the Public Records Law
depending upon the contents of the file or communication. Even
though employees are issued a password or other private access
code, they should have no expectation of privacy with regard to the
use of the system.
(2)
F.
§ 478-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-5
1:741
§ 478-6. Visitors code of conduct.
Violations. Staff should immediately notify their supervisor or
administration of any violations of the Town's Technology Use Policy.
Violations of this policy will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and
including termination of employment.
G.
Cell phone use.
This policy is intended to ensure cell phones do not take time and
attention away from work and productivity. It is also intended that
the use of cell phones while at work is done in an acceptable,
professional and productive manner.
(1)
During work hours or work shifts, when an employee is not
operating a Town-owned vehicle or equipment but is 'on the clock',
employees are expected to exercise discretion in using personal
cellular phones. Use of a cell phone while at work can pose a
distraction to employees and to the public. If an employee receives
a text or phone call, the customer must be the first priority of the
employee.
(2)
Cell phones should not be used in view of the public, even if
someone else is available and helping a customer.
(3)
Calls and texts from your cell phone should be made and received
only when it is necessary for medical or family needs.
(4)
Use of cell phones at work must not cause a distraction for coworkers.
If you must make a phone call, it is requested that you
leave the area where co-workers would be distracted. Cell phones
should be kept on a vibrate setting in order not to disturb the
workplace.
(5)
The Town of South Hadley will not be held liable for the loss of
personal cell phones brought into the workplace.
(6)
Unless authorized for legitimate Town business assignments or job
duties, the Town prohibits employee use of phone cameras and
video recorders in the workplace, as a preventative step necessary
to secure employee privacy, and personal/confidential information.
(7)
H.
The Town of South Hadley's employees strive to provide a positive
experience for those visiting Town facilities, by following the
Professional Standards of Conduct Policy. In addition, the Town
supports a workplace that is conducive to personal safety and security
and is free from intimidation, threats or violent acts. The Town does not
tolerate workplace violence, including the threat of violence by anyone
who conducts business with the Town.
A.
The Town will not tolerate harassing conduct that affects employment
conditions, that interferes unreasonably with an individual's
B.
§ 478-5 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § 478-6
1:742
Chapter A500
ACCEPTANCES
performance or that creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive work
environment. Unsigned documents or letters will not be considered or
reviewed.
Complying with this code of conduct is required by all people doing
business with Town employees.
C.
Violators who do not comply with this policy may be asked to leave the
premises.
D.
Expected conduct.
(1) Avoid causing disturbances or disruptions.
Show respect for others, building facilities and personal property
of others.
(2)
(3) Use common courtesy when interacting with others.
(4) Do not engage in any lewd or offensive behavior.
(5) Any form of violence is prohibited.
Smoking, drinking alcohol or appearing to be under the influence
of any illegal substance is prohibited.
(6)
E.
Repeated violations may result in permanent suspension of facility
privileges.
F.
§ 478-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 478-6
1:743

ARTICLE I
Acts of the Legislature
§ A500-1. Acts accepted by Town.
Citation Subject Matter Date of Acceptance
Acts of 1902, Ch. 205 Removal of snow and ice
from sidewalks
4-26-1902
Acts of 1902, Ch. 424 Use of land for a Free
Public Library
6-7-1902
Acts of 1907, Ch. 191,
§§ 1-9
Board of Survey (street
construction)
5-20-1918
Acts of 1913, Ch. 655,
§§ 1, 2, 3
Regulation of buildings 5-20-1918
Acts of 1913, Ch. 835,
§ 421
Precinct voting for Town
officers and granting
licenses for intoxicating
liquors
2-28-1916
Acts of 1915, Ch. 284,
(amended by Ch. 59,
§ 1 of Acts of 1916)
Liquor licenses 3-18-1918
Acts of 1916, Ch. 153 Annual licensing for
slaughtering meat, cattle,
sheep or swine
3-5-1920
Acts of 1917, Ch. 23 Licensing of coffee houses 3-181-1918
Acts of 1920, Ch. 240 Permit certain sports and
games on Sunday
3-21-1921
Acts of 1921, Ch. 14,
§ 25A
Assessors can appoint
Assistant Assessor
3-21-1921
Acts of 1945, Ch. 723 Establishment of Veterans'
Service
12-11-1945
Acts of 1946, Ch. 75 Permit the use of Beach
Playground for athletic
field purposes
3-16-1946
Acts of 1946, Ch. 559 20% increase in pensions
under $1,000
9-18-1946
Acts of 1948, Ch. 588 Equalizing of retirement
benefits
11-22-1948, effective
as of 9-10-1948.
Acts of 1950, Ch. 820 Increasing pensions,
annuities for former
employees payable by
Commonwealth
3-15-1952
Acts of 1951, Ch. 781 Pensions, annuities etc.
former employees
3-15-1952
§ A500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-1
1:745
Citation Subject Matter Date of Acceptance
Acts of 1952, Ch. 624 Increasing pensions,
retirements, allowances
and annuities for former
public employees
7-21-1953
Acts of 1953, Ch. 434 Rent control 3-13-1954
Acts of 1955, Ch. 225 Rent control 4-18-1955
Acts of 1955, Ch. 670 Retirement benefits 3-17-1956
Acts of 1958, Ch. 17 Board of Health Director-
Civil Service
(act passed
1-28-1958) Effective
3-3-1958
Acts of 1963, Ch. 478 Increasing amounts of
pensions and retirement
allowances to certain
former public employees
3-14-1964
Acts of 1964, Ch. 11 Park and Playground
Commission of South
Hadley under Civil Service
Laws
3-18-1967
Acts of 1967, Ch. 772
(also known as Chapter
40D)
Industrial Development
Financing Authority
10-24-1972
Acts of 1978, Ch. 576,
which amends MGL c.
59, § 38
Assessment exemptions
for repairs
2-12-1980
Acts of 1979, Ch. 151
(rescind MGL c. 31)
Civil service 4-18-1981
Reconvened
5-30-1981
Acts of 1980, Ch. 85 Office of Building
Inspector
9-9-1980
Acts of 1982, Ch. 597 9-20-1987
Acts of 1983, Ch. 527
and Ch. 183A
Conversion of residential
property to condos
2-10-1987
Acts of 1985, Ch. 188,
§ 12
Direct service expanded
for pupils in South Hadley
Public Schools
6-2-1990, 5-6-1989
Acts of 1986 § 40 of Ch.
71, amended by Ch.
188
Equal Education
Opportunity Grant
3-30-1986
Acts of 1987, Ch. 236;
accepted MGL c. 41,
§ 81U, as amended by
Ch. 236 of Acts of 1987
Disposition of performance
bonds or deposits on
subdivision in default
10-25-1988
§ A500-1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § A500-1
1:746
Citation Subject Matter Date of Acceptance
Acts of 1987, Ch. 661
(amends Acts of 1933
Ch. 45, § 2)
Election of Town Meeting
members
§ A500-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-1
1:747

ARTICLE II
General Laws
§ A500-2. General Laws accepted by Town.
Citation Subject Matter Date of Acceptance
MGL c. 6, § 172B 1/2 Fingerprinting of ice
cream vendors
1-11-2017
MGL c. 11, § 335 Election of Town Clerks
and their duties
3-7-1902
MGL c. 30B
(Procurement Act)
Contract for purchases
without formal bids
6-2-1990
MGL c. 31, §§ 48 and
49
Civil Service Police. See
Acts of 1979 (rescind)
6-18-1933
MGL c. 32B, § 7A Health Insurance Blue
Cross-Blue Shield more
than 50%
3-17-1973
MGL c. 32B, § 9E Health Insurance-60%
(Greater than 50%)
10-6-1987 and
adjourned
10-13-1987
MGL c. 32B, § 18 Medicare extension plans;
mandatory transfer of
retires
6-13-1992
MGL c. 40, § 4G May contract up to $4,000
without bids
5-30-1981
MGL c. 40, § 6B Uniform purchase and
clothing allowance for
police officers
3-18-1967
MGL c. 40, § 6J Authorizing purchases of
"stormy weather clothes"
8-6-1963
MGL c. 40, § 8A Industrial Development
Commission
3-19-1955
MGL c. 40, § 8B Establishing COA 3-14-1970
MGL c. 40, § 8C Conservation Commission 3-8-1961
MGL c. 40, § 8E Youth Commission 5-8-2010
MGL c. 40, § 8G Authority to enter into
mutual aid agreements
9-8-1975
MGL c. 40, § 13 Municipal buildings
insurance fund
management and use
6-13-1992
MGL c. 40, §§ 13A and
13C
Workers Compensation
Insurance
10-15-1991
§ A500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-2
1:749
Citation Subject Matter Date of Acceptance
MGL c. 40, § 13D Reserve fund for future
payment of accrued
liabilities for compensated
absences due any
employee or full-time
officer upon termination of
employment
1-11-2017
MGL c. 40, § 22 Removal of unlawfully
parked cars which impede
snow removal
4-17-1976
MGL c. 40, § 22C Towing of vehicles from
public ways where such
vehicles are parked or
standing in violation of the
law
3-17-1962
MGL c. 40, § 21D Noncriminal enforcementticketing
5-6-1989
MGL c. 40, § 57 Local license suspension 5-4-1991
MGL c. 40, § 57 Amends § 7-2 of the Town
Bylaws - denial,
suspension or revocation
of licenses/permits to
anyone owing municipal
taxes or charges
57-94 and updates
5-3-1997
MGL c. 40, § 57 Modernized municipal
financing and government
(Acts of 2016, Ch. 218,
§§ 37 and 38)
1-11-2017
MGL c. 40, § 58 Outstanding charges or
fees owed to Town, which
may be liened against real
property within one year
1-11-2017
MGL c. 41 Acts of 1936, Ch. 211 (as
amended by) Formation of
Planning Board
3-13-1937
MGL c. 41, § 25 Board of Assessors as an
appointed body
4-18-1981
MGL c. 41, § 38A Town Collector 5-3-1997
MGL c. 41, § 73 Board of Survey 3-31-1934
MGL c. 41, § 81U As amended by Ch. 236 of
the Acts of 1987
10-25-1988
MGL c. 41, § 100B Benefits to retired
policemen
5-7-1983
§ A500-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § A500-2
1:750
Citation Subject Matter Date of Acceptance
MGL c. 41, § 108L Quinn Bill - police officers
salary by education
5-7-1994
MGL c. 41, § 110A Closing of public offices on
Saturdays
12-3-1955
MGL c. 41, § 111A Vacation pay for police 3-16-1935
MGL c. 43D Expedited permitting 11-18-2015
MGL c. 44, § 53C Deposit and expenditures
of money received for offduty
work details of police
3-17-1973
MGL c. 44, § 53D Recreation Revolving Fund 10-6-1987 and
10-13-1987
MGL c. 44, § 53F 1/2 Enterprise fund for: (A)
WWTP and Collection
System; (B) Sanitary
Landfill
6-13-1992
MGL c. 44, § 53F 3/4 PEG Access and Cable
Related Fund
1-11-2017
MGL c. 44, § 55C Affordable Housing Trust
Fund
6-20-2013
MGL c. 48, § 57F Holiday pay for Police
Chief
MGL c. 49, § 15 (Amended by Acts of 1907,
Ch. 177) Sewer
assessments and charges
MGL c. 59, § 5, cl. 17D
and 41C
Abatement of real estate
tax on property of elders
2-10-1987
MGL c. 59, §§ 41(B) and
17(C)
Real estate exemptions 5-5-1984
MGL c. 59, § 57C Quarterly tax bills 5-4-1991 (effective
7-1-1992)
MGL c. 59, § 5, cl. 50 Exemption improvements
elderly housing
6-2-1990
MGL c. 60, § 77C Alternative tax takings and
foreclosures
Accept deed in lieu of
taxes owed
MGL c. 71, § 40 (as
amended by Ch. 188 of
Acts of 1985)
Minimum teachers'
salaries $18,000/year
5-3-1986
MGL c. 71, § 40 Pay teachers no less than
$20,000/year
3-29-1988
§ A500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-2
1:751
Citation Subject Matter Date of Acceptance
MGL c. 71, § 40 (as amended by Chapter
188 of the Acts of 1986)
Equal Education
Opportunity Grant
9-30-1986
MGL c. 71, § 71E Revolving fund for funds
received in conjunction
with adult education and
continuing ed program
4-15-1978
MGL c. 83, §§ 16, 16A,
16B, 16C, 16D, 16E and
16F
Sewer assessments and
fees, collection of
4-26-1980
MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2 Parking violation
procedures
9-22-1981
MGL c. 90, § 20C Disposition of parking
violations
3-18-1972
MGL c. 91, § 29
(amended by Chs. 516,
524, Acts of 1950)
Town liable for all
damages incurred by work
performed by DPW
5-14-1960
MGL c. 138, § 33B Sale of alcoholic
beverages by on-premises
licensees on Sundays and
certain legal holidays
9-15-2010
MGL c. 140, § 132 to
136
Smoke nuisance sections 3-13-1948
MGL c. 140 Dog Law violators fines Petitioned General
Court to be exempt
from c. 140. South
Hadley exempt from
9-12-1978
MGL c. 148, § 13 (as amended by Chapter
351, Section 90 of the Acts
of 1981) Annual licensing
and fees for storage of
explosives and/or
inflammable materials
5-5-1984
MGL c. 148, § 26H Boarding-/Lodging house
sprinklers
11-12-2014
MGL c. 164A New England Power Pool 3-16-1974
MGL c. 481, Acts of
1993
Amending MGL c. 138, § 2 5-7-1994
§ A500-2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § A500-2
1:752
Chapter A501
SPECIAL ACTS APPLICABLE TO TOWN
§ A500-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A500-2
1:753

ARTICLE I
List of Applicable Special Acts
[The following Special Acts have been enacted by the Legislature and are
specifically applicable to the Town of South Hadley.]
SECTION 1. List of Special Acts specific to Town.
Citation
Enacted by
Legislature
Adopted by
Town
Meeting Subject Matter
Acts of 1986, Ch.
558
12-8-1986 Authorizing Town to
establish a Department
of Public Works
Acts of 1992, Ch.
34
5-19-1992 Appointment of
Superintendent of Public
Works (amends Acts of
1986, Ch. 558)
Acts of 1998, Ch.
63
3-27-1998 Financing of golf course
by Town
Acts of 1998, Ch.
200
7-31-1998 Authorizing South
Hadley Housing
Authority to convey land
Acts of 1999, Ch.
57
8-13-1999 Authorizing Town to
convey recreational land
Acts of 2000, Ch.
416
1-12-2001 Election of Town
Meeting members
Acts of 2002, Ch.
168
7-23-2002 Authorizing Fire District
No. 2 to convey land to
Commonwealth
Acts of 2002, Ch.
472
1-1-2003 Authorizing South
Hadley Housing
Authority to retain
balance from sale of
property
Acts of 2004, Ch.
89
5-6-2004 Election of Town
Meeting members;
validating actions taken
at certain Town Meetings
held in Town
Acts of 2007, Ch.
30
4-18-2007 Authorizing Town to
grant additional
alcoholic beverage
license
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 1
1:755
Citation
Enacted by
Legislature
Adopted by
Town
Meeting Subject Matter
Acts of 2008, Ch.
510
1-14-2009 Exemption School
Custodian from Civil
Service Law
Acts of 2010, Ch.
335
9-15-2010 Town Meeting members
Acts of 2010, Ch.
418
1-5-2011 Town Meeting members
Acts of 2011, Ch.
127
10-7-2011 Geographic limits of Fire
District No. 2
Acts of 2011, Ch.
146
11-2-2011 Authorizing Town to pay
unpaid bills to
Meadowbrook Golf
Acts of 2012, Ch.
456
1-10-2013 12-3-2012 Positions of Collector
and Clerk-Treasurer in
Town
Acts of 2012, Ch.
458
1-10-2013 12-3-2012 Establishing a
Selectboard-Town
Administrator form of
government for Town
Acts of 2013, Ch.
130
11-14-2013 Inspector of Plumbing
and Gas Fitting
(repealing Acts of 1991,
Ch. 209)
Acts of 2016, Ch.
206
8-9-2016 Authorizing change of
use of parkland in Town
SECTION 1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE SECTION 1
1:756
ARTICLE II
An Act Relative to the Election of Town Meeting Members in South
Hadley
[Acts of 1987, Ch. 661, approved 1-5-1988]
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1.
Section 2 of chapter 45 of the acts of 1933 is hereby amended by striking
out the first paragraph and inserting in place thereof the following
paragraph:-
The voters of each precinct in the town of South Hadley shall elect by
ballot from residents of the precinct town Meeting members, other than the
offices designated in section three of this act as town Meeting members
ex officiis, forty-two registered voters. The first third in the order of votes
received of members elected at such annual election in each precinct
shall serve until the third succeeding annual election, the second third in
the order of votes received at such election shall serve until the second
succeeding annual election, and the remaining third in the order of votes
received at such election shall serve until the first succeeding annual
election; and thereafter except as herein provided at each annual election
the voters of each precinct in the town shall in like manner, elect as town
Meeting members one third of the 42 for the term of three years, and shall,
at such elections, fill for the unexpired term or terms any vacancies then
existing in the number of town Meeting members in the precinct.
SECTION 2.
The third paragraph of section 3 of said chapter 45 is hereby amended by
striking out the first sentence and inserting in place thereof the following
sentence:- Any elected town Meeting member who becomes by appointment
or election one of the officers designated as town Meeting members, ex
officiis, shall, upon such appointment or election retain their elected town
Meeting member status; provided, however, such member shall have just
one vote.
SECTION 3.
This act shall take effect on January 1st, 1988.
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 3
1:757

ARTICLE III
An Act Relative to the Positions of Collector and Clerk-Treasurer in
the Town of South Hadley.
[Acts of 2012, Ch. 456, approved 1-10-2013]
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1.
Chapter 191 of the acts of 1990 is hereby repealed.
SECTION 2.
The office of town clerk for the town of South Hadley shall be separate from
the office of treasurer and shall be an appointive office. The town clerk shall
perform all functions of the Clerk's office and shall continue to be an ex
officio member of the Board of registrars in accordance with the General
Laws; provided, however, that the incumbent elected Clerk-treasurer in
office on the effective date of this act shall be the lawful successor to that
position, absent felonious actions, through the end of the term for which the
incumbent was elected; and provided further, that thereafter the incumbent
may continue to serve in one or both positions in an appointed capacity
at the incumbent's discretion and may continue to hold one or both offices
until retirement, resignation, removal or if the position should otherwise
become vacant. The town clerk shall be appointed and may be removed by
the town administrator, subject to approval of the selectboard.
SECTION 3.
The office of treasurer for the town of South Hadley shall be separate from
the office of the Clerk and shall be an appointive office, provided, however,
that the incumbent elected Clerk-treasurer in office on the effective date
of this act shall be the lawful successor to that position, absent felonious
actions, through the end of the term for which the incumbent was elected;
and provided further, that thereafter the incumbent may continue to serve
in one or both positions in an appointed capacity at the incumbent's
discretion and may continue to hold one or both offices until retirement,
resignation, removal or if the position should otherwise become vacant.
The treasurer shall be appointed and may be removed by the town
administrator, subject to approval of the selectboard.
SECTION 3.A.
Nothing in this act shall prevent the town administrator from appointing
one person to serve as both Clerk and treasurer, or one person to serve
as both collector and treasurer; provided, however, that combining the
collector position with the treasurer position shall only be proposed upon
the vacancy in the office of the present incumbent collector.
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 4
1:759
SECTION 4.
Upon the effective date of this act, the term of the incumbent elected
collector shall terminate and the position of collector as an elected office
shall be abolished; provided, however, that the incumbent elected collector
shall be deemed to be the first appointed collector under this act and
shall be the lawful successor to that position, absent felonious actions,
through the end of the term for which the incumbent was elected; and
provided further, that thereafter the incumbent shall hold said office until
retirement, resignation, removal, or if the position should otherwise become
vacant. The position of collector shall be appointed and may be removed by
the town administrator, subject to approval of the selectboard. Nothing in
this act shall prevent the town administrator from appointing one person
to serve as both Clerk and treasurer, or one person to serve as both
collector and treasurer, subject to the approval of the selectboard; provided,
however, that combining the collector position with the treasurer position
can only be proposed upon a vacancy in the office of the present incumbent
collector.
SECTION 5.
This act shall take effect upon its acceptance by the voters of the town
of South Hadley at an annual town election or special election, but not
otherwise. The town counsel shall prepare a concise summary of the
contents of the act to appear on the town election ballot.
SECTION 6.
This act shall take effect upon its passage.
SECTION 4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE SECTION 6
1:760
ARTICLE IV
An Act Establishing a Selectboard-Town Administrator Form of
Government for the Town of South Hadley
[Acts of 2012, Ch. 458, approved 1-10-2013]
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. SELECTBOARD.
Composition. There shall be a selectboard consisting of five members
elected for terms of three years each, so arranged that the term of
office of as nearly an equal number of members as is possible shall
expire each year.
(A)
Vacancy in office. Vacancies on the selectboard shall be filled by a
special election in accordance with the General Laws.
(B)
Executive powers.
The selectboard shall serve as the chief policymaking body of the
town and shall have all of the executive powers given to boards of
selectmen by the General Laws, except for those granted herein to
the town administrator.
(1)
The selectboard shall be responsible for the formulation and
promulgation of policy directives and guidelines to be followed by
all town agencies serving under it, and in conjunction with other
elected town officers and multiple member bodies to develop and
promulgate policy guidelines designed to bring the operation of
all town agencies into harmony; provided, however, that nothing
in this section shall be construed to authorize any member of the
selectboard, or a majority of such members, to become involved in
the day-to-day administration of any town agency. The selectboard
shall act only through the adoption of broad policy guidelines,
which shall be implemented by officers and employees serving
under it.
(2)
The selectboard shall cause the by-laws, rules and regulations for
the government of the town to be enforced and shall cause an upto-
date record of all its official acts to be kept.
(3)
The selectboard shall appoint and may remove the town
administrator as provided in sections 3 and 6, respectively, and the
town counsel, and shall approve the appointment of department
heads as provided in paragraph (1) of subsection (B) of section 4.
(4)
The selectboard shall appoint the Board of Appeals, registrars of
voters, conservation commission, recreation commission, historical
commission, trustees of special funds and members of all appointed
multiple member bodies for whom no other method of selection is
provided by this act or by by-law, except persons serving under
(5)
(C)
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 1
1:761
SECTION 3. TOWN ADMINISTRATOR - APPOINTMENT,
QUALIFICATIONS, RESTRICTIONS AND TERMS OF EMPLOYMENT.
other elected town officers and members appointed by state
officers.
The selectboard shall be the licensing board of the town and shall
have the power to issue licenses, to make all necessary rules and
regulations regarding the issuance of licenses and to attach such
conditions and restrictions thereto an it deems to be in the public
interest. The selectboard shall enforce the laws relating to all
businesses for which it issues licenses.
(6)
The selectboard shall be responsible for providing timely audits
as required by law. The audits shall be made by a certified public
accountant, or by a firm of accountants, who have no personal
interests, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the government
of the town of South Hadley or any of its officers. The selectboard
shall approve the selection of the town audit firm, which shall be
recommended by the town administrator.
(7)
Appointment. There shall be established in the town of South Hadley
the office of town administrator, who shall be appointed by the
selectboard for a term not to exceed three years, as the selectboard
may determine, and who may be appointed for successive terms of
office. Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the office of town
administrator, the selectboard shall appoint a town administrator
screening committee to identify and recommend qualified candidates
for the position. The selectboard shall provide the screening committee
with a written charge and statement of qualifications and duties of the
position that have been approved by the selectboard. The screening
committee shall design and undertake a recruitment process and shall
present candidates to the selectboard. The selectboard shall, within 45
days following the date of receipt of the list of candidates, either choose
one candidate from the list to fill the position of town administrator or
reject all candidates and direct that the screening committee resume
the search.
(A)
Qualifications. The town administrator shall be a person of
demonstrated ability who is qualified by reason of education, skills
and experience in public management or business administration. The
selectboard may establish additional qualifications for the office of town
administrator.
(B)
Restrictions. The town administrator shall devote full-time to the duties
of the office and shall not engage in any other business or occupation
during such employment by the town unless such action is approved in
advance, in writing, by the selectboard. The town administrator shall
hold no elective office in the town while serving as town administrator,
but the selectboard may appoint the town administrator to any
nonelective office or position consistent with the responsibilities of
(C)
SECTION 1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE SECTION 3
1:762
SECTION 4. TOWN ADMINISTRATOR - POWERS AND DUTIES.
the town administrator. Before entering upon its duties, the town
administrator shall be sworn to the faithful and impartial performance
thereof by the town clerk.
Terms of employment.
To the extent permitted by law, the terms of the town
administrator's employment may be the subject of a written
agreement between the parties.
(1)
The selectboard shall set the compensation of the town
administrator.
(2)
The selectboard shall provide for an annual review of the job
performance of the town administrator which shall, at least in
summary form, be a public record.
(3)
(D)
Chief administrative officer. The town administrator shall be the chief
administrative and financial officer of the town and shall be responsible
to the selectboard for the effective management of all town affairs
placed in the town administrator's charge by this act, by the
selectboard or by vote of the town Meeting. The town administrator
shall be responsible for the implementation of town policies established
by the selectboard and shall supervise, manage and coordinate the
day-to-day activities of all town departments and employees under the
jurisdiction of the selectboard, and shall coordinate all activities of
such town departments with the activities of other departments under
the jurisdiction of other elected town boards and commissions. The
town administrator may delegate, authorize or direct any subordinate
or employee of the town to exercise any power, duty or responsibility
which the town administrator is authorized to exercise, provided,
however, that all acts which are performed under such delegation shall
be deemed to be the acts of the town administrator. The functions and
duties of the town administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the
functions and duties as herein described.
(A)
Powers of appointment.
Subject to the approval of the selectboard, the town administrator
shall appoint and may remove the police chief, superintendent of
public works and town accountant.
(1)
Except as provided in this act, the town administrator shall appoint
and may remove all other department heads, including those that
serve with an appointed board, commission or committee, and
other employees for whom no other method is provided under
this act, and shall approve the appointment and removal of all
other employees pursuant to the General Laws or this act. The
town administrator shall consult with the appropriate appointed
board, commission or committee prior to making any appointment
(2)
(B)
SECTION 3 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 4
1:763
or removal under this subsection. This subsection shall not apply to
any department heads or employees that serve with elected boards,
commissions or committees.
Department heads shall appoint and may remove, subject to the
approval of the town administrator, assistant department heads,
subordinates and employees, provided, however, that the town
administrator may undertake removal proceedings if the town
administrator determines that such action is necessary to assure
the effective operations and management of any department.
The department head seeking to make such appointments shall
consult with the appropriate appointed board, commission,
committee or official prior to making the appointment or removal
unless otherwise provided under the General Laws or this act.
This subsection shall not apply to any assistant department heads,
subordinates and employees that serve with elected boards,
commissions or committees.
(3)
The town administrator may, in consultation with department
heads and any affected boards, as applicable, transfer personnel
between departments as needed. Such transfer shall be presumed
to be temporary and shall require the approval of the affected
board. This subsection shall not apply to personnel of the school
department.
(4)
All personnel appointments of the town administrator shall be
based on education, skills and experience alone.
(5)
Copies of notices of board and commission vacancies, job vacancies
and opportunities and requests for volunteers shall be
conspicuously posted in the town hall and on the town's official
website.
(6)
Administrative duties. The town administrator shall:
Be responsible for the day-to-day supervision of all town
departments and direction of the operations of the town; provided,
however, that this section shall not apply to employees of the school
department and to the statutory responsibilities and functions of
the school committee;
(1)
Supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient administration
of all officers appointed by the town administrator and the
selectboard, and their representative departments, and of all
functions for which the town administrator is given responsibility,
authority or control by this act, by-law, town Meeting vote or vote
of the selectboard;
(2)
Reorganize, consolidate or establish any department or position
under the town administrator's direction or supervision, at the
town administrator's discretion and with the selectboard's
(3)
(C)
SECTION 4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE SECTION 4
1:764
approval. With the approval of both the selectboard and
appropriations committee, the town administrator may transfer
all or part of any unexpended appropriation of a reorganized or
consolidated department, board or office to any other town
department, board or office;
Administer, either directly or through a person appointed by the
town administrator, all provisions of general and special laws
applicable to the town, including federal and Massachusetts
emergency management agencies' requirements, by-laws, votes of
the town within the scope of the town administrator's duty and
all policy rules and regulations made by the selectboard; provided,
however, that all acts that are performed under such delegation
shall be deemed to be the acts of the town administrator;
(4)
Establish control and data systems appropriate to monitoring
expenditures by town boards and departments to enable the town
administrator to make periodic reports to the selectboard and the
town's appropriations committee on the status of the town's
finances;
(5)
Develop and administer, either directly or through a person
appointed by the town administrator, a personnel system including,
but not limited to, determination of compensation, the development
and implementation of ongoing training programs, personnel and
hiring policies, practices and regulation and evaluation process, for
town employees;
(6)
Manage and be responsible for all town buildings, properties and
facilities, except those under the control of the school committee,
library trustees and conservation commission; provided, however,
that the town administrator may maintain and repair school
committee, library trustees and conservation commission
buildings, properties and facilities to the extent the school
committee, library trustees and conservation commission may
request and authorize the same;
(7)
Attend and participate in all regular and special selectboard
meetings and town Meetings, unless excused therefrom by the
selectboard;
(8)
Cause full and complete records of meetings of the selectboard to
be taken and maintained and compile reports of the meetings as
requested by the selectboard;
(9)
Act as the liaison to, and represent the selectboard before, state,
federal and regional authorities;
(10)
Be responsible for approving all grant requests and applications
submitted on behalf of the town; and
(11)
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 4
1:765
Perform any other duties consistent with the office of the town
administrator as may be required by by-law or by vote of the town
or by vote of the selectboard.
(12)
Financial powers and duties.
At a time fixed by by-law, the selectboard, after consultation
with the town administrator and the appropriations committee,
shall issue a policy statement relating to the budget for the
next fiscal year. The statement shall establish the parameters
of expected budget growth, if any, for the town, with
appropriate guidance provided to various town agencies,
officers and committees for use in the preparation of operating
budgets for the ensuing fiscal year.
(a)
The town administrator shall prepare and submit to the
selectboard and appropriations committee at a public meeting
prior to the annual town meeting a written proposed balanced
budget for town government, including the school department,
for the ensuing fiscal year. To assist the town administrator
in preparing the proposed annual budget of revenues and
expenditures, all boards, officers and committees of the town,
including the school committee, shall, within the time frame
requested by the town administrator, furnish all relevant
information in their possession and submit to the town
administrator, in writing and in such form as the town
administrator shall establish, a detailed estimate of the
appropriations required and available funds.
(b)
The proposed budget shall detail all estimated revenues from
all sources and all expenditures, including debt service, for the
previous, current and upcoming years.
(c)
It shall include proposed expenditures for both current
operations and capital expenditures during the next fiscal year,
together with estimated revenues and free cash available at
the close of the current fiscal year, including estimated
balances in special accounts.
(d)
(1)
The town administrator shall negotiate collective bargaining
contracts on behalf of the selectboard, which contracts shall
be subject to approval, ratification and execution by the
selectboard. The selectboard may authorize, at its discretion,
use of additional counsel to assist the town administrator in the
negotiations.
(a)
The town administrator shall administrator and enforce
collective bargaining agreements, personnel rules and
regulations and by-laws adopted by the town.
(b)
(2)
The town administrator shall be responsible for procurement
under chapter 30B of the General Laws and shall be
(3) (a)
(D)
SECTION 4 SOUTH HADLEY CODE SECTION 4
1:766
SECTION 5. TOWN ADMINISTRATOR — VACANCY.
responsible for the purchasing of all supplies, materials and
equipment for the town, including the bidding and awarding of
all contracts, subject to policies established by the selectboard,
except for the school department.
The town administrator may delegate such purchasing power
as provided in chapter 30B of the General Laws.
(b)
Warrants for payments of town funds prepared by the town
accountant in accordance with the General Laws shall be
submitted to the town administrator for approval. Subject to
policies established by the selectboard, the approval of any
such warrant by the town administrator shall be sufficient
authority to authorize payment by the town. Any warrants
generated by the office of the town administrator shall be
signed by the selectboard. The selectboard shall approve all
warrants in the event of the absence of the town administrator
or a vacancy in the office of town administrator.
(4) (a)
Permanent vacancy. The selectboard shall fill any permanent vacancy in
the office of the town administrator as soon as feasible in accordance
with subsection (A) of section 3. Pending the appointment of a town
administrator or filling of a vacancy, the selectboard shall, within a
reasonable period of time not to exceed 14 days, appoint some other
qualified person to temporarily perform the duties of the town
administrator until a permanent replacement is appointed.
(A)
Temporary absence or disability.
The town administrator may designate by latter filed with the town
clerk and selectboard a qualified officer of the town to perform
the duties of town administrator during a temporary absence or
disability.
(1)
If the absence or disability exceeds 30 days, any designation by the
town administrator shall be subject to approval by the selectboard.
If the town administrator fails to make such a designation or if
the person so designated is unable to serve, the selectboard may
designate some other qualified person to perform the duties of
town administrator.
(2)
The powers and duties of the acting town administrator shall be
limited to matters not permitting of delay and shall include
authority to make temporary, emergency appointments or
designations to town office or employment, but not to make
permanent appointments or designations, unless authorized by the
selectboard.
(3)
(B)
SECTION 4 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 6
1:767
SECTION 6. TOWN ADMINISTRATOR — REMOVAL, SUSPENSION.
Removal, suspension. The selectboard may terminate and remove or
suspend the town administrator by a majority vote of the selectboard. Prior
to any termination or removal or if a suspension is to exceed five days,
notice shall be given and the reasons for the proposed action shall be
provided in writing to the town administrator and an opportunity shall
be provided for the town administrator to meet with the selectboard and
respond to the selectboard's notice. After such meeting, if any, the
selectboard may act by majority vote of the entire selectboard to terminate,
remove, or suspend the town administrator.
SECTION 7. CONTINUATION OF EXISTING GOVERNMENT.
SECTION 8.
Section 3 of chapter 558 of the acts of 1986 is hereby amended by striking
out the first and the fifth paragraphs.
SECTION 9.
This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Continuation of existing laws. All laws, by-laws, rules and regulations
of or pertaining to the town of South Hadley which are in force on
the effective date of this act and which are not inconsistent with this
act shall continue in full force and effect until amended or repealed.
Elected and appointed officers, boards, commissions and committees
shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities which are in
force on the effective date of this act that are not inconsistent with this
act, which are given to the respective officers, boards, commissions and
committees by law, this act, town by-law or vote of the town meeting.
If any provision of this act conflicts with any law, by-law or rule or
regulation of the town of South Hadley, this act shall govern.
(A)
Continuation of personnel. Any office or position in the administrative
service of the town of South Hadley and incumbents in those offices
on the effective date of this act shall continue to function as the office,
position or incumbent did previously until a change in such office,
position or incumbent is effected in accordance with this act.
(B)
SECTION 6 SOUTH HADLEY CODE SECTION 9
1:768
ARTICLE V
An Act Relative to the Inspector of Plumbing and Gas Fitting in the
Town of South Hadley
[Acts of 2013, Ch. 130, approved 11-14-2013]
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court
assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1.
Chapter 209 of the acts of 1991 is hereby repealed.
SECTION 2.
This act shall take effect upon its passage.
SECTION 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS SECTION 2
1:769
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 2005 Bylaws to 2017 Code.
NI = Not included in Code.
Article/Section from 2005 Bylaws Location in 2017 Code
Article I, General Provisions Ch. 1
Article II, Town Elections Ch. 18
Article III, Town Meeting Ch. 72
Article IV, Committees, Boards Appointed by
the Selectboard
Ch. 7, Art. I
Article V, Committees and Boards Appointed
by Others
Ch. 7, Art. II
Article VI, Individuals Appointed by the
Selectboard
Ch. 39, Art. I
Article VII, Individuals Appointed by Others Ch. 39, Art. II
Article VIII, Regulation of Public Conduct
§ 800, Penalties and Enforcement Ch. 46
§ 801, Off-Road Vehicle Restrictions Ch. 230, Art. I
§ 802, Discharge of Firearms; Archery Ch. 145, § 145-1
§ 803, Discharge of Air, Pellet, Paint-Ball
Guns
Ch. 145, § 145-2
§ 804, Alarms Ch. 105
§ 805, Non-Motorized Vehicles Ch. 230, Art. II
§ 806, Motorized Scooters Ch. 230, Art. III
§ 807, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 110
§ 808, Soliciting Ch. 190, Art. I
Article IX, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 230, Art. IV
Article X, Miscellaneous Bylaws
§ 1000, Annual Report Ch. 61, Art. I
§ 1001, Municipal Liens for Unpaid Fees Ch. 141, Art. I
§ 1002, Junk and Secondhand Dealers Ch. 158
§ 1003, Licenses Ch. 166
§ 1004, Hawkers and Peddlers Ch. 190, Art. II
§ 1005, Tag Sales Ch. 207
§ 1006, Amusement Devices Ch. 115
§ 1007, Nuisances Ch. 179
SECTION 2 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § DT-1
1:770
Article/Section from 2005 Bylaws Location in 2017 Code
§ 1008, Trailers Ch. 218
§ 1009, Trees Ch. 223
§ 1010, Buildings, Numbering of Ch. 123
§ 1011, Dogs Ch. 194
§ 1012, Facility Closings Ch. 77, Art. I
§ 1013, Vending Machines (2007) Ch. 235
§ 1013, Posting Minutes of Meetings (2010) Ch. 61, Art. II
§ 1014, Regulation of Outdoor Lighting Ch. 171
Article XI, Personnel Bylaws NI
Article XII, Department of Public Works NI; see Ch. 315
Article XIII, Telecommunication Rights of Way NI
Article XIV, Board of Health NI; see Ch. 300
Article XV, Non-Zoning Wetlands Bylaw Ch. 240
Article XVI, Stormwater Management Bylaw Ch. 200
Appendix A, Massachusetts General Laws
Accepted by the Town
Ch. A500, Art. II
Appendix B, Acts of the Legislature Accepted
by the Town
Ch. A500, Art. I
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of enactments.
KEY:
ATM = Annual Town Meeting
BOH = Board of Health
COA = Council on Aging
ConCom = Conservation Commission
DPW = Department of Public Works
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in
nature)
PB = Planning Board
STM = Special Town Meeting
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:771
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 11 5-10-2017 Ice cream truck
vendors
Ch. 153
ATM, Art. 12 5-10-2017 Licenses and permits
amendment
Ch. 166
ATM, Art. 13 5-10-2017 Bylaw amendments Ch. 1; Ch. 7; Ch. 18;
Ch. 39; Ch. 46; Ch.
72; Ch. 77; Ch. 105;
Ch. 110; Ch. 190; Ch.
207; Ch. 230
ATM, Art. 21 5-10-2017 Plastic bags Ch. 196
ATM, Art. 22 5-10-2017 Building construction:
Stretch Energy Code
Ch. 120, Art. I
ATM, Art. 24 5-10-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 255
Selectboard 8-2017 Benefits Amendment Ch. 400
Selectboard 8-2017 Personnel Policy
Amendment
Ch. 441
Selectboard 8-2017 Workplace Policy
Manual Amendment
Ch. 478
BOH 9-6-2017 Refuse and Recycling
Collection Amendment
Ch. 300, Art. XI
BOH 9-6-2017 Sale of Tobacco
Products and Nicotine
Delivery Products
Amendment
Ch. 300, Art. XIII
STM, Art. 2 1-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 255
STM, Art. 3 1-10-2018 Stormwater
Management
Amendment
Ch. 200
STM, Art. 5 1-10-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 255
STM, Art. 6 1-10-2018 Marijuana: Licensed
and Other Related
Establishments
Ch. 175, Art. I
STM, Art. 7 1-10-2018 Wetlands Amendment Ch. 240
STM, Art. 8 1-10-2018 Ice Cream Truck
Vendors Amendment
Ch. 153
ATM, Art. 11 5-9-2018 Water: Testing in Public
Buildings and
Municipal Facilities
Ch. 237, Art. I
ATM, Art. 17 5-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 255
ATM, Art. 18 5-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 255
§ DL-1 SOUTH HADLEY CODE § DL-1
1:772
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 19 5-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 255
ATM, Art. 20 5-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 255
ATM, Art. 21 5-9-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 255
ATM, Art. 22 5-9-2018 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:773