Chapter 106 of the Acts of 2016 
THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSCHUSETTS 
In the One Hundred and Eighty-Ninth General Court 
AN ACT REVISING THE CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF SWAMPSCOTT. 

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows: 
SECTION 1. Chapter 119 of the acts of 1949 is hereby amended by striking out section 1, as appearing in section 1 of chapter 416 of the acts of 1969, and inserting in place thereof the following section:­
Section 1. There shall be in the town of Swampscott a Swampscott War Memorial Scholarship Fund. The town of Swampscott may raise and appropriate the sum of $40,000.00 to provide high school and preparatory school graduates who are residents of the town with financial assistance for higher education. The fund shall be dedicated as a memorial to veterans of World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War. 
SECTION 2. Section 2 of said chapter 119 is hereby amended by adding the following sentence: -The board of trustees shall have a chairperson and a secretary and any vacancy in the office of trustees shall be filled by appointment by the board of selectmen. 
SECTION 3.  Chapter 330 of the acts of 1998 is hereby repealed.  
SECTION 4.  Chapter 22 of the acts of 2000 is hereby repealed.  
SECTION 5.  Chapter 7 of the acts of 2002 is hereby repealed.  
SECTION 6.  Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, the following shall be  

the charter of the town of Swampscott: 
CHARTER OF THE TOWN OF SWAMPSCOTT 
PREAMBLE.  We, the people of the town of Swampscott, not unmindful of the practical necessity of delegating to a duly constituted general court the power to act on behalf of all the inhabitants of the commonwealth in matters which transcend the boundaries of a single town but firmly believing that the best government is that which is most directly that of the people themselves, of which belief we recognize Article LXXXIX of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth to be an expression, do hereby adopt and establish this charter of the town of Swampscott. 
Chapter 1:  INTRODUCTION 
Section 1-1. Pursuant to Article LXXXIX of the Constitution of the Commonwealth and chapter 43B of the General Laws, the town of Swampscott adopts this charter. 
Section 1-2. The effective date of this charter shall be July 1, 1969. 


CHAPTER 2:  TOWN MEETING 
Section 2-1. Precincts. The existing precinct boundaries of the town shall be reviewed and, if necessary, wholly or partly revised by the selectmen in October 1969, and once in every 10 years thereafter or in October of any year when so directed by a vote of a representative town meeting held not later than September 20 of that year or otherwise as required by law so that there shall be precincts, of compact and contiguous territory, bounded as far as possible by the center line of know streets and ways or by other well-defined limits and containing approximately an equal number of persons. 
The board of selectmen shall, within 10 days after any revision of the precincts, file a report of their doings with the town clerk, the board of registrar of voters and the board of assessors with a description of the precincts and the names and residences of the voters therein and shall post in the town all such description, names and residences. Any revision of those precincts shall take effect upon the 
1 

date of the filing of the report therefor with the board of registrar of voters or otherwise as required by law.  Whenever the precincts are revised, the board of registrar of voters shall give written notice thereof to the state secretary. Meetings of the voters of the several precincts for elections, for primaries and for voting upon any question to be submitted to all of the voters of the town shall be held on the day, at the hour and at such places within the town as the selectmen shall direct in the warrant for the meeting. 
Section 2-2. Precincts; Revision. If the precinct boundaries are wholly or partly revised by the board of selectmen, the voters in each precinct shall, at the first town election following any such revisions, conformably to the laws relative to elections, elect by ballot 54 voters in the precinct to be town meeting members. The first 18 in the order of votes received shall serve for 3 years, the second 18 shall serve for 2 years and the remaining 18 shall serve for 1 year from the date of the annual town meeting. In case of a tie vote affecting the division into thirds, the members from the precinct determine the same by ballot. Except as otherwise provided herein, if the precinct boundaries are not revised, at each annual town election, the voters of each precinct shall elect 18 town meeting members for a term of 3 years and shall, at such election, fill each vacancy for the unexpired term then existing. Upon every revision of the precincts, the terms of office of all town meeting members shall cease upon the qualification of their successors who shall be elected at the annual town election held after such revision. The town clerk shall, after every election of town meeting members, forthwith notify each member by mail of that member’s election. Each town meeting member shall be sworn to the faithful and impartial performance of duties of the office of town meeting member but failure to comply with this requirement shall not affect the validity of any action taken at any town meeting. The town meeting members shall be the judge of the election and qualification of their members. 
Section 2-3. Warrants; Notice; Quorum. The articles for the warrant for each town meeting, so far as they relate to the election of the moderator, town officers and town meeting members, and as herein provided, to referenda, and all matters to be acted upon and determined by ballot shall be so acted upon and determined by the voters of the town in their respective precincts. All other articles in the warrant for each town meeting shall be acted upon and determined exclusively by town meeting members. The annual town meeting shall meet on the third Monday of May each year and at such other times and places as shall be set forth by the selectmen in the warrant for the meeting. The board of selectmen may convene a special town meeting, subject to section 10 of chapter 39 of the General Laws. A special town meeting may also convene upon petition in accordance with section 12 of said chapter 39. The town clerk shall notify the town meeting members of the time and place at which representative town meetings are to be held which shall be sent by mail at least 7 days before any town meeting. A majority of the town meeting members shall constitute a quorum for doing business but a lesser number may organize temporarily for the purposes of adjourning such meeting to a time, date and place certain. All town meetings shall be open to the public.  The town meeting members shall receive no compensation for service as town meeting members. Subject to such conditions as may be determined from time to time by the town meeting members, any voter of the town who is not a town meeting member may speak at any town meeting but shall not vote. 
Section 2-4. Moderator. A moderator shall be elected by ballot at each annual town meeting and shall serve as a moderator of all town meetings, except as otherwise provided by law, until a successor is elected and qualified. If a moderator is absent, a moderator pro tempore may be elected by the town meeting members in accordance with section 14 of chapter 39 of the General Laws. 
Section 2-5. Members; Resignation. A town meeting member may resign by filing a written resignation with the town clerk and such resignation shall take effect on the date of filing. A town meeting member who moves out of the town shall cease to be a town meeting member and a town meeting member who moves to another precinct may serve only until the next annual town meeting. Any vacancy in town meeting membership caused by the resignation of a town meeting member shall be filled by offering the position to the person who received the next highest number of votes at the last election. If there is a tie, then the process to fill the vacancy shall be by lottery. If the person who received the next highest vote declines appointment, then the vacancy shall be offered to the person who got the next highest vote or, if a lottery shall be held and if that person declines or if there is no list of persons who got the next highest vote, then the vacancy shall be filled by the precinct caucus, by ballot, by a majority of those present and voting for the unexpired term. Upon written acceptance by a person so chosen, that person shall be deemed elected, subject to the right of all town meeting members to judge the election and qualifications of the member as set forth in this chapter. 
2 

Section 2-5A. Members; Removal. A town meeting member who has missed 3 consecutive sessions of any town meeting may be removed by a 2/3 vote of the town meeting members of that precinct that are present and voting at a meeting convened for that purpose. 
Section 2-6. Votes; Petition. No affirmative vote, except a vote to adjourn or authorize the borrowing of money in anticipation of receipt of taxes for the current year, passed at any representative town meeting, shall be operative until after the expiration of 5 days from the date on which the possibility of reconsideration of such vote has expired or become exhausted. If, within such 5 days a petition, signed by not less than 5 per cent of the voters of the town, containing their names and addresses as they appear on the list of voters, is filed with the selectmen and asking that any questions involved in such vote be submitted to the voters of the town, the selectmen shall forthwith call a special election for the purpose of presenting any such question to the voters. The hours of voting shall be the same as at the previous annual town election and all other election laws shall be applicable to that special election. 
The question shall be stated upon the ballot in substantially the same language and form in which it was stated to the representative town meeting by the moderator as it appears from the records of the meeting in a form similar to the following: 
“Shall this town vote to approve the action of the representative town meeting whereby it was 
voted on (insert date of meeting) to (insert full text of action taken by town meeting in the form in which it 
was stated to the town meeting by the moderator)?” 
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, if the action taken by the representative town meeting would exceed more than 2 paragraphs of text on the ballot, the board of selectmen may direct town counsel to prepare a fair and concise description of the action to be included on the ballot and the full text shall be posted on the town’s official bulletin board and on the town’s official website. 
Section 2-7. Finance Committee. The moderator shall appoint a finance committee consisting of 1 voter from each precinct and 3 additional voters at large who shall serve for 3-year terms; provided, however, that not more than 2 voters from any 1 precinct shall serve at the same time on the finance committee. Matters referred to this committee shall include all questions pertaining to the appropriation or expenditure of money, the creation of debt, the disposition of town property and all other questions affecting the town, for the purpose of making recommendations, but this shall not prohibit the appointment of special committees to investigate matters pertaining to the town or to execute work authorized by it. The finance committee may consult with all departments, officers, employees, agents or committees of the town and all such departments, officers, employees, agents and committees shall furnish such information as they possess that may be required by the finance committee. The finance committee may also examine all books, vouchers, papers and other instruments in the custody or possession of any officer, employee, agent or committee of the town. 
Section 2-8.   Powers. The town shall have the capacity to act through and be bound by its town meeting members who shall, when convened from time to time as herein provided, constitute representative town meetings and such representative town meetings shall exercise exclusively all powers vested in the town. Action in conformity with all laws now or hereafter applicable to the transaction of town affairs in town meetings shall, when taken by any representative town meeting in accordance with this charter, have the same force and effect as if such action had been taken in a town meeting open to all the voters of the town. 
Section 2-9.  Capital Improvements Committee. 
(a) 	
There shall be a capital improvement committee to be appointed by the moderator which shall consist of 5 registered voters for alternating 3 years each, beginning on the first day of July following appointment and expiring 3 years thereafter. The town administrator and the director of public works and, at the discretion of the moderator, 1 additional town employee or official shall be ex-officio, nonvoting members of the committee. Any vacancy on the committee arising otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. If any member of the committee ceases to be a resident or voter of the town, that member shall forthwith cease to be a member of the committee.  The committee shall choose its own officers. 

(b) 	
The committee shall study articles for proposed capital projects and improvements involving major nonrecurring tangible assets and projects which: (i) are purchased or undertaken at intervals of not less than 3 years; (ii) have a useful life of at least 3 years; and (iii) cost over $20,000.00. All officers, boards, departments and committees, including the board of selectmen and school committee shall, by December 31 of each year, give to the committee, on forms prepared by it, information concerning all anticipated projects requiring town meeting action during the ensuing 6 years, including all capital 


3 

improvement article requests for the annual town meeting. The committee shall consider the relative need, impact, timing and cost of these expenditures and the effect each will have on the financial position of the town. 
(c) 	No appropriation shall be voted by town meeting for a capital improvement requested by a department, board or commission unless the proposed capital improvement has been submitted to the committee for consideration. The committee shall report its findings to the finance committee as 
part of the finance committee’s budget deliberations. 
(d) 	The committee shall prepare an annual report recommending a capital improvement budget for the next fiscal year and a capital improvement program, including recommended capital improvements for the following 5 fiscal years.  The report shall be submitted to the town meeting for its consideration and approval.  The board shall submit its approved budget to the annual town meeting for adoption by the town or take any action relative thereto. 
Section 2-10.  Conformance.  To the extent that any provision of chapter 300 of the acts of 1927 is inconsistent with any provision of this charter, the charter provision shall control. 

CHAPTER 3:  ELECTION OF TOWN OFFICIALS 
Section 3-1. Board of Selectmen. The board of selectmen shall consist of 5 members elected for alternating 3-year terms, with not more than 2 seats expiring in any 1 year. 
Section 3-2. Other Elected Officials. There shall be such other town officers, boards and committees serving for such terms as are now or hereafter provided for by law, by-law or vote of the town. The adoption of this charter shall not change the present officers, boards or committees or their powers, duties or terms of office except as expressly provided in this chapter.  
Section 3-2A. Vacancies. An elective or appointive office shall become vacant upon the death, resignation or removal from office of the office holder in a manner authorized by law. Any vacancy in an office, committee or board, with the exception of the board of selectmen and town meeting members, originally filled by election shall be filled by a majority vote of the board of selectmen and the remaining members of the respective office, board or committee until the next annual election, at which time the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Any vacancy in an office, board or committee to which the holder was originally appointed shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by any officials having the original power of appointment. 
Section 3-3. 
(a) 	
Board of Assessors; Powers and Duties. The elected board of assessors shall annually make a valuation of all property, both real and personal, within the town in accordance with the law. The board shall, except as expressly provided herein, have all the powers and duties given to boards of assessors under the constitution of the commonwealth, the General Laws and any other general or special law and such additional powers and duties as may be authorized by the charter, by-laws or other town meeting vote. The board of assessors shall also provide policy guidance to the assessing department in areas within its jurisdiction. 

(b) 	
Appointment of Full-Time or Part-Time Assistant Assessors. Full-time or part-time assistant assessors shall be appointed as provided in this subsection. The board of assessors shall serve as a screening committee in accordance with clause 8 of subsection (a) of section 21 of chapter 30A of the General Laws and shall recommend to the town administrator not less than 3 finalists for appointment. The town administrator shall recommend to the board of selectmen, in accordance with subsection (c) of section 6-2, 1 such finalist for appointment. If the town administrator chooses not to recommend any such finalist, the town administrator may direct the board of assessors to conduct a new search. 


Section 3-4. 
(a) 	
Board of Health. There shall be an elected board of health consisting of 3 members for terms of 3 years each, so arranged that the term of office of 1 member shall expire each year. 

(b) 	
Powers and Duties. The board of health shall enforce all regulations and by-laws relating to environmental control and shall annually submit, for the consideration of the town meeting, such regulations and by-laws as it deems proper to accomplish its purposes including, but not limited to, matters concerning noise abatement and the like, as provided in clause (22) of section 21 of chapter 40 of the General Laws. The board of health shall be responsible for advising the town administrator and board of selectmen on all matters relating to health issues. The board of health shall, except as 


4 

expressly provided herein, have all the powers and duties given to the board of health under the constitution of the commonwealth, the General Laws and any other general or special law and such additional powers and duties as may be authorized by the charter, by-laws or other town meeting vote.  The board of health may advise the health department, when warranted, on all matters.  
(c) Appointment of Health Agent. The health agent shall be a person especially fitted by education, training or previous experience to perform the duties of the office. The health agent shall be appointed in the manner provided in this subsection. The elected board of health shall serve as a screening committee in accordance with clause 9 of subsection (a) of section 21 of chapter 30A of the General Laws and shall recommend to the town administrator not less than 3 applicants for appointment. Thereafter, the town administrator shall recommend to the board of selectmen, in accordance with subsection (c) of section 6-2, 1 such finalist for appointment. If the town administrator chooses not to recommend a finalist, the town administrator may direct the board of health to conduct a new search. Section 3-5.  
(a) 	
Board of Library Trustees; Composition, Term of Office. There shall be an elected board of library trustees which shall consist of 3 members for terms of 3 years each, so arranged so that the term of office of 1 member shall expire each year. 

(b) 	
Powers and Duties. The board of library trustees shall have all the powers and duties given to a board of library trustees under the constitution of the commonwealth and the General Laws and such additional powers and duties as may be authorized by the charter, by-law or other town meeting vote.  The board of library trustees may advise the library department, when warranted, on all other matters. 

(c) 	
Appointment of Head Librarian. The head librarian shall be appointed as provided in this subsection. The board of library trustees shall serve as a screening committee in accordance with clause 8 of subsection (a) of section 2 of chapter 30A of the General Laws and shall recommend to the town administrator not less than 3 applicants for appointment. Thereafter, the town administrator shall recommend to the board of selectmen, in accordance with subsection (c) of section 6-2, 1 such finalist for appointment. If the town administrator chooses not to recommend a finalist, the town administrator may direct the board of library trustees to conduct a new search. 



CHAPTER 4:  RECALL 
Section 4-1. Process. This section providing for recall shall apply to all elected town officials, regardless of length or term of office. 
(a) 	
Recall action may be commenced at any time after election to office, subject to the limitations in subsection (1); provided however, that a recall shall not be initiated with respect to any elected official if there are 3 months or less remaining in the term of office of the official sought to be recalled. 

(b) 	
A minimum of 25 registered voters may file an affidavit, signed under oath or before a notary public, containing their signatures and setting forth the name and office of the elected official sought to be recalled and the specific reasons for the recall. At the time of filing, 1 signer shall be identified as the primary petitioner. 

(c) 	
After the board of registrars of voters has verified that at least 25 or more signatures on the affidavit are those of registered voters of the town, the town clerk shall, within 5 days after receipt of the affidavit, issue to the primary petitioner petition forms, in sufficient quantity, containing the name and office held by the elected official sought to be recalled, the names and address of the first 10 signers of the petition, the specific reasons for recall and the date and time that the petition forms were issued to the primary petitioner. 

(d) 	
Recall petition forms shall be returned and filed with the board of registrars of voters by not later than 

5:00 p.m. on the twentieth day following the date on which the town clerk has issued petition forms; provided, however, that is such day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the petitions shall be filed on the next business day. The petitions so filed shall contain the signatures of at least 15 per cent of the registered voters of the town, calculated as of the date of the last town election. 

(e) 	
The board of registrar of voters shall certify the validity of the required number of signatures, increased by 1/5 thereof to the extent additional signatures have been filed or submitted, with 5 days after the last day fixed for filing the petition forms. 

(f) 	
Immediately after the certification pursuant to subsection (e), the board of registrars of voters shall order that written notice be given to the official sought to be recalled, such notice to be served in hand 


5 

on that official or otherwise by a town constable or other process server in hand or at the elected official’s place of residence as shown on the official list of voters and set forth the specific reasons given for the recall and shall also contain a statement advising the official concerned of the official’s 
right to tender a written resignation to the town clerk within 7 calendar days after service of the written notice as provided in this subsection. 
(g) 	
If the official sought to be recalled does not resign as provided in subsection (f), the board of selectmen shall forthwith set a date for the recall election and the calling and conduct of the election shall be in accordance with all General Laws relative to elections. 

(h) 	
A recall election shall be held on a date not less than 64 days or more than 90 days from the date the board of selectmen called for the recall election. The polls shall be open for recall election voting during the same hours as they were set for the most recent annual town election and the result shall be determined by a majority vote. In the event that the annual town election is scheduled to take place within 100 days of the date on which the board of registrars of voters certifies the recall petitions, the recall election shall be postponed until the date of such annual town election and the recall election may, at the discretion of the board of selectmen, appear on the ballot therefor or on a separate ballot. 

(i) 	
If the official sought to be recalled does not resign as provided in subsection (f), the official shall continue to perform the duties of the official’s office until the recall election and shall, at the official’s discretion appear on the ballot as a candidate for the office which is the subject of the recall election by notifying the town clerk in writing of the same. The recall election shall take place notwithstanding any vacancy occurring prior thereto. 

(j) 	
The recall election ballot shall contain 2 propositions in the order indicated: For the Recall of (Name of Official, Name of Office) Against the Recall of (name of Official, Name of Office) 

(k) 	
The recall election ballot shall also contain the names of the candidates nominated as hereinbefore provided to fill a vacancy resulting from a vote for recall. If recall is voted under subsection (j), the candidate receiving the greatest number of votes shall be deemed elected, or reelected, to fill the remainder of the term of office subject to the recall election. 

(l) 	
A second recall against any elected town official shall not be initiated until at least 6 months after the date of the first recall election. 


CHAPTER 5:  BOARD OF SELECTMEN 
Section 5-1.  Powers and Duties. 
(a) 	
Powers and duties in General. The board of selectmen shall serve as the chief policy making agency of the town and shall be responsible for the formulation and promulgation of policy directives and guidelines to be followed by all town agencies serving under it. The board of selectmen shall also be responsible for the development and promulgation of policy guidelines for elected town officers and multiple member bodies not serving under the board, in conjunction with those officers and bodies. The board of selectmen shall recommend to the town meeting for approval, disapproval or other appropriate action each article presented in the warrant. The recommendation shall be printed in the town meeting warrant, if then available, and the town moderator shall, after a motion has been made on each article, request that the board’s recommendation be announced by a member of the board or its designated representative. 

(b) 	
Licensing Authority. The board of selectmen shall be the licensing board for the town and may issue licenses in accordance with the General Laws and town by-laws. 

(c) 	
Appointment Powers. The board of selectmen shall appoint a town administrator, persons to serve as representatives or delegates of the town to the governing or advisory boards of regional or district authorities and such other town officials and members of multiple member bodies as provided for in this chapter. 

(d) 	
Investigations. The board of selectmen may make, or authorize the town administrator to make, investigations into the affairs of the town and the conduct of any town agency. The report of the results of any such investigation shall be placed on file in the office of the board of selectmen and a 


6 

report summarizing the results of any such investigation shall be printed in the next annual town report. 
(e) 	Contracts. The board of selectmen shall be the signatory authority for all contracts within its jurisdiction as provided for in the General Laws, town by-laws, by vote of the town meeting or otherwise. 
Section 5-2.  Appointments.  The board of selectmen may appoint: 
(i) 	
A town administrator, subject to chapter 6; 

(ii) 	
A conservation commission which shall consist of 7 members who shall serve for terms of 3 years; 


(iii) 	The zoning board of appeals which shall consist of 5 regular members who shall serve for terms of 5 years and 3 associate members who shall serve for terms of 2 years; 
(iv) 	
A council on aging s provided by by-law 

(v) 	
A cable television oversight committee 

(vi) 	
Constables 


(vii) 	An arts council 
(viii) 	A historical commission 
(ix) 	
A building code board of appeals 

(x) 	
A harbor advisory board 

(xi) 	
A recreation commission as provided in chapter 7 


(xii) 	An affirmative action committee 
(xiii) 	A 4th of July committee 
(xiv) 	A Veteran’s Day committee 
(xv) 	A Memorial Day Committee 
(xvi) 	A War Memorial Scholarship Fund committee 
(xvii) 	The board of registrars of voters 
(xviii) 	A disability commission 
(xix) 	An athletic field and facilities advisory committee as provided in chapter 10; and 
(xx) 	Any other committee not referred to in this charter which the town meeting or the board of selectmen deems appropriate. 
CHAPTER 6:  TOWN ADMINISTRATOR 
Section 6-1. Appointment; Qualifications; Term. The board of selectmen shall appoint a town administrator from a list prepared by a screening committee. The board of selectmen shall appoint the town administrator to serve for a renewable contract period not to exceed 5 years and shall fix the compensation for the town administrator annually within the amount appropriated by the town meeting. The town administrator shall be appointed solely on the basis of demonstrated executive and administrative qualifications. The town administrator shall be a person especially fitted by education, training and previous experience in public or business administration to perform the duties of the office. The town administrator need not be a resident of the town. The town administrator shall not have served in an elective office in the town of Swampscott government for at least 12 months prior to appointment, with the exception of service as a town meeting member. 
The town administrator shall devote full-time to the office and shall not hold any other public office, elective or appointive, nor engage in any other business or occupation during such service, unless such action is approved in advance and in writing by the board of selectmen. 
The board of selectmen shall provide for a review of the job performance of the town administrator twice in the first year of a new contract and annually thereafter which shall, at least in summary form be, a public record.  
Any vacancy in the office of the town administrator shall be filled as soon as possible by the board of selectmen and, in the interim, the board of selectmen shall appoint a qualified town administrative officer or employee to serve as a temporary town administrator to perform the duties of the office. A temporary appointment shall not exceed 6 months but 1 renewal of the temporary appointment may be approved by the board of selectmen to extend the temporary appointment for a second 6 months.  Compensation for the temporary town administrator shall be set by the board of selectmen. 
7 

Section 6-2. Powers and Duties. The town administrator shall be the chief administrative and financial officer of the town and shall be directly responsible to the board of selectmen for the administration of all town affairs not specifically reserved to another elected body. The power and duties of the town administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(i) 	
To supervise, direct and be responsible for the efficient administration of all functions and activities for which the office of town administrator is given authority, responsibility or control by the town charter, by-laws, by town meeting vote, by vote of the board of selectmen or otherwise; 

(ii) 	
To attend all sessions of all town meetings and, at the request of a town meeting member or voter and at the discretion of the town moderator, provide an explanation of any warrant articles and answer all questions which relate to warrant articles; provided, however, that the town administrator shall also provide appropriate information to town meeting including, for example, written summaries of town meeting warrant articles and such other information as the town administrator or the board of selectmen deems appropriate and helpful to inform town meeting; 


(iii) 	To appoint, hire, remove and discipline, subject to the civil service law and any applicable collective bargaining agreements, all nonschool department officials and nonschool department employees for whom no other method of selection or discipline is provided in this charter; provided, however, that notwithstanding the foregoing, the town administrator shall recommend and the board of selectmen shall appoint, hire, remove and discipline, subject to the civil service law and any applicable collective bargaining agreements, the following officials and employees, which appointment, hire, discipline or removal shall become effective upon approval of the majority of the members of the board of selectmen: 
(1) 
Superintendent/director of public works; 

(2) 
Police chief; 

(3) 
Fire chief; 

(4) 
Assistant town administrator; 

(5) 
Town accountant; 

(6) 
Town clerk; 

(7) 
Treasurer/collector; 

(8) 
Town counsel and all other employees of that office; 

(9) 
Full-time and part-time assistant assessors; 

(10) 
Head librarian; 

(11) 
Harbormaster; 

(12) 
Inspector of buildings; 

(13) 
Veterans’ agent; 

(14) 
Health agent; and 

(15) 
Town planner. 


(iv) 	
To be entrusted with the administration of a town personnel system, except for the school department, and including, but not limited to, personnel policies and practices, rules and regulations, including provisions for an annual employee performance review, personnel by-laws and collective bargaining agreements entered into by the town; provided, however, that the town administrator shall also prepare and keep current a plan establishing the personnel staffing requirements for each town department; 

(v) 	
To attend all regular and special meetings of the board of selectmen and other meetings deemed appropriate by the board of selectmen unless unavailable for reasonable cause; provided, however, that the town administrator shall have a voice, but not a vote, in all of its proceedings; 

(vi) 	
To assure that full and complete records of the financial and administrative activities of the town are kept and to render as often as may be required by the board of selectmen, but at least once each year, a full report of all town financial and administrative operations during the period reported on, which report shall be made available to the public; 


(vii) 	To keep the board of selectmen fully advised as to the needs of the town and shall recommend to the board of selectmen and to other elected town officers and agencies for adoption such measures requiring action by them or by the town meeting as the town administrator may deem necessary or expedient; 
(viii) 	To have full jurisdiction over the rental and use of all town facilities and property except school property; provided, however, that the town administrator shall be responsible for the maintenance 
8 

and repair of all town buildings and facilities placed under the town administrator’s control by by­ 
law or by vote of the town or otherwise;  
(ix)  To prepare and present each year a balanced annual operating budget for the town and a  
proposed capital outlay program for the 5 fiscal years next ensuing in accordance with existing  
by-laws;  
(x)  To assure that an inventory of property of the town, both real and personal, is kept, including  
property within the jurisdiction of the school committee, in accordance with generally accepted  
government accounting principles;  
(xi)  To negotiate all contracts involving any subject within the jurisdiction of the office of town  
administrator, including contracts with town employees, except employees of the school  
department, involving wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment;  
(xii)  To be responsible for purchasing all supplies, materials and equipment for all departments and  
activities of the town, but not including food for schools, school books and other instructional  
materials, supplies and equipment unless otherwise specifically requested by the school  
committee; provided, however, that the town administrator shall examine, or cause to be  
examined, the quantity, quality and condition of all supplies, materials and equipment delivered to  
or received by any town department, except schools; provided further, that the town administrator  
shall be responsible for the disposal of all supplies, materials and equipment which have been  
declared surplus by any town agency; and provided further, that the town administrator, or the  
town administrator’s designee, shall be the chief procurement officer for the town;  
(xiii)  To see that all of the General Laws, the town charter, the town by-laws and the votes of the town  
meeting and board of selectmen and other elected boards that the town administrator has  
operational jurisdiction over, which require enforcement by the town administrator or other  
officials subject to the direction and supervision of the town administrator, are faithfully executed,  
performed or otherwise carried out;  
(xiv)  To inquire, at any time, into the conduct of the officials or the performance of duties of any official,  
employee, department, board, commission or other town agency, excluding schools;  
(xv)  To recommend to the board of selectmen, who are granted the authority to make such changes  
upon majority vote, the reorganization, consolidation or abolishment of town departments or  
agencies serving under the supervision of the town administrator, in whole or in part, to provide  
for new departments or agencies and to recommend a reassignment of powers, duties and  
responsibilities among such departments or agencies so established or existing;  
(xvi)  To coordinate the activities of all town departments or agencies serving under the office of the  
town administrator and the board of selectmen with those under the control of other officials and  
multiple member bodies elected directly by the voters; provided, however, that for this purpose,  
the town administrator may require the persons so elected or their representatives, to meet with  
the town administrator at reasonable times for the purpose of affecting coordination and  
cooperation among all departments or agencies of the town; and  
(xvii)  To perform any other duties as may be required to be performed by the town administrator by by­ 
law, administrative code, vote of the town meeting or vote of the board of selectmen or otherwise.  
Section 6-3:  ACTING TOWN ADMINISTRATOR 


(a) 	
Temporary Absence. By letter filed with the town clerk, the town administrator shall recommend a qualified town administrative officer or employee who, with the approval of the board of selectmen, shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of town administrator during a temporary absence. During a temporary absence, the board of selectmen shall not revoke such designation until at least 10 working days have elapsed, whereupon it may appoint another qualified town administrative officer or employee to serve until the town administrator shall return. 

(b) 	
Vacancy. Any vacancy in the office of town administrator shall be filled as soon as possible by the board of selectmen; provided, however, that pending such regular appointment, the board of selectmen shall appoint a qualified town administrative officer or employee to perform the duties of the office on an acting basis. 

(c) 	
Powers and Duties. The powers of a temporary or acting town administrator under subsections (a) and (b) shall be limited to matters not admitting of delay and shall include authority to make temporary, emergency appointments or designations to town office or employment but not to make permanent appointments or designations. 


9 

Section 6-4:  Removal and Suspension. 
(a) 	
The board of selectmen may, by a vote of at least 4 of its members, terminate and remove or suspend the town administrator in accordance with this section. 

(b) 	
The board of selectmen shall adopt a preliminary resolution of removal by at least 4 of its members which shall state the reasons for removal. The preliminary resolution may suspend the town administrator for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered in hand or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the town administrator. 

(c) 	
Within 5 days after receipt of the preliminary resolution, the town administrator may request a public hearing by filing a written request therefor with the Board of Selectmen. The hearing shall be held at a meeting of the board of selectmen not later than 30 days and not earlier than 20 days after the request is filled.  The town administrator may file a written statement responding to the reasons stated in the resolution of removal with the board of selectmen provided that the written statement I received at the office of the board of selectmen more than 48 hours in advance of the public hearing. 

(d) 	
If the town administrator does not request a public hearing, the board of selectmen may, by the affirmative vote of at least 4 of its members, not less than 10 days and not more than 21 days following the delivery of the preliminary resolution to the town administrator, adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately. If the town administrator requests a public hearing, the board of selectmen may, by the affirmative vote of at least 4 of its members within 10 days following the close of the public hearing, adopt a final resolution of removal, which may be made effective immediately. Failure to adopt a final resolution of removal within the time periods provided in this subsection shall nullify the preliminary resolution of removal and the town administrator shall, at the expiration of that time, immediately resume duties of the office. The town administrator shall continue to receive full pay and benefits until the adoption of a final resolution by the board of selectmen. 

(e) 	
The action of the board of selectmen in suspending or removing the town administrator shall be final. Section 6-5. Appointment of Town Administrator; Qualifications. 

(a) 
Upon the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the town administrator, a screening committee shall be established for the purpose of soliciting, receiving and evaluating applications for the position of town administrator. The screening committee should consist of 5 persons, 1 of whom shall be a member of the board of 


selectmen or a designee, the school committee and the finance committee and 2 of whom shall be elected town meeting members appointed by the town moderator. A person named as a designee of any aforementioned members may, but need not be, members of the agency from which they are designated. Appointments made by the town moderator shall be made last in time in order that in making appointments the town moderator may, insofar as it may be feasible to do so, appoint persons who will broaden the membership base of the committee to be most representative of the demographic and occupational base of the town. 
If in the sole judgment of the screening committee there are no candidates deemed acceptable, then the screening committee shall report to the board of selectmen and request that the advertising and solicitation process be reinstituted. The screening committee may employ a professional search firm to aid in this process, subject to funding, but all final decisions shall be made by the screening committee except that the search firm shall not be required to forward applications to the screening committee that the search firm deems unqualified for the position. The screening committee shall have full access to the relevant files of the search firm. 
Not more than 90 days following the date on which the screening committee meets to organize, the screening committee shall submit to the board of selectmen the names of not less than 3 and not more than 5 persons whom it believes to be best suited to perform the duties of the office of town administrator. The board of selectmen may, upon request by a majority vote of the screening committee, grant an extension of the 90-day period; provided, however, that such extension not to exceed 30 days. The board of selectmen may grant only 3 such 30-day extensions. 
Within 30 days following the date the list of nominees is submitted to it, the board of selectmen shall choose, by the affirmative vote of at least 3 of its members, 1 of the nominees to serve as town administrator. If the board of selectmen does not select 1 of the finalists submitted, the process shall commence again beginning with the advertising of a vacancy and solicitation of candidates. 
Upon the appointment of a town administrator, the screening committee established hereunder shall be discharged. 
10 

(b) 	
Town Administrator Qualifications -Until such time as the town meeting may act by by-law to establish different qualifications for the office, the town administrator shall have: 

(i) 	
At least a Master’s degree from a recognized, accredited college or university in a relevant discipline; 

(ii) 	
A Bachelor’s degree from a recognized, accredited college or university and 3 additional years of experience; or 


(iii) Served full-time 	as an administrative officer of a city or town for not less than 3 years or have demonstrated executive, management and administrative qualifications and be fitted by education, training and previous experience in the public or private sector. 
CHAPTER 7:  RECREATION COMMISSION 
Section 7-1. Establishment and Composition. There shall be a recreation commission which shall consist of 7 voters of the town who shall be appointed by the board of selectmen for terms of 3 years. 
CHAPTER 8:  FINANCE AND FISCAL PROCEDURES 
Section 8-1. Fiscal Year. The fiscal year of the town shall begin on the July 1 and shall end on the June 30 unless another period is required by the General Laws. Section 8-2.  School Committee Budget.  Submission to Town Administrator – The budget for the ensuing fiscal year as adopted by the school committee shall be submitted to the town administrator in sufficient time, but not later than February 15, to enable the town administrator to 
consider the effect of the school department’s requested appropriation upon the total town operating 
budget which is required to be submitted under this charter. 
Section 8-3. Finance Committee. The finance committee shall perform its responsibilities as provided in section 2-7. 
Section 8-4. Submission of Budget and Budget Summary. Within the time fixed by by-law, before the town meeting is to convene, the town administrator, after consultation with the board of selectmen, shall submit concurrently to the board of selectmen and the finance committee a proposed town operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year with an accompanying budget summary and supporting analysis. The proposed operating budget, summary and supporting analysis shall be based, in part, on annual departmental appropriation requests received by the town administrator, who shall provide copies of the same within 7 days after receipt thereof, to the finance committee. Complete copies of the proposed operating budget shall be available for examination by the public. The board of selectmen shall by a majority vote approve a balanced budget and submit the budget to the finance committee not later than March 1 for the ensuing fiscal year. 
Section 8-5. Budget Summary. The budget summary prepared by the town administrator shall explain the budget for all town departments, both in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs. It shall describe important features of the budget, indicate any major variations from the current year in financial policies, expenditures and revenues, together with the reasons for such variations, summarize the town’s debt position and include such other materials as the town administrator deems desirable or as the board of selectmen may reasonably require. 
Section 8-6. The budget. The proposed operating budget shall provide a complete financial plan for all town funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall include supplemental information showing in detail all estimated income from the proposed property tax levy and other sources and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the following year. Supplemental information shall be arranged to show the actual and estimated income and expenditures for the previous, current and ensuing fiscal years and shall indicate in separate sections: 
(i) 	
Proposed expenditures for current and new operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by town department and position in terms of work programs and the method of financing such expenditures; and 

(ii) 	
Proposed capital expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by town department, and the proposed methods of financing each such capital expenditures, the estimated surplus revenue and free cash at the end of the current fiscal year and estimated balances in any special accounts established for specific purposes. 


11 

Section 8-7. Action on the Budget. Action by Town Meeting – Upon receipt of the proposed operating budget approved by the board of selectmen, the finance committee may review, investigate and amend the proposal as it deems necessary and appropriate. The fiancé committee budget proposal, as amended, shall be placed before town meeting for its approval, subject to further amendments from the floor. Supplemental budget information including, but not limited to, the budget summary, income and expense projections and program descriptions shall also be available to town meeting for its approval. Supplemental budget information shall not be subject to town meeting approval. 
Section 8-8.  Intentionally Omitted. 
Section 8-9. Approval of Warrants. The town administrator shall be the chief fiscal officer of the town. Warrants for the payment of town funds prepared by the town accountant in accordance with the General Laws shall be submitted to the town administrator. The approval of any such warrant by the town administrator shall authorize payment by the town treasurer but, in the event of an absence of the town administrator or a vacancy in the office of town administrator, the board of selectmen shall approve all warrants. 
Section 8-10. Annual Financial Forecast. The town administrator shall report to the board of selectmen, the finance committee, and the school committee by not later than November 15 of each year and present a financial forecast for the next fiscal year detailing anticipated revenues, transfers and expenditures. 
Section 8-11. 5-Year Budget Plan. The town administrator shall submit as supplemental information to town meeting a 5-year budget plan detailing anticipated revenues and expenditures, including, without limitation, a 5-year capital budget identifying future capital expenditures and providing a prioritized list of town capital needs as recommended by the town administrator. 
CHAPTER 9:  INTENTIONALLY OMITTED 
CHAPTER 10:  ATHLETIC FIELD AND FACILITIES ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Section 10-1. Creation. There shall be an athletic field and facilities advisory committee which shall be appointed by the board of selectmen. The advisory committee shall provide recommendations to the board of selectmen and the town administrator concerning the use, maintenance and upkeep of the town’s athletic fields and facilities, excluding school-owned property. The recommendations may include possible alternative and supplemental funding sources. The size and membership of the committee shall be determined by the board of selectmen; provided, however, that the recreation director and director of public works shall be ex-officio members to the committee; and provided further, that a member of the recreation commission, as designated by the recreation commission, shall be a voting member of the committee. The membership of the committee shall include, to the extent possible, representatives of athletic groups of different types, ages and genders, and others with relative backgrounds in the design, care and maintenance of athletic fields and facilities. 
CHAPTER 11: CONTINUATION OF GOVERNMENT; EXISTING LAWS, SEVERABILITY AND TRANSITION 
Section 11-1. Continuation of Government. All town agencies shall continue to perform their duties until reappointed, reelected or until successors to their respective positions are duly appointed or elected or until their duties have been transferred and assumed by another town agency in accordance with this charter.  
Section 11-2. All other special acts, by-laws, rules and regulations for the town of Swampscott which are not inconsistent with this charter shall remain in full force. 
Section 11-3. Severability. The provisions of this charter shall be severable. If any provision of the charter is held invalid by the final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby. If the application of the charter to any person or circumstance is held invalid by the final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, the application of the charter and its provisions to other persons and circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
SECTION 7. On the effective date of this act and notwithstanding chapter 119 of the acts of 1949, the trustees of the World War II Memorial Fund established pursuant to section 1 of said chapter 119 shall become the trustees of the Swampscott War Memorial Scholarship Fund for the administration 
12 

of the fund and shall have the same responsibilities and the same terms of office as the trustees of the World War II Memorial Fund shall have had. 
SECTION 8. This act shall take effect upon its passage. 

GENERAL
BY
LAWS
T
OWN OF S WAMPSCOTT
2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I
General Provision
Pg 3
Article II
Town Meeting
5
Article III
Town Finances
9
Article IV
Duties of Town Officers
13
Article V
Streets and Sidewalks
19
Article VI
Junk Dealers, Pawnbrokers and Dealers in Second-Hand Articles
26
Article VII
Cemeteries
28
Article VIII
Emergency Management
30
Article IX
Uses of Land
32
Article X
Gas Inspection and Permit
47
Article XI
Dance
48
Article XII
Non-Criminal Enforcement of By-Laws and Regulations
49
Article XIII
Earth Removal
50
Article XIV
Registration and Enforcement of Alarm Systems
60
Article XV
Public Consumption of Marijuana or Tetrahydrocannabinol
66
Article XVI
Stretch Energy Code
67
Article XVII
Civil Fingerprinting for Certain License Applicants
68
Article XVIII
Illicit Discharges to Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
70
Article XIX
Construction and Post-Construction Stormwater Management
79
Article XX
Swampscott Affordable Housing Trust Fund
89
3
Article XXI
Revolving Funds
92
Article XXII
Single Use Plastic Bags
93
Article XXIII
Improvement of Blighted or Unsafe Structures or Property and the Maintenance of Vacant Buildings
98
Article XXIIV
Administration of Fines for Certain Violations
102
Article XXV
Single Use Plastic Beverage Straw and Stirrer Reduction in Business Establishments
103
4
ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1. TITLE OF BY-LAWS
These by-laws shall be designated as “By-Laws of the Town of Swampscott”.
SECTION 2. EFFECT OF ENACTMENT AND REPEAL
So far as the provisions of these by-laws are the same in effect as those of previously existing by-laws, they shall be construed as a constitution of such by-laws, but all by-laws or portions thereof heretofore in force inconsistent here-with, are hereby repealed. The repeal of a by-law heretofore adopted shall not affect any act done or any right, accruing or accrued or established, nor any action, suit or proceeding commenced in any civil case, nor affect any punishment, penalty or forfeiture incurred under such a by-law.
SECTION 3. RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
In the construction of all the by-laws of the town, the following rules of construction shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent or context of the by-law:
TOWN - The word “town” shall mean the Town of Swampscott.
BOARD OF SELECTMEN - The words “Board of Selectmen” or “Selectmen” shall mean the duly elected Board of Selectmen of the Town of Swampscott.
COMMONWEALTH - The word “Commonwealth” shall mean the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
COMPUTATION OF TIME - In computing the time in which an act is to be done, the first day shall be excluded and the last day shall be included, but if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded.
COUNTY - The word “county” shall mean the County of Essex.
GENDER - A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males.
5
JOINT AUTHORITY - Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority of such officers or persons.
NUMBER - A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
OWNER OR OCCUPANT - The owner or occupant of a building or land shall include any sole owner or occupant, and any joint tenant and tenant in common of the whole or any part of a building or lot of land.
PERSON - The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
SIDEWALK - The word “sidewalk” shall mean a strip within the public way in front or on the side of a house or lot of land lying between the property line and the street.
STREET OR WAY - The words “street” or “way” shall include streets, avenues, roads, alleys, lanes, viaduct and all other public ways in the town, including any bridge which is a part thereof, all of which shall have been decreed, dedicated or accepted by the process of law.
TIME - Words used in the past or present tense include the future tense.
SECTION 4. PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS
Whoever violates a provision of any by-laws of the town, shall unless other provision is expressly made, be liable to a penalty of not more than $50.00 for each offense.
SECTION 5. POWER TO ISSUE LICENSES AND PERMITS
When in any by-law anything is prohibited from being done without the license or permission of a certain officer or officers, such officer or officers shall have the power to license or permit such thing to be done.
SECTION 6. PROCESS OF AMENDMENT
These by-laws may be amended at any town meeting, an article or articles for that purpose having been inserted in the warrant for such meeting.
6
ARTICLE II
TOWN MEETING
SECTION 1. DATE OF TOWN ELECTIONS AND TOWN MEETING
The annual town meeting shall be held on the last Tuesday in April in each year. (5/98) For the election of officers at said annual town meeting unless otherwise provided by law, polls shall be open at seven o’clock in the forenoon and shall remain open until eight o’clock at night. After the counting and declaration of votes for officers at an annual town meeting, said meeting shall be adjourned to the date established by the Town Charter at 7:15 p.m. at the Town Hall or such other place as may be designated by the Selectmen, and at which time and at any further adjournment thereof, the remaining articles of the warrant shall be taken up. Each further adjournment thereof shall be made to the next succeeding and successive nights at 7:45 p.m., unless the meeting determines otherwise by the vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members present and voting, as is necessary to conclude the annual town meeting.
SECTION 2. WARRANT
(a) The warrant for all town meetings shall contain a statement of all subjects to be acted upon at the meeting. When an article is petitioned for by the legal number of voters, there shall be appended thereto the name of the first person signing said petition and the words “et al.” All petitions for insertions of articles in the warrant for the Annual Town Meeting shall be filed with the Board of Selectmen on or before the first Thursday of February prior to the Annual Meeting. All petitions for the laying out and acceptance of public ways shall be filed with the Board of Selectmen on or before the first Thursday of November preceding the Annual Town Meeting.
(b) Notice of every town meeting shall be given by posting attested copies of the warrant for the same in at least two public places in each precinct, and by mailing such warrant to each town meeting member as soon as said warrant is drawn and printed and not less than seven days before the day appointed for said meeting; provided, however, that the warrant for the Annual Town Meeting shall be mailed to each town meeting member not less than seven days prior to the date set for the business portion of the representative town meeting. (2003) Notice of any adjournment of any town meeting other than to the next succeeding night as provided in Section (a) shall be advertised by the town clerk at least once in a newspaper or newspapers published in Swampscott, and in case such adjournment is for a period of more than five days, notice shall be mailed to each town meeting member at least one day prior to the date set for the adjourned meeting. The validity of any proceedings taken at an adjourned town meeting shall not be affected by any defect in the notice of the adjournment.
(c) The Town Clerk shall prepare and furnish to each town meeting member an identification card. No person shall be admitted to the floor of the meeting at any time except upon presentation of his identification card or a pass signed by the Moderator or by the Chairman of the Board of Selectmen.
7
SECTION 3. RULES
The proceeding of town meetings shall be governed by the rules of practice contained in “Town Meeting Time”, except as the same may be modified by law or by these by-laws.
SECTION 4. DECLARATION OF A VOTE
If the Moderator's declaration of a vote has been immediately questioned by seven voters, in polling the members, the Moderator shall appoint tellers and members in the affirmative and in the negative respectively shall be requested to rise and stand until they are counted by the tellers, and the tellers shall make report of said count to the Moderator, who shall then announce the vote. Upon the request of thirty or more Town Meeting members, a roll call vote shall be taken in connection with final action upon any article in the warrant.
SECTION 5. SUPER MAJORITY VOTING
If more than a majority vote of a Town Meeting is required by law, a count shall be taken and the voter shall be recorded in the records by the Clerk; but if the vote is unanimous, a count need not be taken and the Clerk shall record the vote as unanimous. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, on matters requiring a two-thirds vote by statute, a count need not be taken unless the vote so declared is immediately questioned by seven or more voters as provided in General Laws Chapter 39 Section 15. (5/99)
SECTION 6. BALLOT VOTING
Subject to the provisions of General Laws, Chap. 39, S15, the meeting may decide to vote by ballot upon any motion properly before it, and upon the request of two-thirds or more of the town meeting members present and voting, the meeting shall vote by ballot upon any motion properly before it to amend the recommendation of the Finance Com-mittee. In any such case, the Moderator shall state the question, and the Town Clerk shall prepare and distribute the ballots to enable the town meeting members to vote “Yes” or “No” upon such question. Said ballots shall be collected and counted by the Moderator or such persons as he may then and there delegate, and the Moderator shall then an-nounce the vote. When a vote is taken by such ballot, the meeting shall not then be polled under Section 4.
SECTION 7. ADMISSIBLE MOTIONS DURING DEBATE
When a question is under debate, no motion shall be received except a motion to adjourn the meeting, to vote by ballot, or by roll call, to lay on the table, to commit or refer, to amend, to postpone to a day certain, to limit or extend the limits of debate, or to postpone indefinitely, or a motion for the previous question, or a motion for leave to withdraw or modify a motion.
8
SECTION 8. LIMIT ON SPEAKING
No town meeting member shall speak upon the same question more than twice, nor more than ten minutes at one time without first obtaining permission of the meeting.
SECTION 9. ORDER OF ARTICLES
Articles in the warrant shall be acted upon in their order unless two or more articles relate to the same subject matter, when they may be considered jointly.
SECTION 10. MOTION TO DISSOLVE MEETING
No motion to dissolve a town meeting shall be in order until every article in the warrant therefor has been duly con-sidered and acted upon.
SECTION 11. MOTIONS SUBMITTED IN WRITING
All motions submitted for the consideration of the meeting involving the expenditure of money, the creation of a debt, or the disposal of town property shall be in writing, except motions to adopt recommendations for the above-mentioned purposes which are contained in a written report. All other motions shall be in writing if required by the Moderator.
SECTION 12. AMENDMENTS
No motion or proposition, unless germane to the subject under consideration, shall be admitted under color of amend-ment.
SECTION 13. CALL FOR DIVISION OF QUESTION
Any member may call for a division of a question when the sense will admit it.
SECTION 14. NON-DEBATABLE MOTIONS
Motions to adjourn, to lay on the table, to take from the table, to vote by ballot or by roll call for the previous question shall be decided without debate.
SECTION 15. MOTION TO RECONSIDER
9
A motion to reconsider any vote must be made before the final adjournment of the meeting at which the vote was passed; provided, however, that such motion to reconsider shall not be made at an adjourned session of the meeting unless the same member has given notice of intention to make such a motion either at the session of the meeting at which the vote was passed or by written notice to the Town Clerk not more than forty-eight hours after the hour of adjournment of such session and not less than three hours before the hour to which adjournment has been voted. A vote shall not be reconsidered a second time or after a motion to reconsider it has failed to pass.
SECTION 16. ATTENDANCE RECORD OF MEMBERS
The Town Clerk shall keep a record of the attendance of Town Meeting members at each session of Town Meeting. Such record shall consist of lists by precinct designation of the names of Town Meeting members present and of those absent, shall be posted on the bulletin board at the Town Administration Building within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of adjournment or dissolution of a Town Meeting for a period of thirty (30) days thereafter and shall be kept available for public inspection until publication of the next Annual Town Report. The Annual Town Report shall include a record of Town Meeting attendance by the Town Meeting members, including therein, by precinct designa-tion, the names of the members present and the names of the members absent from any session of Town Meeting.
SECTION 17. DISCLOSURE OF EMPLOYMENT AS AN ATTORNEY
Any person who is employed as an attorney or who represents another in any matter under discussion at a Town Meeting or before any board or agency of the town shall disclose the fact of his or her employment before speaking thereon.
SECTION 18. PETITION FOR RECONSIDERATION
No person shall file a Petition for Reconsideration of any vote of the Town Meeting pursuant to Chapter Two, section 6, of the Town Charter without simultaneously filing with the Selectmen a signed statement of financial expenditures incurred in connection therewith. The statement shall enumerate all payments or promises of payment of money or other things of value to any person or persons in consideration for procurement by the latter of signatures for each Petition. Such statement shall be available for examination by any resident of the Town from the time filed until thirty (30) days after the final adjournment of the Town Meeting. No person shall make or promise to make any such payment for an amount based upon the number of signatures obtained.
10
ARTICLE III
TOWN FINANCES
SECTION 1. FISCAL YEAR DESIGNATION
The financial year shall begin on the first day of July and shall end of the thirtieth day of June.
SECTION 2. MONEY PAID FROM TOWN TREASURY
No money except state and county taxes and principal and interest of town notes or bonds shall be paid from the town treasury except upon a warrant therefor, signed by the Town Administrator, or in his absence, by a majority of the Selectmen.
SECTION 3. AUDIT OF TOWN ACCOUNTS
There shall be an annual audit of the town's accounts under the supervision of the Director of Accounts in the Depart-ment of Revenue in accordance with the provisions of Section 35 of Chapter 44 of the General Laws, as amended.
SECTION 4. NO ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION WITHOUT PERMISSION OF SE-LECTMEN
No town officer and no salaried employee of the town or any agent of any such officer or employee, shall receive any compensation or commission for work done by him for the town, except his official salary, and fees allowed by law, without the permission of the Selectmen expressed in a vote which shall appear on their records with the reason therefore.
SECTION 5. MONEY RECEIVED REPORTED TO SELECTMEN AND PUBLISHED
All money received by any town officers or committees, or any person acting for or on behalf of the town, shall upon receipt thereof be paid as provided by the statutes of the Commonwealth; but in all cases, the money so received shall be reported to the Board of Selectmen, who shall publish the same in the Annual Town Report.
11
SECTION 6. COLLECTION OF LIABILITIES TO THE TOWN
Whenever any person incurs any liability to the town on any claim or demand, the department having charge thereof shall forthwith render a bill to said person and give notice in writing to the Collector of Taxes and to the Town Ac-countant, as to the name of the person liable therefore, his address, the amount and nature of such claim or demand, and all other information pertaining thereto that may assist the collection thereof. Upon receipt of such notice, the Collector of Taxes and the Town Accountant shall make appropriate entries in their respective books relating to such claim or demand. If said claim or demand is not paid within a reasonable time after a bill for the same has been sent, the Collector of Taxes, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, shall take appropriate steps to collect the same, and upon payment thereof he shall notify the Town Accountant and the department in charge of the matter and appropriate entries shall be made in their respective books pertaining to it. If any such claim or demand is paid in installments, the Collector of Taxes shall notify the Town Accountant of the receipt of such installment and the entries thereof, shall be made in their respective books.
SECTION 7. COLLECTION OF WATER BILLS
The Collector of Taxes shall have the sole authority to collect, receive, sue for all water bills and other sums due for the supply of water service furnished by the Town.
SECTION 8. MGL CHAPTER 40, SECTION 57, RELATIVE TO GRANTING LICENSES
Chapter 640 of the Acts of 1985, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, is hereby made a part of the Swampscott General By-Laws. (Adopted 5/5/87) Chapter 640. An Act Relative to the Granting or Renewing of Certain Licenses and Permits in Cities and Towns.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
Chapter 40, of the General Laws, as appearing in the 1984 Official Edition, is hereby amended by adding the following section: Section 57. Any city and town which accepts the provisions of this section may by by-law or ordinance deny any application for, or revoke or suspend any local license or permit including renewals and transfers issued by any board, officer, department for any person, corporation or business enterprise who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges. Such by-law or ordinances shall provide that:
(a) The tax collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the tax collector, shall annually, and may periodically, furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licens-ing authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corpora-tion, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local
12
taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the appellate tax board.
(b) The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the tax col-lector, provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the tax collector, as required by appli-cable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen (14) days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party. The tax collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the tax collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate.
(c) Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance of said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
(d) The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his imme-diate family, as defined in Section One of Chapter Two Hundred and Sixty-eight in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.
(e) This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits: open burning; Section Thirteen of Chapter Forty-eight; bicycle permits; Section Eleven A of Chapter Eighty-five; sales of articles for charitable purposes, Section Thirty-three of Chapter One Hundred and One; children work permits, Section Sixty-nine of Chapter One Hundred and Forty-nine; clubs, associations, dispensing food or beverage licenses, Section Twenty-one E of Chapter One Hundred and Forty; dog licenses, Section One Hundred and Thirty-seven of Chapter One Hundred and Forty; fishing, hunting, trapping license, Section Twelve of Chapter One Hundred and Thirty-one; marriage licenses, Section Twenty-eight of Chapter Two Hundred and Seven theatrical events, public exhibition permits, Section One Hundred and Eighty-one of Chapter One Hundred and Forty.
(f) A city or town may exclude any local license or permit from this section by by-law or ordinance.
SECTION 9. DUE DATE FOR THE PAYMENT OF MUNICIPAL CHARGES AND BILLS
The due date for the payment of municipal charges and bills other than taxes shall be 30 days from the date of mailing. Further that the rate of which interest shall accrue if such charges remain unpaid after such due dates shall be at the rate of which interest may be charged on tax bills under the provisions of Section 57 of Chapter 59, MGL. (5/89).
SECTION 10. FUNDING OF COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS
13
The Town Meeting shall not empower to fund any collective bargaining agreement not executed and filed in the Town Clerk's Office at least 21 days prior to convening of a regular or special Town Meeting. (5/6/98).
14
ARTICLE IV
DUTIES OF TOWN OFFICERS
SECTION 1. SELECTMEN’S DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES; TOWN COUNSEL
(a) The Selectmen shall be agents of the town to institute, prosecute, defend, and compromise any and all claims, actions and proceedings on behalf of or against the town or in which the interests of the town are or may be involved. They shall annually appoint an attorney or firm, in good standing before the Massachusetts Bar, as Town Counsel who shall hold office for the term of one year and until a successor is appointed and enters upon the performance of the duties. They shall in like manner fill any vacancy in said office and may employ special counsel to assist the Town Counsel if and when, in their judgment, necessity therefor shall arise. They may also appoint an Assistant Town Counsel to assist the Town Counsel in the performance of such duties as are hereinafter set forth, as they deem nec-essary.
(b) The Board of Selectmen may appoint an attorney who is a member in good standing of the Massachusetts Bar, or a Massachusetts law firm, to serve as Assistant Town Counsel for zoning and planning matters and, further, that said attorney need not be a resident of the Town of Swampscott. (1990).
SECTION 2. DUTIES OF TOWN COUNSEL
It shall be the duty of the Town Counsel to appear in and conduct the prosecution, defenses or compromise of said claims, actions, and proceedings and the prosecution of actions or proceedings by or on behalf of any town board or officer as such; to conduct proceedings brought by or against the Assessors before the Appellate Tax Board and to assist in the prosecution of said complaints for violation of any by-law of the town, when requested to do so by the board or officer enforcing the same; to conduct the defense of any action or proceedings brought against any town board, officer, or committee as such when the Selectmen, having determined that any right or interests in the town are or may be involved therein, shall so request; to examine and report upon titles to all lands to be acquired by the town; to prepare or approve contracts, bonds, deeds and other legal instruments in which the town is a party or in which any right or interest of the town is involved; and generally to advise and act for the town boards, officers and committees upon and in legal matters touching the duties of their respective offices. Town Counsel and any special counsel shall make a written report to the Board of Selectmen concerning the services rendered during the year, which shall be printed in the Annual Town Report.
SECTION 3. TOWN OFFICERS’ ANNUAL REPORTS
15
All town officers, boards and committees shall make an annual report in writing to the town. Such reports for the previous year shall be printed in the Annual Town Report, and to permit such printing shall be submitted to the Town Administrator no later than January fifth of each year.
SECTION 4. MINUTES OF MEETINGS OF BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COM-MITTEES; ATTENDANCE
(a) Each appointed board, commission and committee shall file the minutes of its meetings with the Town Clerk in the manner required by Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 39, Section 23B, and such minutes shall include the names of the members present and absent within 40 days of the scheduled and posted meetings.
(b) The Chairman of such board, commission or committee, or the member thereof designated by the Chairman, shall report in writing to the appointing authority all cases in which a member attends less than 70% of the regular meetings of such board, commission or committee held in one calendar year and/or is absent without just cause from three (3) consecutive regular and/or special meetings. Forthwith thereafter the appointing authority may declare a vacancy on the board, commission or committee involved and appoint a successor to finish the term or task of the absent member. Said record of attendance and the attendance of elected officials shall be published in the Annual Town Report.
SECTION 5. SELECTMEN’S DUTY TO MAKE TOWN REPORTS AVAILABLE
The Selectmen shall annually, not less than seven days before the annual meeting, have copies of the town report for all citizens at the office of the Selectmen in the Town Administration Building, 22 Monument Avenue, Swampscott, MA; the Town Clerk shall mail copies of said report, as soon as available, to all Town Meeting members and to other persons who may request same and remit an appropriate fee including postage. (5/88).
SECTION 6. SELECTMEN INSURE AGAINST LOSS OR DAMAGE OF ALL INSUR-ABLE PROPERTY
The Board of Selectmen, as agents for the town, shall have insured against loss or damage by fire, all insurable property of the town, both real and personal. Each department of the town shall annually on or before the first day of April, render a complete list of all town property, the real and personal under its control to the Board of Selectmen, together with the description of said property and its estimate of the replacement value thereof. The Board of Selectmen shall similarly contract for liability insurance on behalf of the town or its employees, as may be authorized by statute and vote of the town.
SECTION 7. NOTIFICATION OF COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP
The Town Clerk shall immediately notify in writing the members of all committees that may be elected or appointed at any town meeting of their membership on the committee and of the nature of the business upon which they are expected to act. The Town Clerk shall also notify department heads, committee chairmen and town officers of all actions of the town pertaining to their respective departments, committees or offices. All appointed committees,
16
commissions or boards shall be for a term of one year unless otherwise specified by the Massachusetts General By-Laws, town by-laws or the appointing authority.
SECTION 8. SALE OF TOWN PROPERTY NOT EXCEEDING $500
Every Board or Officer in charge of a department may, with the written approval of the Board of Selectmen, sell any personal property or material belonging to the Town not required by said department and not exceeding $500 in value.
SECTION 9. FORMS FOR SUBMITTING ANNUAL BUDGET
(a) All boards, department heads, committees and officers of the town shall submit the annual budget for each depart-ment on forms approved by the Town Administrator.
(b) All bills and vouchers submitted to the Town Accountant for payment of any board, department heads, committees and officers shall contain thereon a reference to the section of the standard budget form to which the expenditure shall be charged.
SECTION 10. CONTRACTS
(a) For all contracts for the purchases or disposition of goods, supplies and or services; and for the constructing, reconstructing, alteration, remodeling, repair or demolition of public buildings or public work, or the disposition of real property will follow the appropriate sections of the General Law of the Commonwealth Chapter 30B, Chapter 30, 39M and/or Chapter 149 or such other laws and/or amendments enacted from time to time by the General Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
The provisions of this section will be deemed to be complied with when purchasing supplies, materials, goods or services made under the provision of Section 22A and 22B of Chapter 7 of the Massachusetts General Laws when one political sub division, as defined in said sections complies with the provisions of the General Laws so defined, or when purchases are made from a vendor pursuant to a contract with the Commonwealth for the item or items being pur-chased. (5/96).
(b) A contract in proper form shall thereupon be prepared and, with the specifications, submitted to the Board of Selectmen, or, upon delegation by the Board of Selectmen, to the Town Administrator, and shall not be valid until countersigned by said Board or Administrator. Upon said countersignature, one of the contracts, including the bond, properly executed, together with a copy of the specifications, shall be deposited with the Town Accountant.
(c) Every contract shall be accompanied by security as defined in the appropriate statutes of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Chapter 30B, Chapter 30, 39M and/or Chapter 149, or such other laws and/or amendments enacted from time to time by the Great and General Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. (5/96).
SECTION 11. ENGINEERING SERVICES
17
The engineering services of the Town shall be under the jurisdiction of the Director of Public Works who shall serve as the Town Engineer unless another person shall be appointed Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall have charge of all engineering pertaining to the town and who shall preserve, arrange and index all plans, surveys, field notes, records, documents and other information relating to the engineering work of the Town so that the same may be readily accessible for public use. The Town Engineer shall furnish proper lines and grades whenever public ways or sidewalks are being constructed or repaired. No water pipes shall be laid in any street or way, nor shall any other public work be done in or upon the same, nor shall any such street or way be accepted by the Town until such street or way has been built in conformity with the plan duly approved by the Planning Board and on file in the office of the Town Engineer.
SECTION 12. ADDRESS NUMBERING – SPECIFICATIONS AND FINES
(a) The Town Engineer shall assign numbers to all buildings or parts thereof on or near the line of public or private ways within the town and a list of such numbers shall be at all times on file in his office.
(b) It shall be the duty of every owner and/or occupant of each house; building and/or other structure within the town of Swampscott to place thereon the number of said house, building or structure.
(c) The size, color, location and visibility of said numbers shall be as follows::
1. The minimum height of said number shall be three and one-half (3-1/2) inches in height.
2. In order to be visible from the road, street or way, the number(s) shall be of a contrasting color from the background onto which it is placed.
3. The number(s) shall be affixed to the front door, or as close to the front door as possible; or if the front door does not face the road, street or way, such number(s) shall be affixed in a manner to be easily read from such road, street or way.
(d) Where there are multiple houses, buildings or structures, located off the road on private ways, roads or lanes, the number(s) shall be placed at the following locations:
1. The number(s) shall be affixed to a post at the entrance to said private way, road or lane;
2. If the house, building or structure is so far off the public way causing the numbers to be unidentifiable, a post with the number(s) affixed thereto shall also be placed at the entrance to the driveway leading to the house, building or structure.
(e) Any person, firm or corporation found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this section, shall be liable to pay a fine not to exceed twenty ($20.00) dollars for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed to one each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. All building, fire, electrical, or health inspectors or their designees, in addition to the police department, shall be enforcing officers for the provisions of this section. (5/5/97).
18
SECTION 13. TOWN OFFICERS REQUIRED TO TRANSMIT DESCRIPTION OF PAYMENT/FEES
Every officer of the town, whether elected or appointed, shall be required to transmit to the Town Treasurer a list, description and payment of all fees received by any such officer by virtue of his office. The listing, description and payment of such fees shall be transmitted to the Town Treasurer within thirty days of receipt of any such fee by any such officer.
SECTION 14. DIRECTOR OF VETERAN SERVICES
The Director of Veterans’ Services shall be an ex-officio member of all committees concerned with the proper com-memoration of the services of Swampscott Veterans of all wars.
SECTION 15. TOWN EMPLOYEE PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS
Every person to be employed by the town in a position included in the retirement system shall first pass a physical examination before becoming an employee. Such examination shall be to the extent required by the Retirement Board and shall be made by a physician designated by said Board, and the cost of the same shall be paid by the town from the same source from which the compensation of the employees is payable, provided, however, that this shall not apply to persons hired for emergency or temporary purposes.
SECTION 16. TOWN PROPERTY DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS
(a) No real property or interest therein, held in the name of the Town, shall be conveyed, abandoned or otherwise disposed of unless authorized by a two-thirds vote of the Town Meeting.
(b) Notice that a Town Meeting warrant article will propose disposition of town property under section 17. (a) of this by-law shall be published in a newspaper in the local area not less than fourteen days prior to the Town Meeting at which such article shall be acted upon.
(c) The disposition of Town Property under this by-law is governed by the procedures contained in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 30B.
(d) The use of the proceeds resulting from the disposition of Town Property under this by-law is governed by Mas-sachusetts General Laws Chapter 44 section 63.
SECTION 17. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS COMMITTEE
(a) The Town Moderator shall establish and appoint a committee to be known as the Capital Improvement Committee, composed of five (5) voters who are residents of the Town for a term of three (3) years each, the terms of no more than two (2) of which shall expire in any one year. The Town Administrator shall be an ex-officio, non-voting member of the Committee. The Town Moderator may also appoint one other ex-officio non-voting member to the Committee.
19
On or before the first day of July in each year the Moderator shall appoint to the Committee one (1) or two (2) members (as the case may be) to serve until the final adjournment of the Annual Town Meeting in the third year thereafter, and until his/her successor is appointed, who shall serve for the unexpired term of his/her predecessor. If any member of the Committee ceases to be a resident and/or voter of the Town, he/she shall forthwith cease to be a member of the Committee. The Committee shall choose its own officers.
(b) The Committee shall study articles for proposed capital projects and improvements involving major non-recurring tangible assets and projects which 1) are purchased or undertaken at intervals of not less than three (3) years; 2) have a useful life of at least three (3) years and 3) cost over $20,000. All officers, boards, departments, and committees, including the Selectmen and School Committee shall, by December 31 of each year, give to the Committee, on forms prepared by it, information concerning all anticipated projects requiring Town Meeting action during the ensuing six (6) years including all capital improvement article requests for the Annual Town Meeting. The Committee shall consider the relative need, impact, timing and cost of these expenditures and the effect each will have on the financial position of the Town.
No appropriation shall be voted for a capital improvement requested by a department, board or commission, unless the proposed capital improvement has been submitted to the Committee for consideration. The Committee shall report its findings to the Finance Committee as part of the Finance Committee's budget deliberations.
(c) The Committee shall prepare an annual report recommending a Capital Improvement budget for the next fiscal year, and a Capital Improvement Program including recommended capital improvements for the following five fiscal years. The report shall be submitted to the Town Meeting for its consideration and approval. The Board shall submit its approved Capital Budget to the Annual Town Meeting for adoption by the Town, or take any action relative thereto. (Adopted 5/92).
SECTION 18. SUPERINTENDENT OF SCHOOLS AND TOWN ADMINISTRATOR PROVIDE REVENUE AND EXPENSE REPORT
The Superintendent of Schools and the Town Administrator shall provide to the Town Clerk, within 30 days of the end of each quarter, a consolidated year-to-date revenue and expenditure report against budget. The Town Clerk shall make the reports available to Town residents in a manner the Town Clerk deems appropriate. (Adopted 5/06)
20
ARTICLE V
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
SECTION 1. DRIVING ON A SIDEWALK
No person shall drive, wheel, propel or draw along any sidewalk a vehicle, except children's carriages or sleds or carriers used by postal workers in the delivery of mail or snow plowing equipment.
SECTION 2. EXCAVATION OF A PUBLIC STREET OR WAY
No persons except employees in the Department of Public Works in the lawful performance of their duties shall make or cause to be made any excavation in a public street or way, for any purpose whatever, without having first obtained written permission from the Director of Public Works. When an excavation is made in a street for any purpose, the person or persons by whom or for whom such excavation has been made, shall cause a rail or other sufficient fence to be placed so as to enclose such excavation and the dirt, gravel or other material thrown there from, and such fence shall be maintained the whole time that such excavation continues.
Such fence, excavation, and material excavated shall be lighted by a lantern, lanterns or other proper and sufficient light, from the beginning of twilight throughout the whole of every night during the entire time that such excavation or obstruction exists.
SECTION 3. EXCAVATION AND TRENCH SAFETY
For the purposes of complying with, and setting policies relative to, 520 Code of Massachusetts Regulations 14.00, Excavation and Trench Safety, the trench permitting authority for the town will be the Director of Public Works or his designee.
SECTION 4. OBSTRUCTIONS ON PUBLIC STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
(a) No person shall obstruct a public street or sidewalk by placing or causing to be placed therein any article, in-cluding snow, or anything whatsoever and suffer the same to remain in such position, without first having obtained written permission from the Director of Public Works so to do, but nothing herein shall be construed to authorize the issuance of permits for the use of any portion of a highway for business purposes.
21
(b) Tent signs may be placed with the permission of the Selectmen on public sidewalks so as not to obstruct or impede pedestrian traffic and will be promptly removed after the advertised event. These tent signs will be restricted to a size of 30 inches by 28 inches. (5/93)
(c) The owner or any other person having the care of any building or lot of land abutting upon any street or public place within the Town where there is a sidewalk, shall clear sidewalks and any abutting curb cuts or ramps of snow and ice a minimum of 3 feet in width within 24 hours after the snow ceases to fall for residential properties and within 12 hours after the snow ceases to fall for non-residential properties. If the sidewalk becomes covered with ice that cannot be readily removed, the owner shall place sand, salt or similar material on the sidewalk so as to render it safe for pedestrians.… (5/19)
(d) No person shall lay, throw or place or cause to be placed any snow or ice on any portion of any street or sidewalk within the Town, which has been cleared or plowed for travel. No snow shall be plowed across any public way by any private plow to deposit snow from one property to another. No snow shall be deposited in such a way as to obstruct the operation of any fire hydrant, including Fire Department connections to buildings, cisterns and dry hydrants.
(e) This bylaw shall be enforceable through the non-criminal disposition procedure provided for in Article XII of the Town’s General Bylaws, and/or Article XXIV, Administration of Fines for Certain Violations. The penalty for violation shall be:
First offense: warning
Second and subsequent offenses: $50.00
The Swampscott Police Department shall be authorized to enforce this bylaw.
(f) The Board of Selectmen may promulgate regulations to implement this bylaw. Waivers shall be available for disabled, elderly and others with special needs or circumstances as promulgated by the Board of Selectmen.
(g) To the extent that any particular provision of this bylaw is determined to be invalid, such invalidation shall not affect the validity of any other provision.
SECTION 5. REMOVAL OF A VEHICLE IMPEDING SNOW REMOVAL
Any vehicle on a public way in the town interfering with the work of removing or plowing snow, or removing ice there from, may be removed by or under the direction of the Director of Public Works to a public garage or any convenient place. The Director of Public Works shall, within a reasonable time, notify the Chief of Police of the removal of any such vehicle and of the place to which it has been removed and the Chief of Police or his designee shall give like notice to the registered owner of the vehicle. The owner, before being permitted to remove the vehicle, shall establish his right to do so and pay to the town or the keeper of the place of storage, the cost of removal and any storage fees.
SECTION 6. DISORDERLY PERSONS/LOITERING
No person shall behave himself in a disorderly manner, in any street, lane, beach, alley or public place in the town, or near any dwelling house or other building therein; or upon any door step, portico or other projections from any building to the annoyance or disturbance of any person. No person with one or more other persons shall stand or loiter in a
22
group on any sidewalk, in a public street, or in any public place in the town in such manner as to obstruct the free passage of foot travelers or , and may, after a request to move on made by any police officer.
SECTION 7. DISCHARGE OF WATER ONTO SIDEWALKS
No water from any conductor, gutter or pipe, shall be allowed to discharge on any sidewalk in the town in such manner as to flow over the sidewalk. The penalty shall not be less than $50.00 per day.
SECTION 8. DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS
(a) No person shall fire or discharge a gun or firearm on any public street of the town, except to a military exercise or review duly authorized by the military authorities of the Commonwealth, or on such occasion as the Selectmen shall specially permit, or in the lawful defense of his person. This by-law shall not apply to the action of any law enforcement officer in execution of his duties. Any person in violation of this by-law shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200.00 for each such offense.
(b) No person while on private property shall lawfully discharge a firearm without consent of the owner unless the use and discharge of such firearm is for the lawful defense of the life or property of the person so using and discharging such firearm; provided, however, that this by-law shall not apply to the action of any law enforcement officer in the execution of his duties. Any person violating this by-law shall be subject to a fine not less than $200 per offense.
SECTION 9. ARTICLES LEFT ON STREET, WAY OR SIDEWALK OVERNIGHT
No person for any cause, shall leave any wagon, cart, boat, trailer or any unregistered vehicle, wood, coal or other articles in any street, way or sidewalk, and suffer the same to remain over night, without maintaining a sufficient light over or near the same throughout the night.
SECTION 10. DEPOSIT OF TRASH, ETC., ON PUBLIC STREET OR SIDEWALK
No person, unless by leave of the officers of the town having charge of the repairs of highways, shall throw or deposit in any street or on any sidewalk, any ashes, dirt, rubbish or filth of any kind, or any animal or vegetable substance. The penalty shall not be less than $50.00 per day.
SECTION 11. DUMPING IN CATCH BASINS
No person shall put or cause to be put in any catch basin in any roadway or street, any filth, sewage, slops or dirty water. The penalty shall not be less than $50.00 per day.
SECTION 12. TRANSPORTATION OF DIRT, SOIL, ETC.
23
Any vehicle, truck or trailer transporting dirt, soil, sand, small pebbles or stones, leaves, rubbish, debris or gravel on any town way or way to which the public has access, must have the load properly covered.
SECTION 13 GAMES ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
No person shall play at any game in which a ball or puck is used or shoot with bow and arrow or throw stones or other missiles in any street or on any sidewalk within the town.
SECTION 14. DOOR TO DOOR SALES
No person, either by himself or by his employees, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for ser-vices to be furnished or performed in the future, whether such person has, carries or exposes for sale, a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, within the corporate limits of the Town of Swampscott shall do so without first registering his or her name and residence with the Chief of Police, and receiving a record number and identification card from the said Chief of Police and concurrently registering with the Board of Selectmen. Said person shall be subject to the rules and regulations as are established, and as amended from time to time, by the said Board entitled the “Regulations for Hawkers and Peddlers.”
SECTION 15. DOGS
(a) NO DOGS AT LARGE: No person owning, harboring, or having custody and control of a dog shall permit such dog to be at large in the Town of Swampscott, elsewhere than on the premises of the owner, except it be on the premises of another person with the knowledge and assent of such other person.
(b) DUTY TO CONTROL OR RESTRAIN: Any dog elsewhere shall at all times (24 hours a day) be controlled or restrained by any chain or leash and be under the direct control and supervision of its owner or his designee. Violations of this paragraph of the Bylaw shall be subject to a fine of $100 per offense.
(c) DOGS ON PUBLIC BEACHES: Dogs are allowed on public beaches for the purpose of exercise and play only between October 1 and May 20 and the following restrictions apply; Dogs must be accompanied by the owner/keeper at all times. Dogs must be leashed to and from the high-water mark. From the high-water mark to the water's edge dogs may be off the leash, but under direct control and supervision of the owner/keeper. The pooper/scooper by-law will apply to the water's edge. Seeing eye and hearing assist dogs are exempt. The owner/keeper will be responsible for the behavior and actions of the dog. Public safety and the safety and well-being of other dogs will be observed at all times. Harassment of wildlife is forbidden. Any dog deemed a nui-sance, safety or health hazard by the Animal Control Officer will be barred from all public beaches. Any owner/keeper who willfully returns a dog to any public beach for any purpose that has been previously barred will be fined by the Animal Control Officer. Fines established for violation of this by-law are as follows: first offense, $25.00; second and subsequent offense, $50.00. Signs shall be erected on all public beaches of the Town of Swampscott stating “NO DOGS ALLOWED ON BEACHES BETWEEN MAY 20 AND OCTOBER 1”
24
(d) DOGS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY: For all Town-owned properties not addressed in Section (c) of this Bylaw, the Board of Health may enact regulations relating to dogs on Town-owned land, which may include, but are not limited to, restricting or prohibiting dogs on certain properties at certain times; provided, however, that no such prohibition or restriction shall apply to service animals performing tasks for persons with disabilities as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(e) DUTY TO DISPOSE: It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any sidewalk, street, park, public areas or private property of an-other. The Board of Health may enact regulations to effectuate the purposes of this Bylaw. Said regulations may include a schedule of fines for implementing this Section. A copy of said regulations shall be filed with the office of the Town Clerk.
(f) DUTY TO POSSESS MEANS OF REMOVAL: No person who owns, possess or controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, street, park, public area or private property of another without the means of removal of any feces left by such dog.
(g) METHOD OF REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL: For the purposes of this regulation the means of removal shall be any tool, implement or other device carried for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces, unexposed to said person or the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting such feces to a place suitable and regularly reserved for the disposal of human feces or specifically reserved for the disposal of canine feces, and so disposing of said feces.
(h) FINES FOR VIOLATION: Unless otherwise specified herein, fines for violations of this by-law, in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 140, is $50.00 per offense. (2000)
(i) EXEMPTION: This Bylaw shall not apply to service animals performing tasks for persons with disabilities as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act. (5/19)
(j) SEVERABILITY: The provisions of this section are severable and if any of the provisions of this section shall be held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions.
(k) EXCESSIVE BARKING: It shall be unlawful for any dog owner to allow excessive, complaint provoking bark-ing on the part of the dog. Violations of this by-law shall subject the dog owner to a $25.00 for the first offense and a fine of $50.00 for each subsequent offense.
(l) DOG LICENSING FEES: Notwithstanding the provisions of MGLA Chapter 140, Section 137 or any other pro-vision of law to the contrary, the annual fees to be charged by the Town of Swampscott for the issuance of licenses for dogs shall be:
Neutered males or spayed females…………………$10.00
Male or females ……………….........................................$25.00
Kennel License ................................................................$50.00 (2000)
25
Further, should any owner or keeper of a dog fail to license that dog before December 31 (or the first business day after December 31), that owner or keeper shall pay a late fee of $5.00 before obtaining said license, except-ing a dog brought into Town as provided in Section 138 of Chapter 140, MGLA. (5/89) (Amended 5/04)
(m) FINES FOR PICKING UP AND TRANSPORTING UNLICENSED DOGS: A fine of $50.00 per day is established for any owner of an unlicensed dog not accompanied by the owner that has to be picked up by the Animal Control Officer and transported to the animal hospital and/or kennel. (5/93)
SECTION 16. VEHICLE PARKING, PRIVATE WAYS AND PROPERTY
(a) It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park a vehicle so as to block a private way from access for fire apparatus to any building.
(b) It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park a vehicle in any fire lane hereby established and adopted as part of the Town of Swampscott Fire Prevention Code, Section 28.16, said fire lane to be a distance of not less than twenty (20) feet from the curbing of a sidewalk in a shopping center, theater, residential complex, health center, school, and public buildings or similar locations, said lanes to be marked at said locations.
(c) It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park a vehicle in any parking space designated as reserved for vehicles owned and operated by disabled veterans or handicapped persons.
(d) Any object or vehicle blocking or so parked as to obstruct any fire lane, any parking space reserved or designated for disabled veterans or handicapped persons, or any private way in violation of Section (a), (b) or (c) of this by-law may be removed or towed by the town at the expense of the owner and without liability to the town.
(e) Any person whether he be the owner or operator of any vehicle involved in a violation of either Section (a), (b) or (c) of this by-law and for being found guilty by a court having jurisdiction thereof shall be subject to the fine estab-lished by the Board of Selectmen pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws.
(f) Subject to established parking regulations, overnight parking of registered motor vehicles is permitted on all public roads at any time during the year, and overnight parking is permitted in designated off-street public parking areas, but only in accordance with rules to accommodate day-time uses of said off-street parking areas. Except that, any per-mitted parking may be prohibited in accordance with other provisions of these bylaws, when necessary to allow fire and police personnel to carry out their lawful duties; and, during declared snow events.
A snow event is declared when blue lights located throughout the town on street poles are blinking; when notification is sent to all households through the town’s automatic telephone call system; and/or when official announcements are made through major media outlets. The town may remove any vehicle impeding snow removal in accordance with Article V, Section 5 of these bylaws.
SECTION 17. WEAPONS WITH BLADES
No person, except as provided by law, shall carry on his person or have under his control in a vehicle, any saber, sword or weapon of like or similar nature; and knife having any type of blade in excess of 2.5 inches or other object or tool so redesigned, fashioned, prepared or treated that the same may be used to inflict bodily harm or other injury to another, except those persons actually engaged in hunting or fishing or employment which requires the use of a knife with a blade in excess of 2.5 inches, and while going directly to and/or returning directly from such activities.
26
Any person found in the act of violating this section may be arrested without a warrant by any officer authorized to serve criminal process, and shall be punished by a fine of not more than $50 upon conviction.
SECTION 18. TEMPORARY REPAIRS OF PRIVATE WAYS
The Town will make temporary repairs of private ways and such temporary repairs shall be made to the following extent and conditions:
(a) Minor repairs, to include minor paving, patching and regrading for drainage shall be at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.
(b) Repairs must be required by public necessity
(c) Betterment charges shall be assessed for said repairs to be determined by the Director of Public Works
(d) The Town accepts no liability on account of damages caused by such repairs
(e) A cash deposit shall be required for said repairs at the discretion of the Director of Public Works.
SECTION 19. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC
(a) No person shall have in his possession alcoholic beverages as defined in Chapter 138, Section 1 of the Massachu-setts General Laws., on any public playground, public school yard, public beach or public park.
(b) No person shall consume alcoholic beverages as defined above, on any sidewalk, a public way or any way to which the public has the right of access or any place to which the public has access as invitees or license, beach or any town owned property without written approval of the Board or Committee having charge of such premises or property and no person shall have in his or her possession any alcoholic beverage where he or she is a trespasser.
(c) No person other than those employed on the premises, a police officer, a municipal employee in the course of his employment or a person engaged in a proper purpose associated with the property shall drive or operate a motor vehicle as defined in Chapter 90, Section 1 of the Massachusetts General Laws or in any public playground, public school yard, public beach or any town owned property.
(d) Any person found in the act of violating this section may be arrested without a warrant.
27
ARTICLE VI
JUNK DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS AND DEALERS IN SECOND-HAND ARTICLES
SECTION 1. PAWN BROKER LICENSE
No person shall carry on the business of pawnbroker, or dealer in, or keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or second-hand articles in the town, unless he is duly licensed therefore by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 2. LICENSE TO PURCHASE JUNK OR METAL
No person shall engage in buying or collecting junk or old metal or second-hand articles, from place to place within the town unless he is duly licensed therefore by the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 3. PAWN SHOP RECORDS
Every keeper of such shop shall keep a book in which he shall record the time of receiving any article as a pawn or purchasing any article, a description of the same, the name, age and residence of the person from whom and the day and hour when he received or purchased it, and the book shall at all times be open to the inspection of the Board of Selectmen and any person by them respectively authorized to make such inspection including any member of the Swampscott Police Department. The person from whom the article is received or purchased shall be photographed and that photograph shall be retained in said record book. At the time of the transaction positive identification shall be required in the form of a picture identification card issued by a government agency. Keeping a photocopy of that picture identification with the record of the transaction shall satisfy the requirement that a photograph be retained. A legible and correct list containing an accurate description, including all distinguishable marks and numbers of all articles taken in shall be delivered to the Chief of Police or his designee every month on the first business day before lO:OO a.m.
SECTION 4. WAITING PERIOD FOR SALE OF ARTICLES
No article received as a result of barter or purchase shall be sold until a period of at least two weeks from the date of purchase or receipt of the same shall have elapsed. Articles deposited in pawn with a licensed pawnbroker shall, unless redeemed, be retained on the premises for at least four months after the date of deposit after which he may sell the article at public auction, apply the proceeds thereof in satisfaction of the debt or demand and the expense of the notice and sale, and pay any surplus to the person entitled thereto on demand. No such sale of any article deposited in pawn
28
shall be made unless, not less than ten days prior to the sale, written notice of the intended sale shall have been sent by certified mail to the person entitled to payment of any surplus, addressed to his residence as appearing on the records of such pawnbroker. Proof of certified mail shall be kept on file for one year after the date of sale.
SECTION 5. PAWN SHOP PURCHASES FROM MINORS
No keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale, or barter of junk, old metals or second-hand articles, and no junk collector shall directly or indirectly receive by way of barter or exchange, any articles aforesaid, or purchase any said article from any minor, knowing or having reason to believe him to be such.
SECTION 6. INSPECTION OF SHOP AND ARTICLES BY BOARD OF SELECTMEN
Every such shop and all articles of merchandise therein, shall be exhibited to the Board of Selectmen, or to any member of said board, or to any person respectively authorized by said board or any member thereof to examine such shop or articles of merchandise, whenever a demand is made by any of them for such exhibition.
29
ARTICLE VII
CEMETERIES
SECTION 1. MANAGEMENT BY THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
The Department of Public Works shall have the care, superintendence and management of the public cemeteries in the town and may make rules and regulations concerning the same which the Board of Health is not authorized by law to make, and which are not repugnant to any law of the Commonwealth or in contravention of any vote of the town. All moneys raised by the town or appropriated for the care, improvement, or embellishment of said public cemeteries, shall be expended by the Board of Public Works.
SECTION 2. PUBLIC BURIAL SPACE
The Department of Public Works shall keep set apart and reserved, a sufficient portion of the cemetery as a public burial place for the use of the inhabitants of Swampscott, free of charge and may also lay out any portion in said cemetery in suitable lots or other subdivisions for family or other burial places, with all necessary paths and avenues, in conformity with the plans heretofore adopted by the town; may plant and embellish the same with trees, shrubs and flowers, and other rural ornaments; shall keep the said cemetery suitably enclosed by a wall or fence; shall maintain in good repair a receiving tomb, and may cause to be erected such other structures as may be necessary or convenient for the use of the cemetery.
SECTION 3. DEEDS FOR RIGHTS OF BURIAL
The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to grant and convey to any person or persons by deed or certif-icate duly executed in the name of the Town of Swampscott, the sole and exclusive right of a burial, and of erecting tombs, cenotaphs and other monuments in any of the designated lots or subdivisions of the cemetery. Such deeds or certificates shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose in the office of the Town Clerk.
SECTION 4. PERPETUAL CARE FUND
Any funds, moneys, or securities contributed for the use of said cemetery or burial lot therein, shall be paid to the Town Treasurer, unless otherwise provided by law, to be kept by him separate and apart from other funds of the town, and subject to the order of the Department of Public Works. Such proceeds shall be used for no other purpose than the care, improvement and embellishment of said cemetery, and any balance remaining at the end of any financial
30
year over and above the annual expenditures may be invested by the Department of Public Works as a “Perpetual Care Fund”, the income of which shall be applied solely to the care of said cemetery. A detailed account of the receipts and expenditures and of the investments of the fund shall be included in the Annual Report.
SECTION 5. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS DUTIES AND RECORD KEEPING
It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Works to have entire control of the town tomb, and superintend all interments in the cemetery, keeping accurate record of same.
31
ARTICLE VIII
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
SECTION 1. DEPARTMENT OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
There is hereby established a Department of Emergency Management (hereinafter called the "department"). It shall be the function of the department to have charge of emergency management and civil defense as defined in Section 1, Chapter 639, Acts of 1950 and to perform emergency management and civil defense functions as authorized or di-rected by said chapter or by any and all executive orders or general regulations promulgated hereunder, and to exercise any authority delegated to it by the governor under said Chapter 639.
SECTION 2. DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
The department shall be under the direction of an Emergency Management Director (hereinafter called the “director”) who shall be appointed as prescribed by law. The director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, ad-ministration and operation of the department, subject to the direction and control of the appointing authority. The director may, within the limits of the amount appropriated therefore, appoint such experts, clerks and other assistants as the work of the department may require and remove them, and may make such expenditures as may be necessary to execute effectively the purposes of Chapter 639, Acts of 1950.
The director shall also have authority to appoint district coordinators and may accept and may receive, on behalf of the town, services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan, for purposes of emergency management and civil defense, offered by the federal government or any agency or officer thereof or any person, firm or corporation, subject to the terms of the offer and the rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer. The director shall cause appropriate records to be kept of all matters relating to such gifts, grants or loans.
SECTION 3. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ADVISORY COUNCIL
There is hereby established an Emergency Management Advisory Council (hereinafter called the “council”). Said council shall serve without pay and shall consist of the Emergency Management Director, such other department heads and such other persons as the authority appointing said director may deem necessary. Such member of said council as said appointing authority shall designate shall serve as chairman of said council. Said council shall serve subject to the direction and control of the appointing authority and shall advise said appointing authority and the director on matters pertaining to emergency management and civil defense.
32
SECTION 4. POLICE AID TO OTHER CITIES AND TOWNS
The Police Department is hereby authorized to go to aid another city or town at the request of said city or town in the suppression of riots or other forms of violence therein.
SECTION 5. TERMINATION OF BY-LAW
This by-law shall remain in force during the effective period of Chapter 639, Acts of 1950 and any act in amendment or continuation thereof or substitution therefore.
SECTION 6. DEFINITION
All reference to Chapter 639, Acts of 1950, as now in force, shall be applicable to any act or acts in amendment or continuation of or substitution for said Chapter 639.
33
ARTICLE IX
USES OF LAND
SECTION 1. BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATED SITES
The owners of land which has been excavated shall erect barriers or take other suitable measures within five (5) days after the Director of Public Works has notified them in writing that such excavation constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public. Any person violating this by-law shall be subject to the payment to the town of a fine not to exceed $200 for each such offense.
SECTION 2. REMOVAL OF SOIL, LOAM, SAND OR GRAVEL
The removal of soil, loam, sand or gravel from land not in public use in any of the residential districts of the town, as defined and shown on the Town Zoning Map, is prohibited, except in cases of excavation preparatory to immediate construction or alteration of the residential property or, for the removal of less than 600 cubic yards of said materials, upon application to and with express permission from the Building Inspector, subject to appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Any person violating the provisions of this by-law shall be subject to a penalty of payment to the town of a $50.00 fine for the first offense, $100.00 fine for the second offense and $200.00 fine for each subsequent offense.
SECTION 3. TRIMMING OR CUTTING DOWN OF TREES
No person shall be permitted to either cut down or trim any tree which is situated in or within an unaccepted way which is open to public use without first obtaining permission from the Conservation Commission and the Department of Public Works. Any action taken by the Commission and the Department shall be final. (Adopted 5/91)
SECTION 4. THE PRESERVATION OF HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS
(a) INTENT AND PURPOSE
This by-law is enacted for the purpose of preserving and protecting significant buildings within the Town of Swamp-scott that constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, economic, political or social history of the town and to limit the detrimental effect of demolition on the character of the town. Through this bylaw, owners of preferably preserved buildings are encouraged to seek out alternative options that will preserve, rehabilitate or restore such buildings and residents of the town are alerted to impending demolitions of significant buildings. By preserving
34
and protecting significant buildings, streetscapes and neighborhoods, this bylaw promotes the public welfare by mak-ing the town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live and work. To achieve these purposes the Historical Commission is authorized to advise the Building Inspector with respect to demolition permit applications. The issu-ance of demolition permits is regulated as provided by this by-law.
(b) DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this by-law, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below:
1. APPLICANT - Any person or entity who files an application for a building permit involving the demo-lition of a building or structure as further defined herein. If the applicant is not the owner of the premises upon which the building is situated, the owner must indicate on or with the application his/her assent to the filing of the application.
2. APPLICATION - An application for a building permit involving the demolition of a building or structure as defined herein..
3. BOARD OF SURVEY - the board that is ordered to respond under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 143 Section 8, when an owner of a building or structure fail to take action on a notice that the building or structure is unsafe. The board shall consist of the Town Engineer, the Fire Chief, and one disinterested person to be appointed by the Building Inspector.
4. BUILDING - Any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals, or property.
5. BUILDING INSPECTOR - The person occupying the office of Building Inspector or otherwise author-ized to issue demolition permits.
6. BUSINESS DAY - a day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or a recognized municipal or federal holiday.
7. CHAIRPERSON - the head of the Commission, the person performing the functions of the chairperson in the event that no one holds that title, or any other person to whom the chairperson has delegated authority to act according to this ordinance.
8. COMMISSION - The Swampscott Historical Commission or its designee.
9. DEMOLITION - Any act of pulling down, destroying, removing, dismantling or razing a building or any part thereof, including but not necessarily limited to commencing the work of total or substantial destruction with the intent of completion of the same. Demolition shall also include significantly altering the shape of the roof, or removal of significantly integral components of the building or structure such as a turret. For purposes of this section, the term “demolition” shall not include the ordinary maintenance or repair of any building or structure, interior renovations, or removal or demolition of any ancillary portion of a structure such as porches, decks, windows, etc…provided that in the instance of demolition of said ancillary portions for the purpose of repair or replacement, said repair or replacement shall be done using like-kind or better materials which determination shall be made by the Inspector of Build-ings.
35
10. DEMOLITION PERMIT - Any permit issued by the Building Inspector, which authorizes the demoli-tion of a building, as defined herein, excluding a building permit issued solely for the demolition of the interior of a building.
11. FINAL DETERMINATION - a decision made by the Commission in accordance with Section (d) 3.C. of this chapter.
12. INITIAL DETERMINATION - any determination made by the Commission in accordance with Section (d) 3.A. of this chapter.
13. OWNER - the person with legal title to a building or structure. Where the term "owner" is used, it shall include the owner's legally authorized representative.
14. PERSON - a private individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust or society.
15. PREFERABLY PRESERVED - Any significant building which the Commission determines, fol-lowing a' public hearing, that it is in the public interest to be preserved rather than demolished. A pref-erably preserved building is subject to the nine-month demolition delay review period of this bylaw.
16. SIGNIFICANT BUILDING OR STRUCTURE - Any building or structure within the town which is in whole or in part seventy-five years or more old (at the time of the request for the demolition permit) and which:
a. Is-listed on, or is within an area listed on, the National Register of Historic Places; or which is the subject of a pending application for listing on the National Register, or
b. Is or has been designated by the Commission to be eligible as a significant building or structure after a factual finding that the building or structure is either:
i. Importantly associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the broad architectural, cultural, political, economic or social history of the Town of Swampscott or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts; or
ii. Historically or architecturally significant (in terms of period, style, method of building or construction, or association with a reputed architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of buildings or structures, or
iii. Listed in the Swampscott Historical Commission Survey, originally published in 1986, as periodically amended. A copy is available for review at Town Hall and the Swamp-scott Public Library.
and therefore it is in the public interest to be preserved or rehabilitated rather than to be demol-ished. The Commission shall make its determinations using industry standard historical guide-lines whenever applicable.
c. With the exception of a structure which can be classified under 16(a) above additions, out-buildings or other structures relating to the significant building, that are less than 75 years old
36
are exempted from this by-law, with sufficient documented proof of age as determined by the Inspector of Buildings.
In determining the age of a building and/or structure, the Inspector of Buildings shall use the Town Accessors database and/or MACRIS. In instances where there is a discrepancy between the Accessor’s database and MACRIS, MACRIS shall prevail.
17. STRUCTURE - any constructed, erected, or placed material or combination of materials in or upon the ground, excluding sidewalks and paving on streets, driveways, parking areas, and patios.
18. VOLUNTARILY - any act(s) done by design or intention, which is proposed, intended, or not acci-dental.
(c) COMPUTATION OF TIME
For the purposes of computing any period of time regarding the demolition review process, excluding age of the building or structure, the day of the act after which the designated period of time begins to run is excluded: The last day shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or municipal or federal holiday, in which case, the period runs to the next business day.
For the purpose of calculating the age of a building or structure, any point on a calendar year shall be counted as a complete year; e.g.: a building or structure built in June 1930 shall be considered 75 years old on January 1, 2005.
(d) PROCEDURE
1. Upon receipt of permit application, the Building Inspector will immediately date stamp the application. If the Building Inspector can determine with certainty that the building or structure does not meet the criteria in Section 16 in regard to its age, or if the proposed demolition is excluded under Section (b) 9, then the permit may be issued according to current laws.
2. If the building or structure is not excluded under Section (b) 9 and does not meet the Section (b) 16 criteria, then the Inspector shall notify the Historical Commission in writing within seven (7) business days, that he/she has received a demolition permit request, attaching a copy of the application to the notice. The Building Inspector shall also forward copies of the notice to the applicant and the owner (if different).
3. Commission's Determinations
a. Initial Determination: The Commission shall make a written determination of whether the building or structure to be demolished is significant within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the written notice from the Building Inspector , or sixty (60) days after the receipt of the appli-cation by the Building Inspector, which ever shall first occur, and complete the following:
If the Commission determines that the building or structure is not significant, the Com-mission shall so notify the Building Inspector, the applicant, the owner (if different) and the Town Clerk in writing. The applicant shall not be required to take any further action in regard to this Bylaw.
37
If the Commission determines that the building or structure is significant, the Commis-sion shall so notify the Building Inspector, the applicant, the owner (if different) and the Town Clerk of their determination in writing.
If the Commission fails to respond to the Building Inspector's notice within forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice from the Building Inspector, or within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the application by the Building Inspector, which ever shall first occur, the Building Inspector may grant the demolition permit.
b. Public Hearing: The Commission shall hold a public hearing on the initial determination and the application within (45) days of filing the initial determination with the Town Clerk. The Town of Swampscott shall give public notice of the hearing by publishing the time, place and purpose of the hearing in a local newspaper and in a conspicuous place in town hall for a period of not less than seven (7) days prior to the hearing. The Town of Swampscott shall also send notice of the public hearing to applicant and owner (if different), and abutters by certified mail, at least seven (7) days prior to the hearing, as defined in Chapter 40A of Massachusetts General Laws.
The applicant for demolition permit may voluntarily submit to the Commission a demolition plan that may include:
A brief description of the type of building or structure and the reason for the proposed demolition, with supporting data.
A scaled plot plan showing the location of the significant building or structure on the property and with reference to neighboring properties.
Photographs of all elevations of the building or structure in the context of its surround-ings.
c. Final Determination: Within ten (10) days of the close of the public hearing the Commission shall file a written final determination with the Town Clerk. The Commission shall simulta-neously send a copy of the final determination to the Building Inspector and send copies to the applicant and the owner (if different) by certified mail. If the Commission determines that demolition of the significant building or structure would be detrimental to the architectural, cultural, political, economic, or social heritage of the Town, such building or structure shall be considered as preferably preserved. If the Commission determines that the building is not preferably preserved, the Commission shall so notify the Building Inspector and applicant and owner (if different) in writing. The Building Inspector may then issue the demolition permit.
4. If the Commission determines that the building is preferably preserved, the Commission shall notify the Building Inspector and applicant and owner (if different) in writing. No demolition permit may then be issued for a period of nine (9) months from the date of the determination. If the Commission does not so notify the Building Inspector in writing within ten (10) days of the public hearing, the Building Inspector may issue the demolition permit.
Upon a determination by the Commission that any building which is the subject of an application is a pref-erably preserved building, no building permit for new construction or alterations on the premises shall be issued for a period of nine (9) months from the date of the determination. During this period, the applicant is encouraged to locate a purchaser for the building or structure who is willing to preserve, restore or relocate the building or structure.
38
No permit for demolition of a building determined to be a preferably preserved building shall be granted until all approvals necessary for the issuance of a building permit are obtained; including without limitation any necessary zoning variances or special permits, and all appeals from the granting of such approvals must be concluded.
The Building Inspector may issue a demolition permit or a building permit for a preferably preserved build-ing within the nine months if the Commission notifies the Building Inspector in writing that the Commission finds that the intent and purpose of this bylaw is served even with the issuance of the demolition permit or the building permit.
Following the nine-month review period, the Building Inspector may issue the demolition permit.
Prior to the commencement of the demolition process, the property owner shall allow the Commission to make a proper photographic record of the interior and exterior of the building, and allow for salvage of any unique architectural detail that would otherwise be lost during the demolition process.
5. Emergency Demolition and Unsafe Structure
a. Emergency Demolition: If after an inspection, the Building Inspector finds that a building or structure subject to this bylaw is found to pose an immediate threat to public health or safety due to its deteriorated condition and that there is no reasonable alternative to the immediate demolition of the building or structure, then the Building Inspector may issue an emergency demolition permit to the owner of the building or structure. The Building Inspector shall then prepare a report explaining the condition of the building and the basis for his decision, which shall be forwarded to the Commission.
b. Unsafe Structure: In the event that a Board of Survey is convened to consider the condition of a building or structure under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 143, Section 8, the Chair-person shall be notified to accompany the Board during its inspection.
6. Enforcement
a. The Commission and/or the Building Inspector are each specifically authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or equity, including non-criminal disposition in accord-ance with G.L. c.40, §21D and Article XII, Section 2 of the Town By-laws, as they may deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this bylaw or to pre-vent a threatened violation thereof.
b. Anyone who voluntarily demolishes a building or structure without first obtaining a demolition permit in accordance with the provisions of this bylaw shall be subject to a fine of not more than ten percent of the assessed property value. No building permit shall be issued for a period of two years from the date of the demolition on the subject parcel of land or any adjoining parcels of land under common ownership and control unless the building permit is for the faith-ful restoration or unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission.
SECTION 5: HISTORIC DISTRICTS ACT.
39
If any of the provisions of this by-law conflict with the Historic Districts Act, Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40C, that act shall prevail.
SECTION 6: SEVERABILITY
In case any section, paragraph or part of this by-law be for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph, and part shall continue in full force and effect.
SECTION 7: LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT
The Town of Swampscott hereby establishes a Local Historic District, to be administered by an Historic District Commission as provided for under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C, as amended.
A. PURPOSE
The purpose of this By-law is to promote the cultural, economic, educational and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Swampscott through: 1.) the preservation and protection of the distinctive characteristic of buildings and places significant in the history and development of Swampscott; 2.) maintaining and improving the settings of these buildings and places; and 3.) the encouragement of design compatible with buildings existing in the area, so as to continue to maintain the historic center, fishing, cultural, commercial and residential character and other qualities which distinguish the town as a desirable community for its residents and visitors.
B. DEFINITIONS
The terms defined in this section shall be capitalized throughout ”Section 7: Local Historic District.” Where a defined term has not been capitalized, it is intended that the meaning of the term be the same as the meaning ascribed to it in this section unless another meaning is clearly intended by its context. As used in ”Section 7: Local Historic District,” the following terms shall have the following meaning:
ALTERATIONS, TO ALTER
As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an enlargement whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one (1) location or position to another.
BUILDING
A structure enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, built, erected, and framed of a combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals, or property. For the purposes of this definition, "roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering, whether or not permanent in nature.
CERTIFICATE
A Certificate of Appropriateness, a Certificate of Non-Applicability, or a Certificate of Hardship as set forth in this By-law.
COMMISSION
The Historic District Commission as established in this By-law.
40
CONSTRUCTION, TO CONSTRUCT
The act or the fact of building, erecting, installing, enlarging, moving and other similar activities.
DISPLAY AREA
The total surface area of a sign, including all lettering, wording, designs, symbols, background and frame, but not including any support structure, or bracing incidental to the sign. The DISPLAY AREA of an indi-vidual letter sign or irregular shaped sign shall be the area of the smallest rectangle into which the letters or shape will fit. Where sign faces are placed back to back and face in opposite directions, the DISPLAY AREA shall be defined as the area of one face of the sign.
DISTRICT
The Local Historic District as established in this By-law consisting of one or more DISTRICT areas.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE
Such portion of the exterior of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE as is open to view from a public way or ways, including but not limited to architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind and texture of exterior building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other ap-purtenant exterior fixtures.
PERSON AGGRIEVED
The applicant; an owner of adjoining property; an owner of the property within the same DISTRICT area; an owner of property within 100 feet of said DISTRICT area; and any charitable corporations in which one of its purposes is the preservation of historic places, structures, buildings or districts.
SIGNS
Any symbol, design, or device used to identify or advertise any place of business, product, activity or person.
STRUCTURE
A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support or shelter, such as a building, frame-work, retaining wall, tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole, recreational tramway, mast for radio antenna or the like.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE or BUILDING
A BUILDING not to be in existence for a period of more than two years. A STRUCTURE not to be in existence for a period of more than one year. The COMMISSION may further limit the time periods set forth herein as it deems appropriate.
C. DISTRICT
The DISTRICT shall consist of one or more DISTRICT areas as listed in “4.8.13.0. Appendices” of this By-law.
D. COMMISSION
1. The DISTRICT shall be overseen by a COMMISSION consisting of five members, to be ap-pointed by the Board of Selectmen, one member initially appointed for one year, two for two years, two for three years, and each successive appointment to be made for three years.
2. The COMMISSION shall include among its members, if possible, one member from two nomi-nees solicited from the Swampscott Historical Society, one member from two nominees solicited from the chapter of the American Institute of Architects covering Swampscott, and one property
41
owner from within the DISTRICT areas. If within thirty days after submission of a written re-quest for nominees to any of the organizations herein named insufficient nominations have been made, the Board of Selectmen may proceed to make appointments as it desires.
3. The Board of Selectmen may appoint up to two alternate members to the COMMISSION. Each alternate member shall have the right to act and vote in the place of one regular member should such regular member be absent from a meeting or be unwilling or unable to act or vote. Said alternate members shall initially be appointed for terms of two or three years, and for three year terms thereafter.
4. Each member and alternate member shall continue to serve in office after the expiration date of his or her term until a successor is duly appointed.
5. Meetings of the COMMISSION shall be held at the call of the Chairman, at the request of two members and in such other manner as the COMMISSION shall determine it its Rules and Regu-lations.
6. Three members of the COMMISSION shall constitute a quorum.
E. COMMISSION POWERS AND DUTIES
1. The COMMISSION shall exercise its powers in administering and regulating the CONSTRUC-TION and ALTERATION of any STRUCTURES or BUILDINGS within the DISTRICT as set forth under the procedures and criteria established in this By-law. In exercising its powers and duties hereunder, the COMMISSION shall pay due regard to the distinctive characteristics of each BUILDING, STRUCTURE and DISTRICT area.
2. The COMMISSION may adopt, and from time to time amend, reasonable Rules and Regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this By-law or M.G.L. Chapter 40C, setting forth such forms and procedures as it deems desirable and necessary for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business, including requirements for the contents and form of applications for CERTIFICATES, fees, hearing procedures, and other matters. The COMMISSION shall file a copy of any such Rules and Regulations with the office of the Town Clerk.
3. The COMMISSION, after a public hearing duly posted and advertised at least 14 days in advance in a conspicuous place at Town Hall and in a newspaper of general circulation, may adopt and from time to time amend guidelines which set forth the designs for certain EXTERIOR ARCHI-TECTURAL FEATURES which are, in general, suitable for the issuance of a CERTIFICATE. No such design guidelines shall limit the right of an applicant for a CERTIFICATE to present other designs to the COMMISSION for approval.
42
4. The COMMISSION shall within 30 days of the beginning of each fiscal year hold an organiza-tional meeting and elect a Chairman, a Vice Chairman and Secretary, and file notice of such election with the office of the Town Clerk.
5. The COMMISSION shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions, decisions and determinations and of the vote of each member participating therein.
6. The COMMISSION shall undertake educational efforts to explain to the public and property owners the merits and functions of a DISTRICT.
F. ALTERATIONS AND CONSTRUCTION PROHIBITED WITHOUT A CERTIFICATE
1. Except as this By-law provides, no BUILDING or STRUCTURE or part thereof within a DIS-TRICT shall be CONSTRUCTED or ALTERED in any way that affects the EXTERIOR AR-CHITECTURAL FEATURES as visible from a public way, unless the COMMISSION shall first have issued a CERTIFICATE with respect to such CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION.
2. No building permit for CONSTRUCTION of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE or for ALTERA-TION of an EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE within a DISTRICT and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE within a DISTRICT shall be issued by the Town or any department thereof until a CERTIFICATE as required under this By-law has been issued by the COMMISSION.
G. PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS
1. Any person who desires to obtain a CERTIFICATE from the COMMISSION shall file with the COMMISSION an application for a CERTIFICATE of Appropriateness, of Non-Applicability or of Hardship, as the case may be. Seven (7) copies of the application packages shall be filed with the Town Clerk; one for the Town Clerk, one for the Building Department, and five for the COMMISSION. Applications shall be in the form specified by the COMMISSION, which may include plans and elevations signed by an architect or draftsman, drawn to scale, detailed enough to show architectural design of the structure and its relation to the existing building, and other materials deemed necessary by the COMMISSION. Plot and site plans should be filed when application for CERTIFICATES are made for improvements affecting appearances, such as walls, fences, steps and paving. In the case of demolition or removal, the application must in-clude a statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter.
2. The COMMISSION shall determine within fourteen (14) days of the filing of an application for the CERTIFICATE whether said application involves any EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES which are within the jurisdiction of the COMMISSION.
43
3. If the COMMISSION determines that an application for a CERTIFICATE does not involve any EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES, or involves an EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE which is not subject to review by the COMMISSION under the provisions of this Bylaw, the COMMISSION shall forthwith issue a CERTIFICATE of Non-Applicability.
4. If the COMMISSION determines that such application involves any EXTERIOR ARCHITEC-TURAL FEATURE subject to review under this By-law, it shall hold a public hearing on the application, except as may otherwise be provided in this By-law. The COMMISSION shall hold such a public hearing within forty-five (45) days from the date of the filing of the application. At least fourteen (14) days before said public hearing, public notice shall be given by posting in a conspicuous place at Town Hall. Such notice shall identify the time, place and purpose of the public hearing. Concurrently, a copy of said public notice shall be mailed to the applicant, to the owner of the property under consideration if different from applicant, to the owners of all adjoin-ing properties and of other properties deemed by the COMMISSION to be materially affected thereby, all as they appear on the most recent applicable tax list, to the Planning Board, to any person filing a written request for notice of hearings, such request to be renewed yearly in De-cember, and to such other persons as the COMMISSION shall deem entitled to notice.
1. A public hearing on an application for a CERTIFICATE need not be held if such hearing is waived in writing by all persons entitled to notice thereof. In addition, a public hear-ing on an application for a CERTIFICATE may be waived by the COMMISSION if the COMMISSION determines that the EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE in-volved, or its category, is so insubstantial in its effect on the DISTRICT that it may be reviewed by the COMMISSION without a public hearing. If the COMMISSION dis-penses with a public hearing on an application for a CERTIFICATE, notice of such application shall be given to the owners of all adjoining property and of other property deemed by the COMMISSION to be materially affected thereby as above provided, and ten (10) days shall elapse after the mailing of such notice before the COMMISSION may act upon such application.
5. Within sixty (60) days after the filing of an application for a CERTIFICATE, or within such further time as the applicant may allow in writing, the COMMISSION shall issue a CERTIFI-CATE or disapproval. In the case of a disapproval of an application for a CERTIFICATE, the COMMISSION shall set forth in its disapproval the reasons for such disapproval. The COM-MISSION may include in its disapproval specific recommendations for changes in the applicant’s proposal with respect to the appropriateness of design, arrangement, texture, material and similar features which, if made and filed with the COMMISSION in a subsequent application, would make the application acceptable to the COMMISSION.
6. The concurring vote of a majority of the members shall be required to issue a CERTIFICATE.
44
7. In issuing CERTIFICATES, the COMMISSION may, as it deems appropriate, impose certain conditions and limitations, and may require architectural or plan modifications consistent with the intent and purpose of this By-law.
8. If the COMMISSION determines that the CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION for which an application for a CERTIFICATE of Appropriateness has been filed will be appropriate for or compatible with the preservation or protection of the DISTRICT, the COMMISSION shall issue a CERTIFICATE of Appropriateness.
9. If the CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION for which an application for a CERTIFICATE of Appropriateness has been filed shall be determined to be inappropriate and therefore disap-proved, or in the event of an application for a CERTIFICATE of Hardship, the COMMISSION shall determine whether, owing to conditions especially affecting the BUILDING or STRUC-TURE involved, but not affecting the DISTRICT generally, failure to approve an application will involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant and whether such applica-tion may be approved without substantial detriment to the public welfare and without substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this By-law. If the COMMISSION determines that owing to such conditions failure to approve an application will involve substantial hardship to the applicant and approval thereof may be without such substantial detriment or derogation, the COMMISSION shall issue a CERTIFICATE of Hardship.
10. The COMMISSION shall send a copy of its CERTIFICATES and disapprovals to the applicant and shall file a copy of its CERTIFICATES and disapprovals with the office of the Town Clerk and the Inspector of Buildings. The date of issuance of a CERTIFICATE or disapproval shall be the date of the filing of a copy of such CERTIFICATE or disapproval with the office of the Town Clerk.
11. If the COMMISSION should fail to issue a CERTIFICATE or a disapproval within sixty (60) days of the filing of the application for a CERTIFICATE, or within such further time as the applicant may allow in writing, the COMMISSION shall thereupon issue a CERTIFICATE of Hardship Due to Failure to Act.
12. Each CERTIFICATE issued by the COMMISSION shall be dated and signed by its chairman or such other person designated by the COMMISSION to sign such CERTIFICATES on its behalf.
13. A PERSON AGGRIEVED by a determination of the COMMISSION may, within twenty (20) days of the issuance of a CERTIFICATE or disapproval, file a written request with the COM-MISSION for a review by a person or persons of competence and experience in such matters,
45
acting as arbitrator and designated by the regional planning agency, the Metropolitan Area Plan-ning Council. The finding of the person or persons making such review shall be filed with the Town Clerk within forty-five (45) days after the request, and shall be binding on the applicant and the COMMISSION, unless a further appeal is sought in the Superior Court as provided in Chapter 40C, Section 12A. The filing of such further appeal shall occur within twenty (20) days after the finding of the arbitrator has been filed with the office of the Town Clerk.
14. A PERSON AGGRIEVED by a determination of the COMMISSION who does not request a review under Section G (13) may, within twenty days after the filing of the notice of such deter-mination with the Town Clerk, appeal to the Superior Court, as provided in Chapter 40C, Section 12A.
H. CRITERIA FOR DETERMINATIONS
1. In deliberating on applications for CERTIFICATES, the COMMISSION shall consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and significance of the site, BUILDING or STRUCTURE; the general design, proportions, detailing, mass, arrangement, texture, and mate-rial of the EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES involved; and the relation of such EX-TERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES to similar features of BUILDINGS and STRUC-TURES in the surrounding area.
2. In the case of new CONSTRUCTION or additions to existing buildings or STRUCTURES, the COMMISSION shall consider the appropriateness of the scale, shape and proportions of the BUILDING or STRUCTURE both in relation to the land area upon which the BUILDING or STRUCTRE is situated and in relation to BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES in the vicinity. The COMMISSION may in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements in ad-dition to those required by applicable statute or bylaw.
3. When ruling on applications for CERTIFICATES on solar energy systems as defined in Section IA of Chapter 40A, the COMMISSION shall consider the policy of the Commonwealth of Mas-sachusetts to encourage the use of solar energy systems and to protect solar access.
4. The COMMISSION shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject to public view from a public way.
I. EXCLUSIONS
1. The COMMISSION shall exclude from its purview the following:
1. TEMPORARY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, or SIGNS subject, however, to condi-tions pertaining to the duration of existence and use, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the COMMISSION may reasonably specify.
46
2. Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar STRUCTURES, provided that any such STRUCTURE is substantially at grade level.
3. Flagpoles, sculpture, mailboxes (freestanding or attached), window boxes, house num-bers, and garden furniture.
4. Storm windows and storm doors, screen windows and screen doors, and window air conditioners.
5. The color of paint.
6. The color of materials used on roofs.
7. Signs of not more than two (2) square feet in DISPLAY AREA in connection with use of a residence for a customary home occupation or for professional purposes, provided only one such sign is displayed in connection with each residence and if illuminated is illuminated only indirectly; and one sign in connection with the nonresidential use of each BUILDING or STRUCTURE which is not more than six (6) square feet in DIS-PLAY AREA, consists of letters painted on wood without symbol or trademark and if illuminated is illuminated indirectly.
8. Landscaping with plants, trees, shrubs or other vegetation.
9. Photovoltaic (PV) Solar Panels.
2. Upon request the COMMISSION shall issue a CERTIFICATE of Non-Applicability with respect to CONSTRUCTION or alteration in any category not subject to review by the COMMISSION in accordance with the above provisions.
3. Nothing in this By-law shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or replace-ment of any EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE within a DISTRICT which does not involve a change in design, material or the outward appearance thereof, nor to prevent landscap-ing with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of requirements certified
47
by a duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous condition, nor construed to prevent any CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION under a permit duly issued prior to the effective date of this By-law.
J. CATEGORICAL APPROVAL
The COMMISSION may determine from time to time after a public hearing, duly advertised and posted at least four-teen (14) days in advance in a conspicuous place at Town Hall, that certain categories of EXTERIOR ARCHITEC-TURAL FEATURES, STRUCTURES or BUILDING under certain conditions may be CONSTRUCTED or AL-TERED without review by the COMMISSION without causing substantial derogation from the intent and purpose of this By-law.
K. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
1. The COMMISSION shall determine whether a particular activity is in violation of this By-law or not, and the COMMISSION shall be charged with the enforcement of this By-law.
2. The COMMISSION, upon a written complaint of any resident of Swampscott, or owner of prop-erty within Swampscott, or upon its own initiative, shall institute any appropriate action or pro-ceedings in the name of the Town of Swampscott to prevent, correct, restrain or abate violation of this By-law. In the case where the COMMISSION is requested in writing to enforce this By-law against any person allegedly in violation of same and the COMMISSION declines to act, the COMMISSION shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such enforcement of any action or refusal to act and the reasons therefore, within twenty one (21) days of receipt of such request.
3. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this By-law shall be punishable by a fine of up to $300.00 for each offense. Each day during any portion of which such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
4. The COMMISSION may designate the Inspector of Buildings of the Town of Swampscott to act on its behalf and to enforce this By-law under the direction of the COMMISSION.
L. VALIDITY AND SEPARABILITY
The provisions of this By-law shall be deemed to be separable. If any of its provisions, sections, subsections, sentences or clauses shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this By-law shall continue to be in full force and effect.
M. APPENDICES
Appendix 1:
Frederick Law Olmsted Local Historic District
The Frederick Law Olmsted Local Historic District shall be a DISTRICT area under this By-law. The loca-tion and boundaries of the Frederick Law Olmsted Local Historic District are defined and shown on the “Local Historic District Map of the Town of Swampscott,” on file with the Town Clerk. The delineation of
48
the DISTRICT area boundaries is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein, except as amended
Appendix 2:
Swampscott Fish House Local Historic District
The Swampscott Fish House Local Historic District shall be a DISTRICT area under this By-law. The loca-tion and boundaries of the Swampscott Fish House Local Historic District are defined and shown on the “Local Historic District Map of the Town of Swampscott,” on file with the Town Clerk. The delineation of the DISTRICT area boundaries is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein, except as amended.
Appendix 3:
Swampscott Railroad Depot Local Historic District
The Swampscott Railroad Depot Local Historic District shall be a DISTRICT area under this By-law. The location and boundaries of the Swampscott Railroad Depot Local Historic District are defined and shown on the “Local Historic District Map of the Town of Swampscott,” on file with the Town Clerk. The delineation of the DISTRICT area boundaries is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein, except as amended.
Appendix 4:
Swampscott Cemetery and Andrews Chapel Local Historic District
The Swampscott Cemetery and Andrews Chapel Local Historic District shall be a DISTRICT area under this Bylaw. The location and boundaries of the Swampscott Cemetery and Andrews Chapel Local Historic Dis-trict are defined and shown on the “Local Historic District Map of the Town of Swampscott,” on file with the Town Clerk. The delineation of the DISTRICT area boundaries is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein, except as amended. (5/5/14 ATM)
49
ARTICLE X
GAS INSPECTION AND PERMIT
SECTION 1. RULES AND REGULATIONS
The present Rules and Regulations of the Gas Regulatory Board of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and any amendments thereto shall be the rules and regulations under which the Gas Inspector will operate.
SECTION 2. PERMITS FROM GAS INSPECTOR
All gas fitters installing gas appliances and piping in the Town of Swampscott must obtain a permit from the Gas Inspector before commencement of work, except in those instances where gas heated plumbing fixtures or appliances are installed by the same plumber who installs gas piping.
50
ARTICLE XI
DANCE
No owner, lessor, or other person in charge of a building shall allow a dance to be held in which the public is invited and admission is charged unless a permit is issued by the Board of Selectmen.
51
ARTICLE XII
NON-CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT OF BY-LAWS AND REGULATIONS
SECTION 1. NON-CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT OF HEALTH, FIRE AND BUILD-ING REGULATIONS
The Board of Health and/or Health Officer, the Office of Inspector of Buildings and/or the Building Inspector and the Fire Department and/or the Fire Chief or their respective designees are authorized to enforce Chapter 40 Section 21D of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Whoever violates any provision of the Swampscott Board of Health and Regulations may, at the discretion of the Board of Health and/or Health Officer, and the same for the Building Department or Fire Department be penalized by a Non-Criminal Complaint in the District Court pursuant to the provisions of the General Laws Chapter 40 Section 21D.
The fines shall be the same as the fines set by state statute, state codes and those regulations established by the Board of Health for criminal violations or take any action thereto. Nothing in this section shall serve to waive the town's right to enforce the by-laws by criminal enforcement (5/94).
SECTION 2. NON-CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT OF THE BY-LAWS
Non-Criminal Enforcement of the General By-Laws not set out in Section 1 above shall be as follows: The Board of Selectmen or their respective designee, or any police officer of the Town, is authorized to enforce said by-laws pur-suant to MGL Chapter 40, Section 21D. Whoever violates any provision of the Swampscott By-Laws may, at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen or their respective designee, or any police officer of the Town, be penalized by a non-criminal disposition pursuant to the MGL Chapter 40 Section 21D. The fines shall be the same as the fines set by the by-laws, or by state statute, state codes and those regulations established by the town for criminal violations. This by-law shall not apply to state statutes, state codes or regulations which provide for range of fines. Nothing in this section shall serve to waive the town's right to enforce the by-laws by criminal enforcement. (5/6/98). (5/4/09)
52
ARTICLE XIII
EARTH REMOVAL
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS
(a) For the purposes of this by-law, “Earth Removal” shall include the removal off site of any form of soil, including without limitation, sod, loam, peat, humus, clay, sand, stone, gravel, rock, and ledge.
(b) For the purpose of this by-law, “Board” shall mean Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 2. EXEMPTIONS
(a) Notwithstanding the provisions hereof, no permit shall be required for the removal of earth from:
1. Any parcel in connection with the lawful construction of a residential building of up to three residential units or structure thereon or the lawful construction of a driveway or sidewalk incidental to any such building or structure, provided that the quantity of material removed does not exceed that actually displaced by the portion of building, structure, driveway or sidewalk below finished grade.
SECTION 3. EARTH REMOVAL PROCEDURE
(a) Permit Required - The removal of more than 600 cubic yards of earth from any parcel of land shall, except as herein provided, be allowed only in accordance with a written permit issued by the Board. The Board may grant a permit for such removal and for structures accessory thereto in accordance with the procedure set forth herein. Any permit granted hereunder shall lapse within six (6) months if substantial use has not sooner commenced, except for good cause shown to the Board. No permit for removal shall be granted unless the Board finds that such removal (subject to the conditions imposed by the permit) will not be contrary to the best interests of the Town; and no removal operations subsequently undertaken under such permit shall continue if contrary to such interests. Removal of earth material shall be considered contrary to the best interest of the Town if it will:
1. Be injurious or dangerous to the public health or safety;
2. Produce noise, vibration, dust or other effects in amounts which are unreasonable, detrimental or otherwise interfere with the normal use of adjacent property or otherwise creates a nuisance;
3. Have a material adverse effect on the health, safety or overall quality of life for the inhabitants of the Town;
53
4. Have an adverse effect on natural resources, including but not limited to, the recharge of the water table or condition of the groundwater, surface water, or wetlands; or otherwise results in noncompliance with ap-plicable federal, state, or local environmental laws or regulations, including the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act;
5. Cause excessive traffic congestion or damage to roadways.
(b) Application for Permit - Any person wishing to remove more than 600 cubic yards of earth from a property shall file a formal application with the Board, which application shall include the following specific information and sup-porting documentation:
1. The location of the proposed excavation;
2. The legal name and address of the owner of the property involved;
3. The legal name and address of the petitioner, which address shall be used by the Board for all correspond-ence hereunder;
4. Property lines, names and addresses of all abutting property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property line, including those across any streets;
5. A detailed plan of the land involved, prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer, or a registered surveyor, and acceptable to the Board, at a scale of 1"-20', or as determined appropriate, showing the entire parcel of land based on a perimeter survey and showing existing topography by two (2) contours within one hundred (100) feet of, and including, the site of the proposed excavation or to the property line. This contour plan shall show locations of a sufficient number of test borings made to determine the average depth of top soil before excavation. The plan shall further show the maximum depth that the applicant intends to excavate, the type of material the applicant intends to extract from the land, the manner and depth in which the top soil shall be replaced, and the type of reseeding and planting proposed for use;
6. A detailed plan of the land involved, prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer, or a registered surveyor, and acceptable to the Board, showing two (2) foot contours of the site as of the completion of the excavation project, all drawn to a scale acceptable to the Board;
7. Natural features, including but not limited to, wetlands, the 100-year flood plain, ground cover, and surface and ground water. Water-table elevation shall be determined by test pits and soil borings. A log of soil borings shall be included, taken to the depth of the proposed excavation, congruent with the size and geolog-ical makeup of the site;
8. A topographical map showing drainage facilities, final grades and proposed vegetation and trees;
9. Erosion and sediment-control plan;
10. The amount of proposed restoration materials;
11. The proposed form of performance security to be used;
12. An Integrated Pest Management (IPM) plan in accordance with Section 17; and
13. Copies of the information outlined in the above articles one (1) through twelve (12) shall be filed with the Town Clerk and the Board of Selectmen.
54
SECTION 4. GENERAL LIMITATIONS:
(a) In granting a permit hereunder, the Board shall impose reasonable conditions especially designated to safeguard the neighborhood and the Town and to protect the environment. The permit shall include, but not be limited to, conditions that address the following:
1. method of removal;
2. type and location of structures;
3. fencing;
4. hours of operation;
5. routes for transporting the material through the Town;
6. the duration of the removal operations;
7. the area and depth of excavation;
8. the re-establishment of ground levels and grades;
9. the steepness of slopes excavated;
10. provisions for temporary and permanent drainage;
11. disposition of boulders and tree stumps;
12. grading of slopes and replacement of loam over the area of removal;
13. planting of the area to suitable cover, including trees, necessary to restore the area to usable condition;
14. distance from excavation to street and lot lines;
15. the distance, vegetation and other materials and qualities required to provide adequate buffer for noise, dust, aesthetics and safety from excavation and associated structures, machinery and operation thereof;
16. corrective measures to be taken to restore areas of past removal operations in the case of an application for continuation of an existing removal operation;
17. pollution insurance if appropriate under the circumstances; and
18. an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) plan.
(b) No permit for the removal of earth shall be approved by the Board if the work extends within two hundred (200) feet, measured horizontally, of a way open to public use (whether public or private) or of an adjacent property line, unless the Board is satisfied that such removal will not undermine the way or structure.
(c) Any excavation shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Ace (MGL Chapter 131, Section 40), and the regulations promulgated thereunder at 310 C.M.R. 10.00, and local zoning bylaws, including the Flood Plain and Coastal Flood Area Overlay District regulations in the zoning bylaws.
55
(d) No area shall be excavated so as to cause accumulation of free standing water unless the Board shall, with the approval of the Conversation Commission, permit creation of a pond in an area not used for drinking water. Permanent drainage shall be provided in accordance with good conservation practices. Drainage shall not lead directly into streams or ponds, unless approved by the Conservation Commission and otherwise properly permitted by other regu-lating governmental agencies, and in compliance with applicable federal, state, and local environmental laws, includ-ing the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act.
(e) All top soil and subsoil stripped from operation areas shall be stockpiled and used in restoring the area.
(f) Any temporary shelters or buildings erected on the premise for use by personnel or storage of equipment shall be screened from public view and shall be removed from the premises within sixty (60) days after the permit has expired or been revoked.
(g) Operations shall be conducted during the hours specified by the Board, under the permit, and shall be strictly regulated. No operations are to occur on Sundays or Massachusetts legal holidays unless expressly authorized by the Board. Trucks shall enter and leave the premises only during permitted hours. All trucks shall be suitably covered to prevent dust and contents from spilling and blowing from the load. Trucks shall not be left idling more than five (5) minutes.
(h) Trucking and access routes and methods shall be subject to the approval of the Chief of Police.
(i) All access roads leading to public ways shall be treated with suitable material to reduce dust and mud for a distance of two hundred (200) feet back from the way. The operator shall clean up any spillage on public ways.
(j) Access roads shall not drain onto public ways.
(k) Permits for the removal of earth material shall be issued for a period of not more than one (1) year.
(l) Any permit issued hereunder shall automatically expire upon the completion of the earth removal project for which it was issued, or at such other time as may be specified in such permit. A permit issued hereunder is not transferable and no work under any such permit shall be performed except by the holder thereof, or the contractor.
(m) The Board shall require a surety bond, cash or other adequate security to insure compliance with the terms, conditions, limitations, and safeguards of a permit issued hereunder, and this by-law, and to indemnify the Town for any harm to any well, roadway, or area subject to protection under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and the regulations promulgates thereunder (including streams, ponds, and wetlands) or other resource that is caused by such removal, the removal operations, the equipment used on the premises, or by ancillary activities.
(n) All applicants are required to provide the Town of Swampscott with a hold harmless agreement along with a certificate of insurance subject to the minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000) single limit.
(o) The bond or cash deposit shall be held by the Town Treasurer for one (1) year after termination of the project or until all conditions as required by the permit have been completed to the satisfaction of the Board. If after eighteen (18) months from the issuance of the permit all conditions as required by the permit have not been completed, (espe-cially grading and seeding), the Board will use said monies to comply with the originally stated conditions.
(p) No permit issued hereunder shall authorize any activity which is in violation of the Zoning By-Law of the Town.
SECTION 5. SPECIFIC LIMITATIONS
56
No permit for removal of earth or operations accessory thereto shall be approved by the Board except upon the fol-lowing conditions:
a. Regained subsoil and topsoil shall be spread over the disturbed area and treated with appropriate fertilizer or other suitable material and seeded with an appropriate mixture of grass or legume mixture as prescribed by and as determined appropriate by the Board. Trees or shrubs of prescribed species will be planted to provide screening and reduce erosion during the establishment period.
b. Restoration shall be carried on simultaneously with excavation, so that when any five (5) acres has been cleared and stumped and five (5) acres is in active mining operation, at least five (5) acres shall be restored before work commences (including building haul roads) on the next contiguous five (5) acres. Final resto-ration work shall be completed within a reasonable time after expiration or withdrawal of a permit or upon cessation of operations.
c. Only in extreme circumstances and only if additional reasonable safety measures are provided, no slope shall be steeper than 2:1 (two feet horizontal to one foot vertical) (50%); 4:1 (four feet horizontal to one foot vertical) is preferred for erosion control and shall be required in all sensitive areas.
d. Unless the permit conditions expressly require alteration of drainage patterns, the land shall be left so that natural storm drainage shall leave the property at the original nature drainage points; and so that the total discharge at peak flow and the area of drainage at any one point, is not increased.
e. Natural vegetation shall be left and maintained on undisturbed land for screening, safety, noise and dust reduction and erosion control purposes.
SECTION 6. EXISTING OPERATIONS
(a) Earth removal activities in lawful operation at the time this by-law is adopted may continue under the existing terms for a period up to three (3) months only if an application is pending under the terms of this by-law. This period may be extended an additional three (3) months by the Board.
(b) Existing quarry operations are exempt from the provisions of Section 5 of this by-law.
SECTION 7. PERMITS FOR PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS
It is the intention of this by-law that the removal from any parcel of land for which a preliminary or definitive subdi-vision plan has been prepared shall be allowed only in the same manner as removal from other parcels of land in the Town. Consequently, tentative or final approval of a subdivision plan by the Planning Board shall not be construed
57
as authorizing the removal of earth materials from the premises, except that which is to be removed in compliance with the requirements of this by-law. For the purposes of this by-law, the original parcel or parcels from which the subdivision is created shall be considered one.
SECTION 8. NOTICE AND HEARING
No permit for the removal of earth material shall be issued by the Board until a public hearing is held thereon by the Board, due notice of which shall be given by the Board, at the expense of the applicant, at least fourteen (14) days in advance of the public hearing, in a newspaper commonly used for such notices in the community, the posting of copies thereof on municipal bulletin boards, and the mailing of copies thereof to property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the property line, including those across any streets.
SECTION 9. GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
(a) The Board shall exercise the powers and duties hereunder.
(b) The Board or its designee may enter upon the premises involved from time-to-time to inspect and ensure proper conduct of the work.
(c) Upon the petition of the owner, permit holder, abutters, or upon its own initiative, the Board may hold a new hearing and reissue or modify the permit, subject to any conditions not in conflict with this by-law.
(d) The Board may order revocation of, or suspension of, the permit if the conditions established hereunder are not complied with, and the permit holder in such situations shall not be relieved of his obligations hereunder.
SECTION 10. FEES
The Board shall establish such fees for the issuance of permits as it shall find necessary for the administration of this by-law, taking into consideration the costs of clerical, civil engineering consultants, legal and inspection expenses.
SECTION 11. VIOLATIONS
(a) The Board, if it concludes that there has been a violation of this by-law or the conditions of any permit issued hereunder, shall send to the permit holder or other offender, by registered mail to the address stated on the initial application, if an application has been filed, or shall post on the premises if no address can reasonably be ascertained, a notice ordering a cessation of the improper activities.
(b) If a permit holder, or other offender, persists in such violation, in addition to the imposition of penalties as con-tained in the Town’s by-laws, the Board shall seek an injunction through appropriate legal action.
(c) In the event that the permit holder persists in such violations, the Board may notify the permit holder by mail or posting as stated above, of a hearing to be held not less than four (4) days thereafter to show cause why said permit should not be revoked, and following said hearing, may in its discretion, revoke or amend the permit.
58
(d) If a permit holder fails to comply within thirty (30) days of a written notice from the Board of any deviation from the approved operating plan, the Board may take such action as is necessary to correct the deviations. In the event of such an undertaking by the Board, the owner of the land shall reimburse the Town for expenses incurred in connection therewith, and such expenses shall constitute a lien upon the entire tract of land approved in the permitting process. (e) The Board may bring suit in the name of the Town of Swampscott to restrain any violation of or noncompliance with the provisions of these regulations.
SECTION 12. VALIDITY
The invalidity of any section or provision of this by-law shall not invalidate any other section or provisions thereof.
SECTION 13. COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER RULES AND REGULATIONS
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing rules and regulations, the applicant shall comply with all other applicable fed-eral, state, and local laws, regulations, rules and guidelines, including the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act.
SECTION 14. EARTH REMOVAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
The Earth Removal Advisory Committee (hereinafter referred to as the “Committee”) shall be established as follows and have the following powers and duties.
(a) The Committee shall consist of five (5) voting members, all residents of the town. One (1) member shall be chosen annually by the Board of Health. One (1) member shall be chosen annually by, and from, the Planning Board to serve a one-year term. One (1) member shall be chosen by, and from, the Conservation Commission to serve a one-year term. Three (3) members shall be appointed by the Board initially for one-, two-, and three-year terms, respec-tively, and as their terms expire, their successors shall be appointed for terms of three-year terms. The terms of the members appointed by the Board shall begin and end at the Annual Town Meeting nearest to the date of their appoint-ment and the third anniversary thereof, respectively. Any member may be appointed to succeed him- or herself. An excavation engineer shall be appointed as a non-voting member. Two (2) alternate voting members shall be appointed by the Board for terms of three (3) years, or take any action related thereto.
(b) The Committee shall file with the Board a written report, with recommendations, at or within twenty-one (21) days of each hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this by-law, and no such permit may be granted until such report has been filed or until the Committee has allowed twenty-one (21) days to elapse after such hearing without filing a report.
(c) The Committee shall from time to time file such reports relating to earth removal as the Board may require or as the Committee shall deem necessary or desirable.
SECTION 15. RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Board may adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this by-law for conducting its business and otherwise carrying out the purposes of this by-law.
59
SECTION 16. BLASTING
No blasting shall be allowed unless permitted, with conditions imposed, by the Fire Chief and otherwise in conform-ance with federal, state, and local law.
SECTION 17. RODENT CONTROL
(a) INTRODUCTION
1.This policy specifies the minimum rodent control and general pest control requirements that shall be in-cluded in the Integrated Pest Management (IPM) plan submitted in a permit application under Section 3(b) of this Article, and that shall be incorporated into a permit issued under this Article. A copy of the IPM shall be provided to the Swampscott Board of Health Agent.
2. Where appropriate, pest control devices and supplies (e.g., bait stations and traps) shall be used so as to facilitate the management and effectiveness of the pest control program.
3. The IPM plan shall be implemented in such a manner that toxicants or other control tools do not pose a hazard to persons, domestic animals, or non-target wildlife, and in a manner that is consistent with all applicable federal, state, or local environmental or public health laws or regulations, including the Massa-chusetts Wetlands Protection Act.
4. The IPM plan requirements are to be performed prior to demolition, excavation, and site preparation, and throughout the project area, so that rodents and other pests do not disperse from or infest the project area or bordering areas. Accordingly, implementation of the IPM plan shall be initiated no later than two weeks before field mobilization begins for the project or such earlier date as necessary to allow for ade-quate time to achieve control before environmental disruptions.
5. The project contractor or third-party subcontractor shall perform the rodent control tasks described in the IPM plan and shall respond to other pest control needs when directed by the Swampscott Board of Health Agent.
6. The project contractor or sub-contractor shall maintain a cooperative dialogue with Town representatives and owners of neighboring properties throughout the development and implementation of the IPM plan.
7. The IPM plan shall be implemented until the project is completed and all equipment and materials are removed from the site.
(b) QUALIFICATIONS
60
Pest control applicators shall have specific training and experience in rodent control and integrated pest management and shall have a Massachusetts pesticide applicator license or certification.
(c) INSPECTIONS
1. Prior to any rodent baiting, the proposed construction area and accessible or observable bordering areas (including, but not limited to, all embankments, edge areas, and properties within and abutting the con-struction area) shall be inspected and signs of rodent activity and sanitation conditions recorded.
2. Thereafter, and for the duration of the project, the proposed construction area and accessible or observa-ble bordering areas, shall be thoroughly inspected for rodent activity and sanitation deficiencies in ac-cordance with the schedule as specified in the IPM, unless directed by the Swampscott Board of Health Agent to inspect on a different or more frequent schedule.
(d) APPLICATION FOR RODENT CONTROL
1. For surface placement of rodent baits, properly secured and tamper-resistant rodent bait stations and traps consistent with U.S. Environmental Protection Agency regulation shall be used and individually numbered and properly identified.
2. Bait stations and traps shall be installed and secured at all observable rodent burrows and at regular and appropriate intervals and locations. Rodent activity (burrows, droppings, bait consumed, dead rodents) shall be recorded. Bait shall be replenished and bait stations and traps shifted as necessary to ensure complete control of rodent populations. Bait placements shall be inspected on a schedule as specified in the IPM plan, unless directed by the Swampscott Board of Health Agent to inspect on a different or more frequent schedule. Inspection and baiting data shall be used to determine the most effective distribution of baiting locations and bait quantities.
3. For situations involving underground construction/demolition, utility relocation, or utility construction, manholes shall be accessed according to the requirements of appropriate agencies and utility companies. Appropriate baits to control rodent populations in manholes and catch basins shall be placed in all acces-sible manholes and catch basins within the project areas.
(e) CLEANUP
1. Visible rodent carcasses shall be promptly removed and properly disposed of.
2. Upon completion of any pest control operations at the site, all remaining bait and bait stations and traps and other controls shall be removed and properly disposed of.
(f) COMPLAINT CALLS
1. During construction, pest-related complaints from the adjacent neighborhood must be responded to by the project contractor or person designated as responsible for responding to neighborhood complaints as soon as practicable. In responding to any such complaints, if it is determined that there is a relationship between pest infestation and the construction activities, or when directed by the Swampscott Board of
61
Health Agent pesticides or traps, or other appropriate controls or measures shall be used as necessary and appropriate to resolve the complaint.
2. 24-hour contact information shall be provided in the IPM plan for the project contractor or person re-sponsible for responding to neighborhood complaints.
3. Records of all complaints received, including location, contact person, inspection results, and actions taken, shall be created and maintained, as well as whether it was determined that the pest infestation was related to construction activities and, if so, the action taken to resolve the complaint.
(g) RECORD KEEPING
1. Accurate records and data sheets shall be created and maintained setting forth, at a minimum: the loca-tions of areas treated; the number and types of bait stations and traps and other control devices set; the amount of pesticide used; inspections conducted and their findings; information regarding any complaints received as specified in subparagraph(g)(3) above; and an explanation of any changes in pest activity ob-served in the construction area and accessible or observable bordering areas.
2. All such reports and data sheets shall be provided to the Swampscott Board of Health Agent ac-cording to the schedule provided in the IPM plan, but not less than on a monthly basis.
62
ARTICLE XIV
REGISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS
A. Alarm Company is a person or business that sells, provides, monitors, maintains, services, repairs, alters, replaces, moves or installs an alarm system. This includes an individual or business that installs an alarm system for their private or proprietary facilities.
B. Alarm Officer is a designee of the Police Department or Fire Department responsible for administration of the alarm program. The Alarm Officer is charged with the responsibility of reviewing alarm activations, service fee billing, reporting on problematic alarm systems and serving as a resource to the community.
C. Alarm System is a device or series of devices that emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm has been activated and is intended or is likely to result in the summoning of police services or fire services. This does not include an alarm installed in a vehicle unless the vehicle is permanently located at the site.
D. Alarm User is any homeowner, renter, lessee, or other resident and any renter, lessee, or owner of a business or other establishment or building (other than a government facility) who is primarily responsible for an alarm system and/or an activation of the alarm system.
E. Alarm Verification is an alarm that has been independently verified by a third party other than the Police Department or Fire Department confirming that the alarm was activated as the result of a crime or incident requiring the police to investigate.
F. Automatic Voice Dialer is any electronic, mechanical or other device that, when activated, automatically contacts the Police Department or Fire Department by telephone, radio or other means requesting police services through a prerecorded message or other automated system.
G. Cancellation is the notification of the Police Department by the person, who initially requests police response to a non-High Risk Alarm activation, that the situation does not require a police response.
H. Contact Person is one or more individuals, or a private business, that can respond to the alarm location to assist police and fire services to thoroughly inspect the property, secure unlocked doors and windows, deactivate or reset an alarm, and/or take responsibility for protected property.
I. False Burglar Alarm is any alarm where a responding officer(s), having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site, finds no reasonable evidence of a criminal offense. False alarms include avoidable alarms whereby the alarm activation caused by non-criminal behavior could have been avoided with simple preventative measures.
63
J. False Fire Alarm is any alarm where responding firefighters, having completed a timely investigation of the alarm site, find no reasonable evidence of a fire. False alarms include avoidable alarms whereby the alarm activation caused by non-fire behavior could have been avoided with simple preventative measures.
K. Fire Alarm Malfunction(s) include operation of a faulty smoke or heat detection device, a faulty control panel or associated equipment, a water pressure surge in automatic sprinkler equipment, accidental operations of an automatic sprinkler system, an action by an employee of the owner or occupant of the protected premises or a contractor employed by the owner or the occupant, causing accidental activation of the internal fire alarm.
L. High Risk Alarms include panic, duress, silent, robbery, hold-up and/or any similarly labeled alarm that suggests the alarm has been manually activated and a crime is in progress or there is some other life threatening event. High Risk Alarms also include commercial establishments such as gas stations, banks, jewelry stores and/or businesses with cash or valuables commonly victimized by robbery or commercial thefts.
M. Nuisance Alarm is any alarm that activates repeatedly and/or unnecessarily within the same 24-hour period, emits an outside audible that does not reset after 10 minutes, emits an outside audible that sounds more than twice from the same activation, and/or when the Chief of Police or Fire Chief, or a designee, determines the alarm is a nuisance due to a violation(s) of these rules and regulations.
N. Malicious False Alarm is any intentional activation of a fire alarm system not resulting from an actual fire or emergency.
SECTION 2. AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALERS PROHIBITED
Alarm Users shall be prohibited from using, and Alarm Companies shall be prohibited from installing, automatic voice dialers.
SECTION 3. ALARM REGISTRATION
A. Alarm Systems in the Town of Swampscott shall be registered with the appropriate department(s) annually between January 1 and January 15. Any subsequent changes to the registration information shall be reported promptly.
B. Required Information:
1. The address and telephone number of the alarmed property;
2. The resident’s name or business name at the alarmed property;
3. If different, the name, address and telephone number of the person(s) or business responsible for any alarm activation; and
4. The name(s) of a Contact Person(s), able to respond to secure the property or prevent additional False Alarms.
64
C. The Alarm User shall be responsible for ensuring that an Alarm System that is under their control and located within Swampscott is registered with the appropriate department(s).
D. An Alarm Company that monitors an Alarm System located in Swampscott with the purpose of reporting alarm activations to the Police Department or Fire Department may register that alarm on behalf of an Alarm User. If registering ten (10) or more Alarm Systems, the list shall be provided in alphabetical order by name. The Alarm Company shall notify the appropriate department of any new or removed Alarm Systems or when there has been a change to the required registration information.
An Alarm Company shall ensure that each Alarm System monitored by them is properly registered. Without confirmation that an Alarm System is properly registered, Alarm Verification shall be required prior to reporting the alarm activation to the Swampscott Police Department or Fire Department.
E. An Alarm System that is not monitored by an Alarm Company that produces a local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm has been activated and is intended or is likely to result in the summoning of police or fire services shall be required to be registered by the Alarm User.
F. Alarm Registration Fee. The annual fee for registering an alarm is $10 for residential alarms and $25 for commercial alarms.
G. No Registration Required if the residence or business has no local audible, visual or electronic signal that alerts a neighbor or passing person that an alarm has been activated and for other types of alarms where the Alarm User or Alarm Company provides Alarm Verification. In these instances, no False Alarm will be reported to the Police Department or Fire Department.
SECTION 4. DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER
A. An Alarm User shall:
1. Ensure that the alarm is properly registered.
2. Ensure that the Alarm System is properly installed and maintained to minimize or eliminate False Alarms (including equipment that prevents False Alarms during regional power outages and severe storms).
3. Set the Alarm System so that the audible signal sounds for no longer than ten (10) minutes after being activated. The alarm shall be programmed to sound or cycle not more than twice during any single activation. The Alarm User shall not intentionally cause a False Alarm resulting in a public safety response to the alarm site.
B. Alarm User Guidelines
1. If two False Alarms are received in a calendar year, the Alarm System should be inspected, repaired if needed, and/or the Alarm User(s) should receive additional training in the use of the Alarm System.
65
2. Ensure that all persons who may activate the alarm are properly trained in the use of the Alarm System and/or have the means to disarm and rearm the Alarm System without causing a False Alarm.
SECTION 5. DUTIES OF THE ALARM COMPANY
A. An Alarm Company shall:
1. Clearly distinguish High Risk Alarms when reporting alarm activation to the Police Department. High Risk Alarms will be given a high priority public safety response.
2. When reporting an alarm activation, provide, to the extent possible: the nature of the alarm; Alarm User’s name and the address, the address where the alarm was activated, and any other pertinent information that may assist police officers to safely investigate the alarm.
3. Report an alarm Cancellation to the proper public safety department as soon as it is learned that a response is not required. Cancellations received prior to arrival of public safety personnel shall not result in a service fee.
B. Alarm Company Guidelines:
1. The Alarm Company shall install Alarm Systems that meet current industry standards and offer Alarm Users written and oral instructions as to the proper use of the system. The Alarm Company should make regular maintenance, upgrades and remedial training available to the Alarm Users.
SECTION 6. FALSE ALARM SERVICE FEE
A. Residential. An alarm service fee of $60 (sixty dollars) shall be assessed on the third and each subsequent false alarm in a calendar year.
B. Non-Residential and High Risk Alarms. An alarm service fee of $80 (eighty dollars) shall be assessed on the third and each subsequent false alarm in a calendar year.
C. Malicious False Alarm. An alarm service fee of $150 (one hundred and fifty dollars) shall be assessed for the first and subsequent alarms.
D. All False Alarm activations that occur in one calendar day will be counted as one False Alarm.
E. Alarm Users shall be billed once a month for the previous month’s False Alarm activity. All service fees assessed shall be paid to the Town of Swampscott for deposit in the general fund.
If a bill is not paid within thirty (30) days, a second notice will be sent. If the bill is not paid after another thirty-day period, a final notice will be sent informing the owner and/or occupant that court proceedings will commence.
F. When possible, the Police Department shall leave notice of each False Alarm activation at the residence or business of the Alarm User and provide a written letter of warning in response to the second False Alarm.
66
G. Alarm service fees are not subject to appeal. However, the Police Chief or Fire Chief, Alarm Officer or their designees shall accept written documentation that outlines mitigating circumstances for the False Alarms and the measures being taken by the Alarm User to prevent future False Alarms. The Chief of Police or Fire Chief shall be authorized to waive service fees.
H. An Alarm User with five (5) or more alarm service fees, unpaid for a period of six months, will be given a “FINAL” written notice of the fees owed. The Alarm User has fourteen (14) days to make full payment; otherwise the Alarm User is subject to an additional fine.
SECTION 7. CONFIDENTIALITY
The Town recognizes that it is subject to the requirements of the Public Records Law, G.L. c.66, §10. However, in the interest of public safety, it is the intention of the Town, to the extent permitted by law, to maintain confidentially personal information and infrastructure information regarding Alarm Systems including, but not limited to, that specifically identifying the location, operations, or other proprietary information contained in alarm registrations.
SECTION 8. GOVERNMENT IMMUNITY
Alarm System registration is not intended to, nor shall it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed; governmental immunity, as provided by law, is retained. When registering an alarm, the Alarm User and the Alarm Company shall acknowledge that law enforcement or fire services response may be influenced by factors such as, but not limited to: the availability of police units or fire units; priority of calls; weather conditions; traffic conditions; emergency conditions; and staffing levels.
SECTION 9. ENFORCEMENT
Any person who violates any provision of Sections 2, 3, 4A, and 5A of this By-law shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Penalties for violation of this By-law shall be as follows: $50 for the first offense in a calendar year; $100 for the second offense in a calendar year; and $300 for the third and subsequent offenses in a calendar year. No person shall incur penalties in excess of $750 in any one calendar year under this section.
This by-law may be enforced by any means available in law or in equity, including non-criminal disposition in accordance with G.L. c.40, §21D and Article XI, Section 2 of the Town By-laws. In addition to the enforcing authorities identified in said Article, any police officer of the Town or the Fire Chief or his designee shall be authorized to enforce this Bylaw.
1. Appropriation Amount: Not Applicable
2. Funding: Not Applicable
3. Indicate department priority in relation to your requests: Not Applicable
67
4. Justification Narrative: Historically a very small minority of alarm activations involve criminal conduct. This proposed bylaw is an effort to provide some regulatory oversight in the interests of public safety. The by-law provides a more stringent policy for repeated, false burglar and/or fire alarms. (5/4/09ATM)
68
ARTICLE XV
PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF MARIJUANA OR TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in G.L. c. 94C, § 1, as amended) while in or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway, stairs, bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing, public building, schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any other area owned by or under the control of the Town; or in or upon any bus or other passenger conveyance operated by a common carrier; or in any place accessible to the public.
Any person smoking, ingesting or otherwise using or consuming marijuana or tetrahydrocannabinol in violation of Section 1 of this bylaw shall provide to a police officer so requesting personal identifying information, including their full legal name and address. Failure to provide such identifying information upon request, or provision of false, incorrect or otherwise invalid identifying information, shall be considered a separate violation of this bylaw, and any fine imposed shall be in addition to that imposed for violation of the first paragraph of this bylaw.
This by-law may be enforced through any lawful means and in law or in equity including, but not limited to, non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c. 40, § 21D, by the Board of Selectmen, the Town Administrator, or their duly authorized agents, or any police officer. Any penalty imposed under this by-law shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed under G.L. c. 94C, § 32L.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this bylaw is for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph and part shall continue in full force and effect. (5/4/09ATM)
69
ARTICLE XVI
STRETCH ENERGY CODE
SECTION 1. ADOPTION
The Town of Swampscott has adopted the provisions of 780 CMR 120.AA (i.e., Appendix 120.AA of the State Build-ing Code or the “Stretch Energy Code”), as may be amended from time to time, in place of the provisions set forth under 780 CMR 13.00, 34.00, 61.00 and 93.00.
SECTION 2. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code shall be to provide the Town with a more energy efficient alternative to the base energy code otherwise set forth under the State Building Code. (5/3/10ATM)
70
ARTICLE XVII
CIVIL FINGERPRINTING FOR CERTAIN LICENSE APPLICANTS
By-law requires the Police Department to conduct state and national fingerprint based criminal history checks for individuals applying for specified licenses, and further authorizes the Board of Selectmen, in consultation with the Chief of Police, to adopt appropriate policies and procedures to effectuate the purposes of the by-law, or take any other action relative thereto:
Civil Fingerprinting for Certain License Applications
1. In accordance with the provisions of G.L. c.6, §172BY2, the Police Department shall, fingerprint the per-sons listed below and conduct state and national fingerprint-based criminal history checks for such indi-viduals. To carry out these criminal history checks, the Police Department shall be authorized to utilize Federal Bureau of Investigation records; provided, however, that such records shall not be disseminated to unauthorized entities and shall be maintained and disclosed in accordance with law. The licensing authority is hereby authorized to deny an application for any license specified herein, in-cluding renewals and transfers thereof, from any person who is determined unfit for the license due to in-formation obtained pursuant to this by-law. Factors that shall be considered in making a determination of fitness shall include but not be limited to whether the record subject has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for a crime that bears upon the subject's ability or fitness to serve in that capacity, in-cluding any felony or a misdemeanor that involved force or threat of force, possession of a controlled sub-stance, or a sex-related offense.
2. All applicants for Hawkers and Peddlers, Door-to-Door Sales, Pawn Broker, Dealers of Second Hand Ar-ticles, Ice Cream Truck Vendor, Taxi and Livery licenses, and for any license to sell alcoholic beverages, including the "responsible manager" listed on the license application, shall be subject to the requirements of this by-law.
3. The Board of Selectmen, in consultation with the Chief of Police, shall promulgate regulations for the im-plementation of this by-law, which may include, but shall not be limited to: establishment of submission deadlines; procedures for making recommendations to the licensing authority or making a licensing deci-sion as a result of such criminal history check; procedures for accessing, correcting or amending any such record; criteria for fitness determinations in addition to those set forth in Section 1 of this by-law; and penalties for failure to comply with this by-law.
71
4. The Police Department shall charge a fee of one hundred dollars ($1 00.00) for each fingerprinting and criminal history check. A portion of the fee, as specified in G.L. c.6, §1 72B Y2 , shall be deposited into the Firearms Fingerprint Identity Verification Trust Fund, and the remainder of the fee may be retained by the Police Department for costs associated with the administration of the fingerprinting system.
5. This by-law and any regulations adopted hereunder shall be enforceable through any means available at law or in equity, including but not limited to non-criminal disposition under G.L. c.40, §21 D. The Chief of Police or any police officer of the Town of Swampscott shall be an enforcing person for purposes of this by-law. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
6. This by-law shall take effect after compliance with all requirements of G.L. c.40, §32 have been met. (5/7/12 ATM)
72
ARTICLE XVIII
ILLICIT DISCHARGES TO MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of this Bylaw is to eliminate non-stormwater discharges to the Town of Swampscott’s municipal separate storm sewer system. Non-stormwater discharges contain contaminants and supply additional flows to the Town’s storm drain system. Both increased and contaminated stormwater runoff are major causes of:
1. impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater;
2. contamination of drinking water supplies;
3. alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and
4. flooding.
Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system is necessary for the protection of the Town’s natural resources and municipal facilities, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the environment.
The objectives of this Bylaw are:
1. To prevent pollutants from entering the Town’s municipal separate storm sewer system;
2. To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system;
3. To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
73
4. To comply with State and Federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater discharges; and
5. To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Bylaw through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS
For purposes of the administration and enforcement of this Bylaw, the following definitions shall apply:
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY: The Director of the Department of Public Works, and Town employees and/or agents designated by the Director of the Department of Public Works to enforce this Bylaw.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS: The addition from any source of any pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system or into waters of the United States or Common-wealth from any source.
GROUNDWATER: Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance, which allows an illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain system, including without limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether said connection was previously allowed or approved before the effective date of this By-law.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as exempted in Section 8. The term does not include a discharge in compliance with an NPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit or a Surface Water Dis-charge Permit, or resulting from firefighting activities exempted pursuant to Section 8, Subsection (a) of this Bylaw.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material or structure on or above the ground that prevents water infiltrating into the underlying soil. Impervious surface includes without limitation roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks, and roof tops.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or Municipal Storm Drain System: The system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Swampscott.
74
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WA-TER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by United States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts that authorizes and regulates the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE: Discharge to the municipal storm drain system not com-posed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation, agency, au-thority, department or political subdivision of the Commonwealth or the Federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
POINT SOURCE: Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, or container from which pollu-tants are or may be discharged.
POLLUTANT: Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the Commonwealth. Pollutants shall include without limitation:
1. paints, varnishes, and solvents;
2. oil and other automotive fluids;
3. non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
4. refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, accu-mulations and floatables;
5. pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
6. hazardous materials and wastes;
7. sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
75
8. dissolved and particulate metals;
9. animal wastes;
10. rock, sand, salt, soils;
11. construction wastes and residues; and
12. noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
PROCESS WASTEWATER: Water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste product.
RECHARGE: The process by which groundwater is replenished by precipitation through the per-colation of runoff and surface water through the soil.
STORMWATER: Runoff from precipitation or snow melt.
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (“DEP”) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE: Any material, which because of its quan-tity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive char-acteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a pre-sent or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment. Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical, petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and alkali, and any substance defined as Toxic or Hazardous under as defined under G.L. Ch.21C and Ch.21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
WASTEWATER: Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool overflow, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product.
WATERCOURSE: A natural or man-made channel through which water flows or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
76
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH: All waters within the jurisdiction of the Common-wealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, estuar-ies, wetlands, coastal waters, and groundwater.
SECTION 3. APPLICABILITY
This Bylaw shall apply to flows entering the municipally owned storm drainage system.
SECTION 4. AUTHORITY
This Bylaw is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Con-stitution, the Home Rule statutes, and the regulations of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
SECTION 5. RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION
The Enforcement Authority shall administer, implement and enforce this Bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Enforcement Authority may be delegated in writing by the Enforcement Au-thority to employees or agents of the Enforcement Authority, and to other Town officials and employees.
SECTION 6. REGULATIONS
The Enforcement Authority may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this Bylaw. Failure by the Enforcement Authority to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this Bylaw.
SECTION 7. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
a) Illicit Discharges
No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be discharged any pollutant or non-storm water discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4).
b) Illicit Connections
No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any illicit connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applica-ble law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
c) Obstruction of Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
77
No person shall obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of storm water into or out of the MS4 without prior written approval from the Enforcement Authority.
d) Yard Wastes
No person shall dump or dispose of yard waste (leaves, grass clippings, etc.) into the municipal storm drain system, or into catch basins which discharge to the storm drain system.
SECTION 8. EXEMPTIONS
a) Discharges or flows resulting from fire-fighting activities or other authorized hydrant use are ex-empt.
b) The following non-storm water discharges or flows are exempt from the prohibitions of this By-law provided that the source is not a significant contributor of a pollutant to the municipal storm drain system:
1. Waterline flushing;
2. Flow from potable water sources;
3. Springs;
4. Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
5. Diverted stream flow;
6. Rising groundwater;
78
7. Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20), or uncon-taminated pumped groundwater;
8. Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, or air conditioning condensation;
9. Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
10. Water from individual residential car washing;
11. Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one ppm chlorine) pro-vided the water is allowed to stand for one week following last chlorination prior to draining and the pool is drained in such a way as not to cause a nuisance;
12. Discharge from street sweeping;
13. Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the Enforcement Authority prior to the time of the test;
14. Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order administered under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency or DEP, provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of the written approval, waiver, or order and applicable laws and regulations; and
15. Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from the Enforcement Au-thority as necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
SECTION 9. EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM ACCESS
The Enforcement Authority may suspend municipal storm drain system access to any person or property without prior written notice when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge of pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment. In
79
the event any person fails to comply with an emergency suspension order, the Enforcement Authority may take all reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environ-ment.
SECTION 10. NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of or suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in or which may result in discharge of pollutants to the municipal storm drain system or waters of the Commonwealth, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of oil or hazard-ous materials, the person shall immediately notify the Town fire and police departments. In the event of a release of non-hazardous material, the reporting person shall notify the Enforcement Authority no later than the next business day. The reporting person shall provide to the Enforcement Authority written confirma-tion of all telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications within three business days thereafter. If the dis-charge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain on-site a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recur-rence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
SECTION 11. ENFORCEMENT
a) Enforcement
The Enforcement Authority or an authorized agent of the Enforcement Authority shall enforce this Bylaw, regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
b) Entry to Perform Duties
To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the Enforcement Authority may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing its duties under this Bylaw and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Enforcement Authority deems reasonably necessary.
80
c) Civil Relief
If a person violates the provisions of this Bylaw, regulations, permit, notice, or order issued there-under, the Enforcement Authority may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the per-son to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
d) Orders
The Enforcement Authority may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this Bylaw or the regulations thereunder, which may include: (i) elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the MS4; (ii) performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; (iii) that unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; and (iv) remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation of contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate or perform reme-diation within the specified deadline, the Town may, at its option, undertake such work, and ex-penses thereof shall be charged to the violator.
e) Criminal Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this Bylaw, regulation, order or permit issued thereunder, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $300.00 per violation. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
f) Non-Criminal Disposition
As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town may elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in G.L. Ch. 40, §21D and Article XII, Section 2 of the Town Bylaws, in which case the Enforcement Authority shall be the enforcing person. For non-criminal disposition, the penalty for the first violation shall be $100.00, the penalty for the second
81
violation shall be $200.00, and the penalty for the third and subsequent violations shall be $300.00. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
g) Appeals
The decisions or orders of the Enforcement Authority shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
h) Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in this Bylaw are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law.
SECTION 13. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Property owners shall have sixty days from the effective date of the Bylaw to comply with its provisions provided good cause is shown for the failure to comply with the Bylaw during that period.
82
ARTICLE XIX
CONSTRUCTION AND POST-CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
Regulation of discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) is necessary for the protection of the Town’s water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the environment. In-creased and contaminated stormwater runoff associated with developed land uses and the accompanying increase in impervious surface are major causes of impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater. In addition, land disturbances can cause harmful impacts due to soil erosion and sedimentation:
A. Impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater;
B. Contamination of drinking water supplies;
C. Erosion of stream channels;
D. Alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat;
E. Flooding; and
F. Overloading or clogging of municipal catch basins and municipal storm drainage systems.
Therefore, this Construction and Post-Construction Stormwater Management Bylaw (“Bylaw”) establishes stormwater management standards for the final conditions that result from development and redevelopment projects to minimize adverse impacts offsite and downstream which would be born by abutters, townspeo-ple, and the general public. In addition, the Bylaw establishes stormwater management standards for land disturbances that have harmful impacts of soil erosion and sedimentation.
The objectives of the Bylaw are:
83
A. To require practices to control the flow of stormwater from new and redeveloped sites into the municipal storm drainage system in order to prevent flooding and erosion;
B. To protect groundwater and surface water from degradation;
C. To promote groundwater recharge and infiltration;
D. To prevent pollutants from entering the Town’s municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and to minimize discharge of pollutants from the MS4;
E. To ensure adequate long-term operation and maintenance of structural stormwater best manage-ment practices (BMPs) so that they work as designed;
F. To require practices that eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation and control the volume and rate of stormwater runoff resulting from land disturbances;
G. To ensure that soil erosion and sediment control measures and stormwater runoff control practices are incorporated into the site planning and design process and are implemented and maintained;
H. To encourage the use of non-structural stormwater management measures and better site design practices or “low-impact development practices”, such as reducing impervious cover and the preservation of green space and other natural areas, to the maximum extent practicable;
I. To require practices to control waste such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste at the construction site that may cause adverse impacts to water quality;
J. To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater discharges; and
84
K. To establish the Town’s legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Bylaw through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS
The definitions contained herein apply to issuance of a Stormwater Management Permit established by this Bylaw. Terms not defined in this section shall be construed according to their customary and usual meaning unless the context indicates a special or technical meaning.
ABUTTER – The owner(s) of land abutting the activity.
ALTERATION – Any activity that will measurably change the ability of a ground surface area to absorb water or will change existing surface drainage patterns. Alteration may be similarly repre-sented as “alteration of drainage characteristics” and “conducting land disturbance activities”. Such changes include change from distributed runoff to confined discrete discharge, change in the vol-ume of runoff from the area, change in the peak rate of runoff from the area, and change in the recharge to groundwater on the area.
APPLICANT – Any person, individual, partnership, association, firm, company, corporation, trust, authority, agency, department, or political subdivision, of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the Federal government to the extent permitted by law requesting a Stormwater Management Per-mit for proposed land disturbances.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) – Structural, non-structural and managerial tech-niques that are recognized to be the most effective and practical means to prevent and/or reduce increases in stormwater volumes and flows, reduce point source and non-point source pollution, and promote stormwater quality and protection of the environment. “Structural” BMPs are devices that are engineered and constructed to provide temporary storage and treatment of stormwater run-off. “Non-structural” BMPs are natural measures to reduce pollution levels, do not require exten-sive construction efforts, and/or promote pollutant reduction by eliminating the pollutant source.
CLEAN WATER ACT – The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended.
CLEARING – Any activity that removes the vegetative surface cover. Clearing activities generally include grubbing activity as defined below.
DEVELOPMENT – The modification of land to accommodate a new use or expansion of use, usually involving construction.
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS – The addition from any source of any pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drainage system or into the waters of the United States or Commonwealth of Massachusetts from any source.
DISTURBANCE OF LAND – Any action, including clearing and grubbing that causes a change in the position, location, or arrangement of soil, sand, rock, gravel or similar earth material.
85
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY – Town’s authorized agent to enforce construction and post con-struction runoff controls as specified in this Bylaw and the Stormwater Management Rules and Regulations. The Director of Public Works, or his designee, is designated as the Enforcement Authority.
EROSION – The wearing away of the land surface by natural or artificial forces such as wind, water, ice, gravity, or vehicle traffic and the subsequent detachment and transportation of soil par-ticles.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN – A document containing narrative, drawings, and details developed by a Registered Professional Engineer (P.E.) or a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC), which includes BMPs, or equivalent measures designed to control surface runoff, erosion and sedimentation during pre-construction and construction re-lated land disturbances.
GRADING – Changing the level or shape of the ground surface.
GRUBBING – The act of clearing land surface by digging up roots and stumps.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE – Any material or structure on or above the ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. Impervious surface includes but is not limited to roads, paved park-ing lots, sidewalks, and roof tops.
LAND DISTURBANCE – Any action that causes a change in the position, location, or arrangement of soil, sand, rock, gravel, or similar earth material.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) – An approach to environmentally friendly land use plan-ning. It includes a series of landscaping and design techniques intended to maintain the natural, pre-developed ability of a site to manage rainfall. LID techniques capture water on site, filter it through vegetation, and allow seeping into the ground rather than being lost as surface runoff so that the local water table can recharge. An important LID principle embodies the concept that rain-water is a resource and not merely a superfluous waste product.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT POLICY – The Policy issued by the De-partment of Environmental Protection, and as amended, that coordinates the requirements pre-scribed by state regulations promulgated under the authority of the Massachusetts Wetlands Pro-tection Act G.L. c. 131 §. 40 and Massachusetts Clean Waters Act G.L. c. 21, §. 23-56. The Policy addresses stormwater impacts through implementation of performance standards to reduce or pre-vent pollutants from reaching water bodies and control the quantity of runoff from a site. The policy has been incorporated in the Regulations to the Wetlands Protection Act at 310 CMR 10.05(6)(k) through (q).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) OR MUNICIPAL STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM – The system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage channel,
86
reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town.
NON-POINT SOURCE POLLUTION – Pollution from many diffuse sources caused by rainfall or snowmelt moving over and through the ground.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN – A plan describing the functional, financial, and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance of a stormwater manage-ment system to insure that it continues to function as designed.
OWNER – A person with a legal or equitable interest in property.
PERSON – An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation, agency, au-thority, department or political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or agent of such person.
POINT SOURCE – Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, or container from which pollu-tants are or may be discharged.
POLLUTANT – Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Pollutants shall include without limitation:
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
C. Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
D. Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances, accu-mulations and floatables;
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
F. Hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
87
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
H. Animal wastes;
I. Rock, sand, salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues; and
K. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
POST-DEVELOPMENT – Conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract of land. Post-development refers to conditions after culmination of a new development or re-development project and does not depict conditions during the construction phases of a project.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT – The conditions that exist at the time that plans for the land development of a tract of land are submitted to the Enforcement Authority. Where phased development or phased plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads, utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first plan submission shall establish pre-development conditions.
RECHARGE – The process by which groundwater is replenished by precipitation through the per-colation of runoff and surface water through the soil.
REDEVELOPMENT – Development, rehabilitation, expansion, demolition, or phased projects that disturb the ground surface or increase the impervious area on previously developed sites.
RUNOFF – Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
SEDIMENT – Mineral or organic soil material that is transported by wind or water, from its origin to another location; the product of erosion processes.
SEDIMENT CONTROL – Measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site or entering off-site drainage structures.
SEDIMENTATION – The process or act of deposition of sediment.
SITE – Any lot or parcel of land or area of property where land disturbances are, were, or will be performed.
SOIL – Any earth, sand, rock, gravel, or similar material.
88
START OF CONSTRUCTION – The first land-disturbing activity associated with a development, including but not limited to, land preparation such as clearing, grading and filling; installation of streets and walkways; excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations; erection of tempo-rary forms; and installation of accessory buildings.
STORMWATER – Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water runoff and drainage.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN – A plan required as part of the application for a Storm-water Management Permit, that includes structural and non-structural best management practices (BMPs) to manage and treat stormwater runoff generated from regulated development activity. A Stormwater Management Plan also includes an Operation and Maintenance Plan describing mainte-nance requirements for structural BMPs.
STREAM – A body of running water, including brooks, creeks, and other water courses, which moves in a definite channel in the ground due to a hydraulic gradient. A portion of a stream may flow through a culvert or beneath a bridge. A stream’s flow may be intermittent (i.e., does not flow throughout the year), or perennial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS – All waters within the juris-diction of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, costal waters, and groundwater.
WETLANDS – Coastal and freshwater wetlands, including wet meadows, marshes, swamps, and bogs, as defined and determined pursuant to G.L. c. 131, § 40 and 310 CMR 10.00 et seq.
SECTION 3. AUTHORITY
This Bylaw is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Con-stitution, the Home Rule statutes, and pursuant to G.L. c.83, §§ 1, 10, and 16, as amended by St. 2004, c. 149, §§ 135-140, and the regulations of the Federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34
SECTION 4. APPLICABILITY
A. No person shall undertake a construction activity, including clearing, grading, and excavation, that results in a land disturbance equal to or greater than one acre of land, or less than one acre of land but part of a larger common plan of development that will ultimately disturb equal to or greater than one acre of land, without a Stormwater Management Permit from the Enforcement Authority. Construction activity does not include routine maintenance that is performed to maintain the orig-inal line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the site.
B. Exemptions
89
The following activities are exempt from the requirement for a Stormwater Management Permit:
1. Construction activities waived from permit coverage under the NPDES General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Construction Activities;
2. Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as defined by the Wet-lands Protection Act regulation 310 CMR 10.04, whether or not the activity occurs within a wetland resource area;
3. Normal maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas associated with a sin-gle-family dwelling;
4. The construction of fencing that will not substantially alter existing terrain or drainage patterns;
5. Construction, maintenance and operation of utilities other than drainage (gas, water, elec-tric, telephone, etc.) which will not alter terrain or drainage patterns;
6. As authorized in the Phase II Small MS4 General Permit for Massachusetts, stormwater discharges resulting from the activities identified in Section 4-A that are wholly subject to jurisdiction under the Wetlands Protection Act and demonstrate compliance with the Mas-sachusetts Stormwater Management Policy as reflected in an Order of Conditions issued by the Conservation Commission are exempt from compliance with this Bylaw; and
7. Emergency work to protect life, limb, or property.
SECTION 5. ADMINISTRATION
The Enforcement Authority shall administer, implement, and enforce this Bylaw. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Enforcement Authority may be delegated in writing by the Enforcement Au-thority to its employees and agents.
SECTION 6. RULES AND REGULATIONS
90
After public notice and public hearing, the Enforcement Authority may adopt, and periodically amend, rules and regulations relating to the procedures and administration of this Bylaw, including but not limited to content of permit applications, review time periods, permit conditions, additional definitions, and fees. Failure by the Enforcement Authority to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this Bylaw.
SECTION 7. FEE STRUCTURE
The Enforcement Authority by regulation shall promulgate an application fee schedule for Stormwater Management Permit applications and completion certificates. The fee schedule shall be reasonably related to the costs of processing, reviewing and acting upon the application, including review of the application by a professional engineer or other consultant retained by the Enforcement Authority, if it so deems neces-sary, to advise it on technical, legal, economic, or other aspects of the proposed work. The fee specified in such a fee schedule shall be made payable to the Town and shall accompany the permit application or request for certificate of completion. The Enforcement Authority may require an additional fee for review of any change in or alteration from an approved permit.
SECTION 8. WAIVERS
A. The Enforcement Authority may waive strict compliance with any requirement of this Bylaw or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, where such action:
1. is allowed by federal, state and local statutes and/or regulations,
2. is in the public interest, and
3. is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this Bylaw.
B. Any applicant may submit a written request to be granted such a waiver. Such a request shall be accompanied by an explanation or documentation supporting the waiver request and demonstrating that strict application of this Bylaw does not further the purposes or objectives of this Bylaw.
91
SECTION 9. ENFORCEMENT
A. The Enforcement Authority or its authorized agent shall enforce this Bylaw, regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violation.
B. Orders
1. The Enforcement Authority or an authorized agent of the Enforcement Authority may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this Bylaw or the regulations thereunder, which may include requirements to:
a) cease and desist from construction or land disturbance until there is compliance with this Bylaw, or provisions of an approved Stormwater Management Permit;
b) maintain, install, or undertake additional erosion and sediment control measures;
c) repair, maintain, or replace the stormwater management system or portions thereof in accordance with the operation and maintenance plan;
d) perform monitoring, analyses, and reporting; and/or
e) remediate an adverse impact resulting directly or indirectly from malfunction of erosion control measures or the stormwater management system.
2. If the Enforcement Authority or its agent determines that abatement or remediation of ad-verse impacts is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed by the violator or property owner.
C. Criminal Penalty
92
Any person who violates any provision of this Bylaw or regulation, order or permit issued thereun-der, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Non-Criminal Disposition
As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town may elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in MGL c.40, § 21D and Article XII, Section 2 of the Town General By-laws, in which case the Enforcement Authority and its agents shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for the first violation shall be $100. The penalty for the second violation shall be $200. The penalty for the third and subsequent violations shall be $300. Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
E. Appeals
The decisions or orders of the Enforcement Authority shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
F. Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in this Bylaw are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law.
SECTION 10. SEVERABILITY
If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this Bylaw shall be held invalid for any reason by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
93
ARTICLE XX
SWAMPSCOTT AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND
SECTION 1. PURPOSE
The purpose of the Swampscott Affordable Housing Trust Fund (the “Trust”) shall be to provide for the creation and preservation of affordable housing in the Town for the benefit of low and moder-ate-income households.
SECTION 2. BOARD OF TRUSTEES
There shall be a Board of Trustees (the “Board”), comprised of five (5) Trustees who shall be ap-pointed by the Board of Selectmen. At least one (1) of the Trustees shall be a Selectman. The Trus-tees of the Board shall serve for a term of two (2) years, except that two of the initial appointments shall be for a term of one (1) year. The Trustees may be reappointed by the Board of Selectmen for succeeding terms, and there are no limits on the number of terms that a Trustee can serve. Vacan-cies shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any Trustee may be removed for cause by the Board of Selectmen after the opportunity for a hearing. Reference to the Trustee shall mean the Trustee or Trustees for the time being hereunder.
SECTION 3. POWERS OF TRUSTEES
The powers of the Board of Trustees, all of which shall be carried on in furtherance of the purposes set forth in G.L. c.44, §55C, shall include the following:
A. To accept and receive real property, personal property or money, by gift, grant, contribution, de-vise or transfer from any person, firm, corporation or other public or private entity, including but not limited to money, grants of funds or other property tendered to the Trust in connection with any ordinance or by-law or any general or special law or any other source, including money from G.L. c.44B;
94
B. To purchase and retain real or personal property, including without restriction investments that yield a high rate of income or no income;
C. To sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any personal, mixed, or real property at public auction or by private contract for such consideration and on such terms as to credit or otherwise, and to make such contracts and enter into such undertaking relative to Trust property as the Board deems advisable notwithstanding the length of any such lease or contract;
D. To execute, acknowledge and deliver deeds, assignments, transfers, pledges, leases, covenants, contracts, promissory notes, releases and other instruments sealed or unsealed, necessary, proper or incident to any transaction in which the Board engages for the accomplishment of the purposes of the trust;
E. To employ advisors and agents, such as accountants, appraisers and lawyers, as the Board deems necessary;
F. To pay reasonable compensation and expenses to all advisors and agents and to apportion such compensation between income and principal as the Board deems advisable;
G. To apportion receipts and charges between incomes and principal as the Board deems advisable, to amortize premiums and establish sinking funds for such purpose, and to create reserves for de-preciation depletion or otherwise;
H. To participate in any reorganization, re-capitalization, merger or similar transactions; and to give proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution to vote any securities or cer-tificates of interest; and to consent to any contract, lease, mortgage, purchase or sale of property, by or between any corporation and any other corporation or person;
I. To deposit any security with any protective reorganization committee, and to delegate to such committee such powers and authority with relation thereto as the Board may deem proper and to pay, out of Trust property, such portion of expenses and compensation of such committee as the Board may deem necessary and appropriate;
J. To carry property for accounting purposes other than acquisition date values;
K. To borrow money on such terms and conditions and from such sources as the Board deems advis-able, to mortgage and pledge trust assets as collateral;
95
L. To make distributions or divisions of principal in kind;
M. To comprise, attribute, defend, enforce, release, settle or otherwise adjust claims in favor or against the Trust, including claims for taxes, and to accept any property, either in total or partial satisfaction of any indebtedness or other obligation, and subject to the provisions of G.L. c.44, §55C, to continue to hold the same for such period of time as the Board may deem appropriate;
N. To manage or improve real property; and to abandon any property which the Board determined not to be worth retaining;
O. To hold all or part of the Trust property un-invested for such purposes and for such time as the Board may deem appropriate; and
P. To extend the time for payment of any obligation to the Trust.
SECTION 3. DECLARATION OF TRUST
The Trustees are hereby authorized to execute a Declaration of Trust and Certificate of Trust for the Swampscott Affordable Housing Trust, to be recorded with the Essex County Registry of Deeds and filed with Essex County Registry District of the Land Court
SECTION 4. FUNDS PAID TO THE TRUST
In accordance with G.L. c.44, §55C, all moneys paid to the Trust in accordance with any zoning or general by-law, exaction fee, or private contributions shall be paid directly into the Trust and need not be appropriated or accepted and approved into the Trust. Funds appropriated into the Trust by the Town shall become Trust property, and, to be expended, these funds need not be further appro-priated. All moneys remaining in the Trust at the end of any fiscal year, whether or not expended by the Board within one year of the date they were appropriated into the Trust, remain Trust property.
SECTION 5. ANNUAL AUDITS
The Board shall provide for an annual audit of the books and records of the Trust. Such audit shall be performed by an independent auditor in accordance with accepted accounting practices. Upon receipt of the audit by the Board of Trustees, a copy shall be provided forthwith to the Board of Se-lectmen.
96
97
ARTICLE XXI
REVOLVING FUNDS
SECTION 1.
There are hereby established in the Town of Swampscott pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c.44, §53E½, the following Revolving Funds:
PROGRAM
AUTHORIZED REPRE-SENTATIVE OR BOARD TO SPEND
DEPARTMENT RECEIPTS
PURPOSE Council on Aging Council on Aging User fees or charges from COA programs To pay for salaries, supplies, equipment and COA pro-grams
Recycling-Blue Bins
Health Department
Fees or charges received in connection with sale of recycling blue bins
To purchase supplies and equipment Recreation Town Administrator Fees or charges received from Recreation Depart-ment programs To pay for supplies, salaries and equipment
Public Li-brary
Town Administrator
Fees or charges for use of Library public copier and computer printers
To purchase supplies and paper for the copier and computer printers Athletic Field Maintenance Town Administrator Fees or charges received for rental or use of town athletic fields To pay for salaries, supplies, and equipment of the town’s athletic fields.
98
SECTION 2.
Expenditures from each revolving fund set forth herein shall be subject to the limitation established by Town Meeting or any increase therein as may be authorized in accordance with G.L. c.44, §53E½.
PROGRAM OR PURPOSE
FISCAL YEAR SPENDING LIMIT Council on Aging $50,000
Recycling-Blue Bins
$5,000 Recreation $275,000
Public Library
$3,500 Athletic Field Maintenance $20,000
(5/19)
99
ARTICLE XXIII
SINGLE USE PLASTIC BAGS
SECTION 1. PURPOSE.
The production and use of single-use plastic bags have significant impacts on the environment of all communities, including but not limited to: contributing to the potential death of fish, fowl, animals and wildlife through ingestion and entanglement; contributing to pollution of the environment through improper disposal; clogging storm drainage systems; creating a burden to solid waste col-lection and recycling efforts; and requiring the use of millions of barrels of non-renewable, polluting, fossil fuel for their manufacture. Therefore, the Town of Swampscott seeks to phase out the use of single-use plastic bags by all retail establishments, including restaurants providing take-out, doing business in Town over a period of 12 months from the effective date of this bylaw.
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS.
“Establishment” means any business selling goods, articles, food or personal services to the public, including restaurants.
“Single-use plastic bags” means bags made of plastic, with integral handles, and thickness less than 2.5 mils, that are intended to be used for the transport of products purchased at an Establishment as defined herein.
“Reusable bag” means a bag that is specifically designed for multiple use and is made of cloth, fabric or other durable materials.
SECTION 3. USE REGULATIONS.
A. Single-use plastic bags shall not be distributed or sold at any Establishment within the Town of Swampscott effective September 1, 2018. Existing stock of single-use bags shall be phased out within four (4) months after August 31, 2018; any stock remaining at the end of said 4 months shall be disposed of properly by the Establishment. Customers are encouraged to bring their own reusable shopping bags to stores.
100
B. Establishments may provide reusable bags at no charge or charge a reasonable fee for each paper or other bag, as they desire. Establishments are strongly encouraged to make reusable bags avail-able to customers at a reasonable price.
C. Thin-film plastic bags, used by Establishments to contain dry cleaning, newspapers, produce, meat, bulk foods, wet items, and other similar merchandise, typically without handles, are exempt from the provisions of this Regulation.
SECTION 4. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
This Bylaw may be enforced by any Town police officer, enforcement officers or agents of the Board of Health. This Bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity, including, but not limited to, non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Article XII of the Town’s General Bylaws. If non-criminal disposition is elected, then any Establishment which violates any provision of this regulation shall be subject to the following penalties:
First Offense: Written warning 2nd Offense: $50 fine 3rd Offense: $100 fine 4th and Subsequent Offenses: $300 fine
Subsequent offenses shall be determined as offenses occurring within two years of the date of the first noticed offense. Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. If more than one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense. Effective date September 1, 2018 shall be phased out within 4 months after August 31, 2018.
ARTICLE XXIII
IMPROVEMENT OF BLIGHTED OR UNSAFE STRUCTURES OR PROPERTY AND THE MAINTE-NANCE OF VACANT BUILDINGS
Section 1. AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE
Pursuant to the general powers granted to towns by Article 89 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitu-tion, and the specific powers granted by Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 139, Sections 1-3A, this Bylaw is adopted for the prevention of any unreasonable interference with the common interest of the general public in maintaining decent, safe, and sanitary structures. The provisions of this Bylaw shall be applicable to any building or structure or property that meets any one of the three sets of conditions set forth herein under the definitions of “Blighted Structure or Property”, “Unsafe Structure or Property,” or “Vacant Buildings” provided however that this bylaw shall not apply to any property in residential use.
Section 2. DEFINITIONS
101
(a) Building - A structure, whether portable or fixed, with exterior walls or firewalls and a roof, built, erected or framed, of a combination of any materials, to form shelter for persons, animals, or property.
(b) Structure - A combination of materials, whether wholly or partially level with, above or below the surface of the ground, whether permanent or temporary, assembled at a fixed location to give support, shelter, or enclosure such as a building (see above), framework, retaining wall, platform, bin, fence, parking area, sign, flagpole, or mast for antenna or the like.
(c) Enforcement Authority – This Bylaw shall be enforced by the Building Inspector or his qualified designee.
(d) Interested Parties - In connection with the enforcement and notification requirements of this Bylaw, In-terested Parties are: The Enforcement Authority; any Responsible Party; owners and occupants of prop-erty abutting the subject property; owners and occupants of property directly opposite the subject prop-erty on any public or private street or way; and a person filing a complaint under this Bylaw.
(e) Occupant - A person who occupies real property with the consent of the owner as a lessee, tenant at will, licensee, or otherwise. The singular use of the term includes the plural when the context so indicates.
(f) Owner - Every person who alone or jointly or severally with others (a) has legal title to any building, struc-ture or property; or (b) has care, charge, or control of any such building structure or property in any ca-pacity including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title; or (c) is a mortgagee in possession; or (d) is an agent, trustee or other person appointed by the courts.
(g) Responsible Party - The owner or occupant (in the case of real property) of property that is the subject of proceedings under this Bylaw. The singular use of the term includes the plural when the context so indi-cates.
Section 3. BLIGHTED STRUCTURE OR PROPERTY
Blighted is a condition of structure or property that by reasonable determination displays physical deterioration that renders the structure unfit for human habitation, in need of major maintenance or repair, or lacks ventilation, light or sanitation facilities, and that contributes to detrimental effects to safety or health and unreasonably interferes with the common interest of the general public in maintaining decent, safe, and sanitary structures. This definition of the term “blighted” is based on Massachusetts General Laws Chapters 121A and 121B and the implementing regulations which provide guidance regarding the definition of blighted structures. Blighted does not constitute a condition that merely adversely affects property values. The term blighted includes, but is not limited to:
(a) property having deteriorated roofs, foundations, walls, or floors, including broken or inadequately secured windows or doors;
(b) burned structures not otherwise lawfully habitable or usable;
(c) property that attracts or harbors vermin or rodents or wild animals; or
(d) garbage and rubbish.
Section 4. UNSAFE STRUCTURE OR PROPERTY
Unsafe is a condition of a structure or structures or personal property that exposes persons to unreasonable risk of injury or harm, or exposes property to unreasonable risk of damage, loss or destruction.
Section 5. VACANT BUILDINGS
102
Vacant buildings or structures are ones which (a) are or will be unoccupied, i.e., not inhabited or lived in, by a Re-sponsible Party for a period of one-hundred-and-eighty (180) consecutive days or more and (b) which appear to manifest blighted or unsafe conditions as defined in Sections 3 and 4, and (c) for which the Responsible Party has failed to do any of the following:
(a) comply with all applicable sanitary, building, and fire codes and orders issued pursuant thereto;
(b) secure the premises to prevent unauthorized entry and exposure to the elements;
(c) maintain the premises in a manner that ensures their external/visible maintenance, including but not limited to the maintenance of major systems, the removal of trash and debris, and the upkeep of lawns, shrubbery, and other landscape features;
(d) repair or replace broken windows or doors within thirty (30) days. Boarding up any doors or windows is prohibited except as a temporary measure for no longer than thirty (30) days, and;
(e) for properties vacant for six months or more at which the utilities have been shut off, remove or cut and cap such utilities to prevent accidents.
Section 6. VIOLATIONS
If the Enforcement Authority is informed of or has reason to believe that blighted or unsafe conditions, as defined in Sections 3 and 4, or that vacant buildings, as defined in Section 5, exist on any real property in the Town, he may make or cause to be made an investigation of the facts, including an inspection of the property where the condition may exist. In making such inspection, the Enforcement Authority shall have such right of access to premises that may be lawfully exercised by him under the laws and constitution of the Commonwealth and/or of the United States.
Section 7. PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT
(a) Procedures – During his investigation of the matter, the Enforcement Authority shall make reasonable efforts to consult with the Responsible Party for the purpose of obtaining voluntary compliance with this Bylaw before initiating any enforcement action.
If, after inspection, the Enforcement Authority confirms the existence of blighted or unsafe conditions or vacant buildings in violation of this Bylaw and the Responsible Party fails to voluntarily comply, he shall issue a Notice of Violation and may make and issue such Orders as he deems necessary to correct or elimi-nate the blighted or unsafe conditions or obtain compliance with the requirements for vacant buildings. Said Notice and Orders shall be in writing and shall be served upon all Responsible Parties as can be deter-mined after reasonable inquiry.
Any Interested Party who has filed a written complaint of blighted or unsafe conditions or vacant buildings to the Enforcement Authority upon which complaint the Enforcement Authority has determined that the conditions do not exist, or the Enforcement Authority has taken action that the Interested Party claims is inadequate, shall have a right to a review of the matter by the Town Administrator. At the request of such an Interested Party, the Town Administrator shall confer with the Enforcement Authority and may confer with other appropriate agencies of Town government such as the Council on Aging, Board of Assessors, and Building Department. The Town Administrator shall make a decision and recommend appropriate action in
103
writing to the Interested Parties, the Responsible Parties, the Enforcement Authority, and the Board of Selectmen.
Any person aggrieved by the decision and recommendation of the Town Administrator may request a hear-ing before the Board of Selectmen. Said request shall be in writing and received by the Board of Selectmen within ten (10) business days of issuance of the Town Administrator’s decision. A copy of the hearing re-quest shall also be delivered to the complainant, if any, and to all interested Parties. It shall be the respon-sibility of the person requesting the hearing to show that all Interested Parties have been notified of the request. If no such request is received within the time specified herein, the order of the Enforcement Au-thority shall be final.
A request for hearing shall not constitute a stay of the Enforcement Authority’s Order unless the Enforce-ment Authority so orders.
Upon receipt of a timely request, the Board of Selectmen shall convene a public hearing, which may include an examination of any complainant or Responsible Party, under oath, to determine whether conditions under this Bylaw exist. Based on the evidence and testimony presented at said public hearing, the Board of Selectmen may affirm the Enforcement Authority’s Order, reverse and nullify the Order, or issue any such Order as it deems necessary to ensure the protection of public safety and/or eliminate blighted or unsafe conditions. The determination of the Board of Selectmen after a hearing shall be final.
Fines for non-compliance with the Enforcement Authority’s or Board of Selectmen’s Order shall be enforce-able through the non-criminal disposition procedure, pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21D, and Ar-ticle XII of the Town’s Bylaws; and/or G.L. c. 40U and Article XXIV of the Town’s General Bylaws in the following amounts:
i. First offense, $100.00
ii. Second offense, $200.00
iii. Third and successive offenses, $300.00 each
Each violation of this Bylaw shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that any such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
The Enforcement Authority may require that a complaint be made in writing subject to the penalties of perjury. If the Enforcement Authority determines that a reported condition may warrant immediate action, or constitutes a substantial violation of this Bylaw, the Enforcement Authority may seek authority to file for injunctive relief in court without first holding a hearing or providing prior notice to the Responsible Party and without requiring the disclosure of the identity of the complainant.
104
If the Enforcement Authority determines that the condition is subject to the jurisdiction of the Board of Health or is a violation of the State Sanitary Code or any health regulation, in addition to enforcing this Bylaw, he shall refer the matter to the Board of Health for action.
(b) Notice to Complainant - In any matter in which a complaint has been made by a person other than the Enforcement Authority, the Enforcement Authority shall notify the complainant in advance of all confer-ences or proceedings concerning resolution of the complaint or of any enforcement action and the com-plainant shall be allowed to be present.
(c) Removal of Blighted or Unsafe Conditions or Vacant Buildings by Selectmen - If the Responsible Party fails to remedy the conditions upon notice and order from the Enforcement Authority to do so, the Board of Selectmen may cause corrective action for the conditions as provided in General Laws c. 139.
(d) Reports by Enforcement Authority - The Enforcement Authority shall file with the Town Administrator each month a report that shall include all complaints under this Bylaw made to him during the prior month; all proceedings begun by him under this Bylaw; all pending complaints and all investigations and enforcement actions taken by him or referred to the Board of Health. The report shall state the location of the premises, a summary of the nature of the complaint, the name of the Responsible Party(ies), and the disposition or the status of the matter.
Section 8. OTHER LAWS
Compliance with this Bylaw shall not relieve the Responsible Party of any applicable obligations set forth in any other codes, regulations, covenant conditions or restrictions, and/or homeowner or condominium association rules and regulations. (5/19)
ARTICLE XXIV
ADMINISTRATION OF FINES FOR CERTAIN VIOLATIONS
Section 1. Adoption of G.L. c.40U
The procedures for the payment and collection of unpaid municipal fines, as set forth in G.L. c.40U are hereby adopted.
Section 2. Municipal Hearing Officer
The Town Administrator shall appoint a Municipal Hearings Officer to conduct hearings of alleged violations of the Bylaws and Regulations specified in this Bylaw.
Section 3. Violations Subject to this Bylaw
The following Bylaws and Regulations and the specified penalties attached thereto shall be included within the pro-cedure established under this Bylaw. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and may be penalized as such hereunder:
BYLAW OR REGULATION
SUBJECT
105
Article V, Section 4
Obstructions on Public Streets and Sidewalks (including Snow & Ice) Article V, Section 7
Discharge of Water onto Sidewalks Article V, Section 10
Deposit of Ashes, Dirt, Rubbish, etc. on a public street or sidewalk Article V, Section 11
Dumping in Catch Basins Article XXIII
Noncompliance with orders relative to blighted, unsafe or vacant properties
Section 4. Enforcement
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Bylaw, the Town may enforce its Bylaws and regulations or enjoin violations thereof through any lawful process, including but not limited to, any lawful means in law or in equity, including, but not limited to, non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Article XII of the Town’s General Bylaws, and the election of one remedy by the Town shall not preclude enforcement through any other lawful means.
Section 5. Severability
If any provision of this Bylaw is declared invalid, or unenforceable, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby. (5/19)
ARTICLE XXV
SINGLE USE PLASTIC BEVERAGE STRAW AND STIRRER REDUCTION IN BUSINESS
ESTABLISHMENTS
Section 1. Purpose and Intent
This bylaw is enacted for the purpose of eliminating the distribution of single use plastic straws
and stirrers by all Business Establishments in the Town of Swampscott. The production and use
of single use plastic straws and stirrers have significant impacts on the environment, including,
but not limited to: contributing to pollution of the land environment; creating a burden to solid
waste collection and recycling facilities; entering storm drains that lead to waterways leading to
the ocean causing the potential death of marine animals through ingestion; and requiring the use
of millions of barrels of crude oil nationally for their manufacture.
Section 2. Definitions
“Business Establishment” means the following businesses: a retail store; supermarket; general department store; bar, tavern, lounge; restaurant and take-out restaurant, serving liquid, slurry, frozen, semi-frozen, or other forms of beverages to the public for consumption, not including nursing homes or nursing care or assisted living facilities or doctors or nurses or Emergency Medical Technicians providing straws to patients.
“Town Sponsored Event” means any event organized or sponsored by the Town of
Swampscott or any department of the Town of Swampscott.
“Plastic Beverage Straw” means a tube made predominantly of plastic derived from
either petroleum or a biologically based polymer, such as corn or other plant sources, for
106
transferring a beverage from its container to the mouth of the drinker. “Plastic Beverage Straw”
includes compostable and biodegradable petroleum or biologically based polymer straws, but
does not include straws that are made from non-plastic materials, such as, but not limited to,
paper, sugar cane, and bamboo.
“Plastic Stirrer” means a device that is used to mix beverages, intended for only one-time
use, and made predominantly of plastic derived from either petroleum or a biologically
based polymer, such as corn or other plant source. “Plastic Stirrer” includes compostable and
biodegradable petroleum or biologically based polymer stirrers, but does not include stirrers that
are made from non-plastic materials, such as, but not limited to, paper, sugar cane, and bamboo.
Section 3. Use Regulations
A. Plastic Beverage Straws and Plastic Stirrers shall not be used or dispensed or sold in conjunction with the serving by Business Establishments or at any Town Sponsored Event of liquid, slurry, frozen, semi-frozen, or other forms of beverages to the public for consumption. The Town of Swampscott shall accept from Business Establishments any stock remaining after that date for disposal free of charge through January 30, 2020, at the DPW.
B. Nothing in this Bylaw prohibits the sale of Plastic Straws by supermarkets and general department stores in packages not in conjunction with the service of liquid, slurry, frozen, semi frozen, or other forms of beverages to the public for consumption.
C. Nothing in this Bylaw prohibits customers from using their own straws of any material for personal use in any Business Establishment.
Section 4. Enforcement
A. This Bylaw may be enforced by any agents of the Board of Health. This Bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity, including, but not limited to, non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Article XII of the Town’s General Bylaws. If non-criminal disposition is elected, then any Business Establishment which violates any provision of this regulation shall be subject to the fol-lowing penalties:
First Offense: Written warning
2nd Offense: $50 fine
3rd Offense: $100 fine
4th and Subsequent Offenses: $300 fine
Subsequent offenses shall be determined as offenses occurring within two years of the date of the first noticed offense. Each day or portion thereof shall constitute a separate offense. If more than one, each condition violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 5. Severability
If any provision of this Bylaw is declared invalid, or unenforceable, the other provisions shall not
be affected thereby. (5/19)



TOWN OF SWAMPSCOTT 



ZONING BY-LAW 

• Adopted by the unanimous vote of the Special Town Meeting held May 2, 2000 •
 • Approved by the Massachusetts Attorney General on August 21, 2000 •
 • Posted in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40 § 32 on August 28, 2000 • 
• Updated at the Annual Town Meeting on May 16, 2005 • 
• Updated at the Special Town Meeting on November 10, 2008• 
• Updated at Annual Town Meeting on May 6, 2009• 
• Updated at the Special Town Meeting October 19, 2010 • 
• Updated at the Annual Town Meeting on May 7, 2012 • 
• Updated at the Special Town Meeting October 15, 2012 • 
• Updated at the Annual Town Meeting May 6, 2013 • 
• Updated at the Annual Town Meeting May 5, 2014 • 
• Updated at the Special Town Meeting October 16, 2014 • 
• Updated at the Annual Town Meeting May 4, 2015 • 
• Updated at the Annual Town Meeting May 9, 2016 • 
• Updated at the Annual Town Meeting May 15, 2017 • 
• Updated at the Annual Town Meeting May 22, 2018 • 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
SWAMPSCOTT ZONING BY-LAW 

ARTICLE I. PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY. ...................................................................................................................... 1 
ARTICLE II. USE, DIMENSIONAL AND TIMING REGULATIONS. .................................................................................. 2 

2.1.0.0.  Districts. ........................................................................................................................................... 2 

2.1.1.0. Establishment of districts ..................................................................................................... 2 

2.1.2.0. Establishment of Overlay Districts ...................................................................................... 2 

2.1.3.0. Official Zoning Map. ............................................................................................................ 3 

2.1.4.0. Rules for Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries ....................................................... 3 

2.2.0.0.  Use Regulations. ............................................................................................................................... 4 

2.2.1.0. General ................................................................................................................................ 4 

2.2.2.0. Applicability ......................................................................................................................... 4 

2.2.3.0. Table of Principal Uses ........................................................................................................ 4 

2.2.4.0. Residential Accessory Uses ................................................................................................ 10 

2.2.5.0. Non-Residential Accessory Uses ........................................................................................ 11 

2.2.6.0. Home Occupations ............................................................................................................ 12 

2.2.7.0. Improved Lots - Nonconforming Uses and Structures. ...................................................... 14 

2.2.8.0. Planned Development Districts. ......................................................................................... 17 

2.2.9.0. Medical Marijuana Treatment Center...............................................................................17 

2.3.0.0.  Dimensional Regulations ............................................................................................................... 18 

2.3.1.0. General .............................................................................................................................. 18 

2.3.2.0. Table of Dimensional Requirements .................................................................................. 18 

2.3.3.0. Accessory Buildings and Structures ................................................................................... 18 

2.3.4.0. Multiple Principal Structures ............................................................................................. 18 

2.3.5.0. Unimproved Lots - Grandfathered or Undersized Lots ...................................................... 19 

2.3.6.0. Dimensional Special Permit ............................................................................................... 19 

2.3.7.0. Height of Buildings ............................................................................................................ 20 

2.3.8.0. Additional Regulations ....................................................................................................... 20 
ARTICLE III. GENERAL REGULATIONS. ..................................................................................................................... 23 

3.1.0.0. Off-Street Parking and Loading .................................................................................................. 23 

3.1.1.0. General Parking Requirements .......................................................................................... 23 

3.1.2.0. Number of Spaces ............................................................................................................... 24 

3.1.3.0. Size of Parking Spaces ....................................................................................................... 26 

3.1.4.0. Lanes for Circulation and Access ..................................................................................... 26 

3.1.5.0. Parking Lot Design ............................................................................................................ 26 

3.1.6.0. Off-Street Loading .............................................................................................................. 27 

3.2.0.0.  Signs ................................................................................................................................................ 28 

3.2.1.0. Applicability ....................................................................................................................... 28 

3.2.2.0. General Standards – All Districts ..................................................................................... 28 

3.2.3.0. Permitted Signs .................................................................................................................. 31 

3.2.4.0. District or Use Regulations ................................................................................................ 33 

3.2.5.0. Specific Sign Types ............................................................................................................ 38 

3.2.6.0. Permit Requirements ......................................................................................................... 40 

3.2.7.0. Enforcement ...................................................................................................................... 40 

3.3.0.0.  General Landscaping and Screening Requirements .................................................................. 40 

3.3.1.0. Landscaping ...................................................................................................................... 40 

3.3.2.0.  Screening........................................................................................................................... 41 

3.3.3.0. Exceptions ......................................................................................................................... 42 

3.3.4.0. Waiver or Modification ..................................................................................................... 42 

3.4.0.0.  Environmental Standards ............................................................................................................. 42 

3.4.1.0. Disturbances ..................................................................................................................... 42 

3.4.2.0. Lighting ............................................................................................................................. 42 

3.5.0.0. Approved Street Plan .................................................................................................................... 43 

3.5.1.0. General ............................................................................................................................. 43 

3.6.0.0. Assisted and Independent Living Facilities ................................................................................. 43 

3.6.1.0. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 43 

3.6.2.0. Definitions ......................................................................................................................... 44 

3.6.3.0. Special Permit ................................................................................................................... 45 

3.6.4.0. Application ........................................................................................................................ 45 

3.6.5.0. Standards .......................................................................................................................... 46 

3.6.6.0. Conversion of Existing Structures ..................................................................................... 50 

3.6.7.0. Action by the Board of Appeals ......................................................................................... 50 
ARTICLE IV. SPECIAL REGULATIONS ........................................................................................................................ 51 

4.1.0.0.  Flood Plain/Wetland Protection Overlay District ....................................................................... 51 

4.1.1.0. Purpose .............................................................................................................................. 51 

4.1.2.0. Location of District ............................................................................................................ 51 

4.1.3.0. Overlay District .................................................................................................................. 52 

4.1.4.0. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................... 52 

4.1.5.0. Emergency Work. .............................................................................................................. 52 

4.1.6.0. Prohibited Uses .................................................................................................................. 52 

4.1.7.0. Uses Available by Special Permit ...................................................................................... 52 

4.1.8.0. Special Permit Application ................................................................................................ 53 

4.1.9.0. Decision ............................................................................................................................. 53 

4.2.0.0.  Coastal Flood Area Overlay District ........................................................................................... 54 

4.2.1.0. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 54 

4.2.2.0. Definitions. ........................................................................................................................ 54 

4.2.3.0. Location of District ........................................................................................................... 54 

4.2.4.0. Floodway and Base Flood Elevation Data ....................................................................... 55 

4.2.5.0. Overlay District ................................................................................................................. 55 

4.2.6.0. Permitted Uses - A and V Zones ........................................................................................ 56 

4.2.7.0. Special Rules - Zone V ...................................................................................................... 57 

4.2.8.0. Variation by Special Permit .............................................................................................. 58 

4.2.9.0. Prohibitions....................................................................................................................... 58 

4.2.10.0. Duties of the Inspector of Buildings and Maintenance of Records ................................. 58 

4.2.11.0. Notification of Watercourse Alteration ........................................................................... 59 

4.3.0.0.  Wireless Communications Services Overlay District ................................................................. 59 

4.3.1.0. Purpose ............................................................................................................................. 59 

4.3.2.0. Location of District ........................................................................................................... 59 

4.3.3.0. Overlay District ................................................................................................................. 60 

4.3.4.0. Permitted and Prohibited Uses ......................................................................................... 60 

4.3.4.0. Uses Available by Special Permit ..................................................................................... 60 

4.3.5.0. Conditions ......................................................................................................................... 60 

4.3.6.0. Special Permit Application................................................................................................ 62 

4.3.7.0. Exemptions ........................................................................................................................ 63 

4.3.8.0. Certification and Removal ................................................................................................ 63 

4.4.0.0.  Regulations Pertaining to Specific Uses....................................................................................... 63 

4.4.1.0. Public Garages, Service Stations, and Liquor Establishments ......................................... 63 

4.4.2.0. Access to Commercial or Industrial Buildings .................................................................. 64 

4.4.3.0. Obstructions to Traffic ...................................................................................................... 64 

4.4.4.0. Stripping, Excavating or Mining ....................................................................................... 64 

4.5.0.0.  Regulations Pertaining to Planned Development Districts ........................................................ 64 

4.5.1.0. Purposes ............................................................................................................................ 64 

4.5.2.0. Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses .......................................................................... 65 

4.5.3.0. Dimensional Regulations .................................................................................................. 66 

4.5.4.0. Parcel Subdivision ............................................................................................................ 68 

4.5.5.0. Zoning Conformance ......................................................................................................... 68 

4.6.0.0.  Regulations Pertaining to Smart Growth (MGL 40R) Zoning Overlay District…………… 68 
4.6.1.0. Purposes…………………………………………………………………………………………...  68 
4.6.2.0. Scope and Authority…………………………………………………………………………….... 69 
4.6.3.0. Establishment of District…….…………………………………………………………... 69 
4.6.4.0. Definitions……………………………………………………………………………….. 69
  4.6.5.0. Permitted Uses…………………………………………………………………………... 72 
4.6.6.0. Prohibited Uses.................................................................................................................. 73 






4.6.7.0. Dimensional and Other Requirements…………………………………………………………. 73 
4.6.8.0. Off-street Parking………………………………………………………………………………… 74 
4.6.9.0. Design Standards…………………………………………………………………………………..76 
4.6.10.0. Affordable Housing…………………………………………………………………….. 77 




4.6.11.0. Administration…………………………………………………………………………………… 81 4.6.12.0. Waivers…………………………………………………………………………………………… 86 
4.6.13.0. Fair Housing Requirement…………………………………………………………………….. 86 
4.6.14.0. Annual Update………………………………………………………………………….. 87 




4.6.15.0. Notification of Building Permits………………………………………………………………. 87 
4.6.16.0. Date of Effect…………………………………………………………………………… 87 
4.6.17.0. Severability……………………………………………………………………………... 87 




4.7.0.0. Humphrey Street Overlay District…………………………………………………………..… 87 
4.7.1.0. Purposes…………………………………………………………………………………………...  87 
4.7.2.0. Overlay District & Boundaries……………………………………………………………….... .88 
4.7.3.0. Permitted Uses and Review Processes…………………………………………………... 88 
4.7.4.0. Humphrey Street Overlay District Design Standards…………………………..……….. 90
  4.7.5.0. Humphrey Street Design Guidelines…………………………………………...………... 92 
4.7.6.0. Humphrey Street Site Plan and Special Permit Standards................................................ 95 

4.7.7.0. Alternative Parking Solutions……………………………………………………..…………... 100 
4.7.8.0. Humphrey Street Site Plan Special Permit Approval Criteria……………………………..100 
4.7.9.0. Humphrey Street Special Permit Approval Criteria…………………………………………101 
4.7.10.0. Decision…………………………………………………………………….…………..102 
4.8.0.0. Inclusionary Housing Regulations...............................................................................................103 

4.8.1.0. Purpose..............................................................................................................................103 

4.8.2.0. Applicability......................................................................................................................103 

4.8.3.0. Special Permit...................................................................................................................104 

4.8.4.0. Mandatory Provision of Affordable Units........................................................................104 

4.8.5.0. Provisions Applicable to Affordable Housing Units On- and Off-Site.............................106 

4.8.6.0. Provision of Affordable Housing Units Off-Site...............................................................107 

4.8.7.0. Fees-in-Lieu-of Affordable Housing Unit Provision.........................................................107 

4.8.8.0. Maximum Incomes and Selling Prices: Initial Sale..........................................................108 

4.8.9.0. Preservation of Affordability; Restrictions on Resale.......................................................108 

4.8.10.0. Conflict with Other Bylaws.............................................................................................109 

4.8.11.0. Severability......................................................................................................................109 

4.9.0.0. Tourist Lodging Overlay District.................................................................................................109 

4.9.1.0. Purpose..............................................................................................................................109 

4.9.2.0. Overlay District & Boundaries.........................................................................................109 

4.9.3.0. Permitted Uses..................................................................................................................109 
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES ................................................................................................. 113 

5.1.0.0.  General ......................................................................................................................................... 113 

5.1.1.0. Permits ............................................................................................................................ 113 

5.1.2.0. Enforcement .................................................................................................................... 113 

5.1.3.0. Penalties .......................................................................................................................... 113 

5.2.0.0.  Board of Appeals ......................................................................................................................... 113 

5.2.1.0. Establishment .................................................................................................................. 113 

5.2.2.0. Powers ............................................................................................................................. 113 

5.2.3.0. Regulations ...................................................................................................................... 114 

5.2.4.0. Fees ................................................................................................................................. 114 

5.3.0.0.  Special Permits ............................................................................................................................ 114 

5.3.1.0. Special Permit Granting Authority.................................................................................. 114 

5.3.2.0. Criteria ............................................................................................................................ 114 

5.3.3.0. ........................................................................................................................................ 115 

5.4.0.0.  Site Plan Special Permit .............................................................................................................. 115 

5.4.1.0. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 115 

5.4.2.0. Applicability .................................................................................................................... 115 

5.4.3.0. Procedures ...................................................................................................................... 116 

5.4.4.0. Preparation of Plans ....................................................................................................... 117 

5.4.5.0. Contents of Plan - Commercial ....................................................................................... 118 

5.4.6.0. Contents of Plan - Residential......................................................................................... 120 

5.4.7.0. Waiver of Compliance ..................................................................................................... 120 

5.4.8.0. Approval .......................................................................................................................... 120 

5.4.9.0. Applicability .................................................................................................................... 121 

5.5.0.0.  Variances ...................................................................................................................................... 122 

5.5.1.0. ........................................................................................................................................ 122 

5.5.2.0. ........................................................................................................................................ 122 

5.5.3.0. ........................................................................................................................................ 123 

5.6.0.0. Procedures for Special Permits and Variances ......................................................................... 123 

5.6.1.0. Procedures ...................................................................................................................... 123 

5.6.2.0. Development Impact Statement (DIS) ............................................................................. 123 

5.6.3.0. Conditions ....................................................................................................................... 125 

5.6.4.0. Plans ............................................................................................................................... 126 

5.6.5.0. Lapse ............................................................................................................................... 126 

5.6.6.0. Regulations ...................................................................................................................... 126 

5.6.7.0. Fees ................................................................................................................................. 126 

5.7.0.0. Applicability/General Provisions ............................................................................................... 126 

5.7.1.0. Other Laws ...................................................................................................................... 126 

5.7.2.0. Conformance ................................................................................................................... 126 

5.7.3.0. Section Headings ............................................................................................................. 126 

5.8.0.0.  Partial Invalidity .......................................................................................................................... 126 

5.9.0.0.  Amendments ................................................................................................................................ 126 

5.10.0.0.  Adult Uses .................................................................................................................................. 126 

5.10.1.0.  Purpose and Intent ........................................................................................................ 126 

5.10.2.0.  Definitions ..................................................................................................................... 127 

5.10.3.0.  Applicability / Eligibility Requirements ........................................................................ 128 

5.10.4.0.  Location Requirements .................................................................................................. 130 

5.10.5.0.  Site Development Standards .......................................................................................... 131 

5.10.6.0.  Application Requirements ............................................................................................. 131 

5.10.7.0.  Criteria for Approval .................................................................................................... 132 

5.10.8.0.  Severability .................................................................................................................... 133 

5.11.0.0.  Accessory Apartments ............................................................................................................... 133 

5.11.1.0. Definitions ..................................................................................................................... 133 

5.11.2.0. Applicability / Eligibility ............................................................................................... 134 

5.11.3.0. Design Standards for Accessory Apartments ................................................................ 134 

5.11.4.0. Use Restriction .............................................................................................................. 134 

5.11.5.0. Procedural Requirements .............................................................................................. 135 

5.11.6.0. Application Requirements ............................................................................................. 135 

5.11.7.0. Criteria for Approval .................................................................................................... 135 

5.11.8.0. Monitoring, Inspections & Enforcement ....................................................................... 135 

5.12.0.0.  Drive-Throughs ......................................................................................................................... 136 

5.12.1.0. Design Criteria ............................................................................................................. 136 

5.13.0.0.   Travel and Tourist Lodging Establishments..........................................................................136 

5.13.1.0. Purpose..........................................................................................................................136 

5.13.2.0. General Regulations for All Types of Travel and Tourist Lodging Establishments......136 
5.13.3.0. Hotel...............................................................................................................................137 

5.13.4.0. Motel..............................................................................................................................138 

5.13.5.0. Inn..................................................................................................................................138 

5.13.6.0. Bed and Breakfast (B&B)..............................................................................................139 
ARTICLE VI. DEFINITIONS. ...................................................................................................................................... 142 
APPENDIX A -TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS: SECTION 2.3.2.0 .......................................................... 153 
APPENDIX B -ILLUSTRATIONS ................................................................................................................................. 155 

ARTICLE I. PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY. 
These regulations are enacted to: 
(a) 	
promote the general welfare of the Town of Swampscott;  

(b) 	
protect the health and safety of its inhabitants; 

(c) 	
encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the town; 

(d) 	
preserve the cultural, historical and agricultural/maritime heritage of the community; 

(e) 	
promote the natural, scenic and aesthetic qualities of the town; 

(f) 	
increase the amenities of the town; and  

(g) 	
reduce the hazard from fire by regulating the location and use of buildings and the area of open space around them, 


all as authorized by the provisions of the Zoning Act, G.L. c. 40A, as amended, and by Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 
[The remainder of this page is intentionally blank.] 
ARTICLE II. USE, DIMENSIONAL AND TIMING REGULATIONS. 











2.1.0.0. Districts. 
2.1.1.0. 	Establishment of districts. For the purposes of this By-Law, the Town of Swampscott is hereby divided into the following districts: 
2.1.1.1. 	Residence A-1 District (A1 District). 
2.1.1.2. 	Residence A-2 District (A2 District). 
2.1.1.3. 	Residence A-3 District (A3 District). 
2.1.1.4. 	Residence A-4 District (A4 District). 
2.1.1.5. 	Business B-1 District (B1 District). 
2.1.1.6. 	Business B-2 District (B2 District). 
2.1.1.7. 	Business B-3 District (B3 District). 
2.1.1.8. 	Business B-4 District (B4 District) 
2.1.1.9. 	Planned Development Districts (PDD).  For the purposes of this By-Law, the Town of Swampscott is hereby divided into the following districts: 
2.1.1.9.1.	 Phillips Fire Station PDD. 
2.1.1.9.2.	   Burrill Senior Center PDD. 
2.1.1.9.3.	 Greenwood PDD. 
2.1.1.9.4. 	  Temple PDD. 
2.1.1.10.	 Industrial District (I District).   
2.1.1.10.1 Location of District. The Industrial Districts includes the following lots and is mapped as follows: 
Assessor’s Map 9, Lot 646 Assessor’s Map 11, Lots 686, 732 and 769 Assessor’s Map 12, Lots 99, 100, 101, 101A, 101B, 101C and 101E 
2.1.2.0. Establishment of Overlay Districts. For the purposes of this By-Law, the Town of Swampscott also establishes the following overlay districts: 
2.1.2.1. 	Flood Plain/Wetland Protection Overlay District. 
2.1.2.2. 	Coastal Flood Area Overlay District. 
2.1.2.3.  Wireless Communications Facilities Overlay District.  
2.1.2.4.  Smart Growth (MGL 40R) Zoning Overlay District  
2.1.2.5.  Humphrey Street Overlay District  
2.1.2.6.  Tourist Lodging Overlay District  

2.1.3.0. Official Zoning Map.  The districts set forth above are shown on the official zoning map(s), entitled "Zoning Map of the Town of Swampscott, prepared under the direction of the Planning Board," on file with the Town Clerk.  Overlay, Planned Development Districts and the Industrial District are mapped as set forth herein. Such maps, together with all explanatory material thereon, are hereby incorporated by reference and declared to be part of this By-Law. 
2.1.4.0. Rules for Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries.  Where uncertainties exist as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning maps the following shall apply: 
2.1.4.1. 	Where the boundary lines as shown upon said map approximately follow the street lines of public and private ways or railways, the centerlines of such ways shall be the boundary lines. 
2.1.4.2. 	Where the boundary lines are shown approximately on the location of property lot lines, and the exact location of property, lot or boundary lines is not indicated by means of dimensions shown in figures, then the property or lot lines shall be the boundary lines. 
2.1.4.3. 	Boundary lines located outside of street lines and shown approximately parallel thereto shall be regarded as parallel to such street lines, and dimensions shown in figures placed upon said map between such boundary lines and street lines are the distance in feet of such boundary lines from such street lines; such distances being measured at right angles to such street lines unless otherwise indicated. 
2.1.4.4. 	In all cases which are not covered by other provisions of this section, the location of boundary lines shall be determined by the distance in feet, if given, from other lines upon said map, by the use of identifications as shown on the map, or by the scale of the map. 
2.1.4.5. 	Where the district boundary line follows a stream, lake or other body of water, said boundary line shall be constructed to be at the thread or channel of the stream; or at the limit of the jurisdiction of the Town of Swampscott, unless otherwise indicated. 
2.1.4.6.  Where a district boundary line divides any lot existing at the time such line is adopted, the regulations of any district in which the lot has frontage on a street may be extended by special permit from the board of appeals not more than thirty (30) feet into the other district.  
2.1.4.7.  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official map, or in other circumstances not covered by the above subsections, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.  





2.2.0.0. Use Regulations. 
2.2.1.0. General.  No structure shall be erected or used or land used except as set forth in Section 2.2.3.0., "Table of Principal Uses", or as otherwise provided in this By-Law or by statute. Uses not expressly provided for herein are prohibited.  Not more than one principal structure shall be placed on a lot, except in accordance with Section 
2.3.4.0. Multiple principal uses shall be allowed in a single structure subject to the provisions of Section 2.2.3.0. below. 
Symbols employed below shall mean the following: 
Y - A permitted use as a matter of right. 
N - An excluded or prohibited use. 
SP - A use authorized under special permit from the Board of Appeals in 
accordance with Section 5.3.0.0. of this By-Law. 

2.2.2.0. Applicability.  When an activity might be classified under more than one of the following uses, the more specific classification shall govern; if equally specific, the more restrictive shall govern. 
2.2.3.0. Table of Principal Uses.  See definitions in Article VI. 
 PRINCIPAL USE  A-1  A-2  A-3  A-4  B-1  B-2  B-3  B-4  I  Off-Street Parking Group (See Art. 3.1.2.0)  
A.  RESIDENTIAL  
1.  Single-family dwelling  Y  Y  Y  Y  SP  N  N  N  N  A  
2.  Two-family dwelling  N  N  Y  Y  SP  N  N  N  N  A  
3.  Multi-family dwelling containing not more than 8 dwelling units  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  A-MF  
3A.  Multi-family dwelling containing more than 8 dwelling units  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  A-MF  

 PRINCIPAL USE  A-1  A-2  A-3  A-4  B-1  B-2  B-3  B-4  I  Off-Street Parking Group (See Art. 3.1.2.0)  
3B.  Multi-family dwelling containing not more than 3 dwelling units  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  A-MF  
4.  Bed and Breakfast Establishment  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  N  N  N  C  
5.  Accessory Apartment (See §5.11.0.0.)  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  A  
6.  Assisted Living Facility or Independent Living Facility  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  N  N  N  N  SEE §3.1.2.4  
7.  Group Residence  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  SEE §3.1.2.4  
8.  Home Occupation As of Right  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  None  
9.  Home Occupation by Special Permit   SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  A-HO  
B.  EXEMPT USES  
1.  Use of land or structures for religious purposes  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  SEE §3.1.2.4  
2.  Use of land or structures for educational purposes on land owned or leased by the commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational corporation  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  SEE §3.1.2.4  
3.  Childcare facility  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  SEE §3.1.2.4  
4.  Use of land for the primary purpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture on a parcel of more than five acres in area  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  SEE §3.1.2.4  
5.  Facilities for the sale of produce, wine and dairy products, provided that during the months of June, July, August, and September of every year, or during the harvest season of the primary crop, the majority of such products for sale, based on either gross sales dollars or volume, have been produced by the owner of the land containing more than five acres in area on which the facility is located  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  SEE §3.1.2.4  
C.  INSTITUTIONAL USES  
1.  Club, lodge or fraternal organization (profit or not for profit)  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  N  N  N  F  

 PRINCIPAL USE  A-1  A-2  A-3  A-4  B-1  B-2  B-3  B-4  I  Off-Street Parking Group (See Art. 3.1.2.0)  
2.  Educational uses, schools (non-exempt)   N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  SEE §3.1.2.4  
3.  Educational uses (non-exempt) containing less than 1,500 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  SEE §3.1.2.4  
4.  Educational uses (non-exempt) containing 1,500 s.f. of gross floor area to 5,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  Y  Y  N  SEE §3.1.2.4  
5.  Educational uses (non-exempt) containing more than 5,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  SEE §3.1.2.4  
6.  Family day care / Adult day care (non-exempt)  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  SEE §3.1.2.4  
7.  Outpatient medical center or clinic  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  N  H  
8.  Theatre; museum; performing, cultural or arts facility; or hall for public gathering  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  D  
D.  LOCAL GOVERNMENT  
1.  Administrative Offices  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
2.  Police/ Fire / Ambulance  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
3.  Municipal Library  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
4.  Municipal Service Facility  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
5.  All other municipal uses  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
E.  COMMERCIAL  
1.  Nursing or convalescent home  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  N  SEE §3.1.2.4  
2.  Retail containing less than 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  G  
3.  Retail containing 2,000 s.f of gross floor area to 10,000 s.f of gross floor area (including storage and sales space, and accessory space)  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  Y  Y  N  G  
4.  Retail containing more than 10,000 s.f. of gross floor area (including storage and sales space, and accessory space)  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  G  
5.  Selling of animals and pets  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  G  

 PRINCIPAL USE  A-1  A-2  A-3  A-4  B-1  B-2  B-3  B-4  I  Off-Street Parking Group (See Art. 3.1.2.0)  
6.  Bakery containing less than 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area (where at least 75% of all goods sold at retail on premises)  N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  G  
7.  Bakery containing 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area or more (where at least 25% of the premises is used for retail sales on premises)  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  G  
8.  Motor vehicle sales and rental  N  N  N  N  N  SP  N  N  N  G  
9.  Motor vehicle general or body repair, or automatic automobile / vehicle washing facility  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  N  G  
10.  Motor vehicle filling / fueling station  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  G  
11.  Self-service automobile / vehicle washing facility   N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N/A  
12.  Motor vehicle light service   N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  G  
13.  Restaurant or coffee shop containing less than 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area   N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  E  
14.  Restaurant or coffee shop containing 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area to 7,500 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  Y  Y  N  E  
15.  Restaurant or coffee shop containing more than 7,500 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  E  
16.  Restaurant or coffee shop abutting one or more residentially zoned properties that are being used for residential purposes  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  E  
17.  Restaurant including entertainment (dancing, live music, DJ, live entertainment.) (not including televisions or background music)  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  E  
18.  Restaurant providing delivery service (using more than one delivery vehicle per shift)  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  E  
19.  Restaurant – with curbside pick-up / curbside delivery  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  N  E  
20.  Catering establishment (establishment primarily for the preparation and sale of food for off-premises sale or consumption)  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
21.  Business, medical or professional office -large  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  I  

 PRINCIPAL USE  A-1  A-2  A-3  A-4  B-1  B-2  B-3  B-4  I  Off-Street Parking Group (See Art. 3.1.2.0)  
22.  Business, medical or professional office - medium  N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  I  
23.  Business, medical or professional office -small  N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  I  
24.  Personal service establishment containing less than 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  G  
25.  Personal service establishment containing 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area to 5,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  Y  Y  N  G  
26.  Personal service establishment containing more than 5,000 s.f. of gross floor area   N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  G  
27.  Animal grooming (no overnight boarding of animals)  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  G  
28.  Bank or financial institution containing less than 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  G  
29.  Bank or financial institution containing 2,000 s.f. of gross floor area to 5,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  Y  Y  N  G  
30.  Bank containing more than 5,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  G  
31.  Automatic teller machine (freestanding)  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  K  
32.  Automatic teller machines (integrated/inline or attached to other structure)  N  N  N  N  Y  Y  Y  Y  N  K  
33.  Outdoor vending machines, kiosks and booths  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  SEE §3.1.2.4  
34.  Nursery / greenhouse   N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
35.  Veterinary Establishment  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  H  
36.  Kennel  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
37.  Drive-Through in connection with any lawfully existing use (See §5.12.0.0.)  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  N  N/A  
38.  Any Permitted Use open before 7:00 a.m. or later than 10:00 p.m.  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N/A  
39.  Bar, Tavern or Lounge  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  E  

 PRINCIPAL USE  A-1  A-2  A-3  A-4  B-1  B-2  B-3  B-4  I  Off-Street Parking Group (See Art. 3.1.2.0)  
40.  Any allowed use containing outdoor seating, display or storage  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N/A  
41.  Any allowed use involving the sale and/or consumption of alcohol  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N/A  
42.  Funeral home / mortuary  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  N  D  
43.  Motel, Hotel or Inn  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  C  
44.  Tattoo and Body Piercing Shop  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  N  G  
F.  INDUSTRIAL  
1.  Light manufacturing under 10,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  N  SP  N  N  SP  J  
2.  Light manufacturing at least 10,000 s.f. of gross floor area  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  J  
3.  Warehouse, Distribution Facility, Self-Storage Mini-Warehouse  N  N  N  N  N  SP  N  N  SP  J  
4.  Contractor's Yard  N  N  N  N  N  SP  N  N  SP  J  
5.  Junkyard or automobile graveyard  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
6.  Quarrying / stone / earth removal for commercial purposes   N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4  
7.  Renewable and Alternative Energy Research Facilities  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  Y  
8.  Medical Marijuana Treatment Center  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  Y  SEE §2.2.9.0 (ATM 5/5/2014)  
G.  MISCELLANEOUS  
1.  One Storage Container for the storage of personal property, provided such storage container does not exceed 1,700 cubic feet and is not maintained for more than 90 days in any 12 consecutive month period  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  N/A  

 PRINCIPAL USE  A-1  A-2  A-3  A-4  B-1  B-2  B-3  B-4  I  Off-Street Parking Group (See Art. 3.1.2.0)  
2.  One Storage Container that is not maintained for more than 180 days in any 12 consecutive month period  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N/A  
3.  One Storage Container, not to exceed 1,700 cubic feet, for the storage of personal property and construction materials and equipment, provided such Storage Container is required as a result of ongoing construction at the property which is being undertaken in accordance with a lawfully issued building permit, provided, however, such Storage Container shall be removed from the property upon the earlier of (i) cessation of construction work on the property for any 10 consecutive day period, (ii) final sign-off of the building permit; and (iii) 150 days following issuance of the building permit permitting such construction   Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  Y  N/A  
3.  All other Storage Containers  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  N/A  
4.  Adult Uses (See §5.10.0.0.)  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SEE §3.1.2.4 

 2.2.3.1. 	Change in Ownership.  A change of ownership of the commercial use without a corresponding change or expansion in the use shall not require a new Special Permit under this Section 2.2.3.0. unless an express condition of the Special Permit approving such commercial use requires that the Special Permit is personal and issued to a particular person or entity. 
2.2.4.0. Residential Accessory Uses. Accessory uses described herein are permitted in residential districts only in accordance with lawfully existing principal uses.  
2.2.4.1. 	Accessory Scientific Uses.  Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter of right, which are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific development or related production, may be permitted upon the issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals, provided that the Board finds that the proposed use does not substantially derogate from the public good. 
2.2.4.2. 	Major Recreational Equipment.  No major recreational equipment shall be stored on any lot in the Residence A-1, A-2, A-3, or A-4 Districts other than in a carport or enclosed building or behind the building line of the principal building, provided however that such equipment may be parked or stored anywhere on residential premises for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. No such equipment shall be used for living or housekeeping purposes when stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use.  
2.2.4.3. 	Unregistered Motor Vehicles. No person shall permit more than one 
(1) unregistered motor vehicle, or major parts thereof,  to remain ungaraged on his premises at any time unless under a class 1 or class 2 license for the sale of motor vehicles.  In no event shall such a vehicle be permitted to remain for more than six (6) months. 
2.2.4.4. 	Commercial Motor Vehicles and Equipment. No person shall permit any commercial vehicle or piece of  equipment to remain ungaraged anywhere on his/her premises in any Residential District with the following exceptions: Commercial vehicles and pieces of equipment belonging to contractors providing services to the premises may be parked outside on the premises only while such services are being actively performed.  Each dwelling unit may have one truck of less than nine thousand five hundred (9,500) pounds manufacturer's GVW rating which has not been decorated with letters or signage greater than that required by the United States Department of Transportation or the Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles parked on any area of the premises. 
2.2.4.5. 	Family Day Care and Adult Day Care. Family Day Care may be permitted as an accessory use.  Adult Day Care may be permitted as a principal or an accessory use upon the issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals.  Providers shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws. 


2.2.4.6. 	Intentionally omitted. 
2.2.4.7. 	Garage.  One (1) garage for not more than three (3) automobiles belonging to residents of the property on which it is located is a permitted accessory use in a Residence A-1, A-2, A-3, or A-4 District. Garages for additional automobiles belonging to residents of the property on which it is located shall only be permitted by special permit pursuant to Section 5.3.0.0. 
2.2.4.8. 	Radio Antenna.  The construction or use of a radio antenna by a federally licensed amateur radio operator is a permitted accessory use; provided, however, that no such antenna shall exceed the height reasonably necessary to accommodate effective communication. 
2.2.5.0. Non-Residential Accessory Uses. Any use permitted as a principal use is also permitted as an accessory use in non-residential districts provided such use is customarily incidental to the main or principal building or use of the land.  Any use authorized as a principal use by special permit may also be authorized as an accessory use by special permit provided such use is customarily incidental to the main or principal building or use of the land.  Any use not allowed in the district as a principal use is also prohibited as an accessory use.  Accessory uses are permitted only in accordance with lawfully existing principal uses.  In all instances where site plan review and approval is required for a principal use, the addition of any new accessory use to the principal use, where such addition exceeds the thresholds established in Section 5.4.0.0., shall also require site plan review and approval. 
2.2.6.0. 	Home Occupations.  Home occupations, as defined in Article VI, are permitted as of right or by special permit as follows: 
2.2.6.1. 	Home Occupations as of Right. Businesses or professions subordinate to and customarily associated with the principal residential use of premises may be engaged in as an accessory use by the owner of that dwelling, provided, however, that all of the following conditions shall be satisfied: 
a. 	
The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the principal building or within a building or other structure accessory thereto which has been in existence at least five (5) years, without extension thereof. 

b. 	
Not more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the gross square footage of the residence and any qualified accessory structures shall be used in the home occupation; provided, however, that no exterior alteration of the building shall be permitted to accommodate the home occupation.  

c. 	
The building or premises occupied shall not be rendered objectionable or detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood due to the exterior appearance, emissions of odor, gas, smoke, dust, noise, electrical disturbance or in any other way. No disturbance, as defined in Section 3.4.1.0., shall be caused, nor shall the home occupation use or store hazardous materials in quantities greater than associated with normal household use.  In a structure containing more than one (1) dwelling unit, the use shall in no way become objectionable or detrimental to any residential use within the structure. 

d. 	
Traffic generated shall not exceed volumes normally expected in a residential neighborhood. 

e. 	
The business or profession shall apply for and obtain a business certificate and obtain an annual certification from the Inspector of Buildings confirming that the home occupation complies with all of the requirements of this Section 2.2.6.1.      

f. 	
There shall be no display of goods or wares visible from beyond the boundaries of the premises or sale of merchandise from the premises. 

g. 	
Any such building shall include no feature of design not customary in buildings for residential use. 

h. 	
No exterior storage of materials, and no other exterior indication of the home occupation, or other variation from the residential character of the premises. 

i. 	
No person not a member of the household shall be employed on the premises in the home occupation, except one subordinate employee on site at any one time. 

j. 	
The home occupation, except for music teachers and tutors, shall not serve clients, customers, salespersons, or the like on the premises. 

k. 	
There shall be no sign, exterior display, or other advertising device visible from off the lot. 


2.2.6.2. 	Home Occupations by Special Permit.  Businesses or professions incidental to and customarily associated with the principal residential use of premises may be engaged in as an accessory use by the owner of that dwelling upon the issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals provided, however, that in addition to the criteria set forth in Section 5.3.2.0. below, all of the following conditions shall be satisfied: 
a. 	
All of the requirements of Sections 2.2.6.1.a-h. 

b. 	
Not more than two (2) persons not members of the household shall be employed on the premises in the home occupation at any one 

(1) time. 

c. 	
No sign, exterior display or other advertising device visible from beyond the boundaries of the premises shall be permitted, except for one (1) unlighted, exterior sign advertising the home occupation shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area attached flush to the building in which the home occupation is located and constructed to be in keeping with the character of the neighborhood. 

d. 	
Parking generated by the home occupation shall be accommodated off-street, but in no event shall such parking be located in the required front, side or rear yard of a property. 

e. 	
No disturbance, as defined in Section 3.4.1.0., shall be caused. The use or storage of hazardous materials in quantities greater than associated with normal household use shall be subject to design requirements to protect against discharge to the environment. 

f. 	
Hours of operation shall be determined by special permit based upon the nature of the home occupation. 


2.2.7.0. Improved Lots - Nonconforming Uses and Structures. This Zoning By-Law shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in existence or lawfully begun, or to a building or special permit issued before the first publication of notice of the public hearing required by G.L. c. 40A, § 5 at which this Zoning By-Law, or any relevant part thereof, was adopted. Such prior, lawfully existing nonconforming uses and structures may continue, provided that no modification of the use or structure is accomplished, unless authorized hereunder. 
2.2.7.1. 	Nonconforming Uses.  The Board of Appeals may award a special permit to change or extend a nonconforming use in accordance with this section only if it determines that such change or extension shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use to the neighborhood. Only the following types of changes or extensions to nonconforming uses may be considered by the Board of Appeals: 
a.	
 Change or substantial extension of the nonconforming use, provided a nonconforming use may not be extended to include more than the lesser of (i) one hundred twenty-five (125%) percent of the area dedicated to such nonconforming use as of the date such use first became nonconforming, and (ii) one hundred twenty-five (125%) percent of the area presently dedicated to such nonconforming use. 

b. 	
Change from one nonconforming use to another, less detrimental, nonconforming use.   


2.2.7.2. 	Nonconforming Structures, Other Than Single and Two-Family Structures. The Board of Appeals may award a special permit to reconstruct, extend, alter, or change a nonconforming structure in accordance with this section only if it determines that such reconstruction, extension, alteration, or change shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood. Only the following types of changes to nonconforming structures may be considered by the Board of Appeals: 
a. 
Reconstructed, extended or structurally changed; and 

b. 	
Altered to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent. 


The reconstruction, extension or structural change of such nonconforming structures so as to increase an existing nonconformity, or create a new nonconformity, including, for example, the extension of an exterior wall at or along the same nonconforming distance within a required yard, shall require the issuance of a dimensional special permit or variance, as applicable, from the Board of Appeals. 
2.2.7.3. Nonconforming Single and Two-Family Structures.   
(a) Nonconforming single and two-family residential structures may be extended, altered, reconstructed or structurally changed upon a determination by the Inspector of Buildings that such proposed extension, alteration, reconstruction or change does not increase the nonconforming natures of said structure, which determination shall only be made by the Inspector of Building if one or both of the following two (2) circumstances exists: 
1. 
In the case of a lot that does not comply with the existing minimum lot area and/or minimum lot frontage requirements: (i) there has been no alteration, extension, reconstruction or structural change to the exterior of the structure within the past five (5) years, and (ii) the existing structure complies with all current setback, open space, lot coverage, and building height requirements, and (iii) the proposed alteration, extension, reconstruction or structural change will also comply with all said current setback, open space, lot coverage and height requirements, and (iv) the cost to complete the proposed alteration, extension, reconstruction or structural change does not exceed one-third (1/3) of the assessed cost of the entire existing structure, and (v) such alteration, extension, reconstruction or structural change does not increase the gross floor area of the structure by more than fifteen (15%) percent, or increase the height of the building by more than fifteen (15%) percent, or increase the size of any lateral dimension by more than fifteen (15%) percent of the aggregate lateral dimension, or increase lot coverage by more than fifteen (15%) percent, or decrease the open space by more than fifteen (15%) percent; and/or 

2. 
In the case where the existing structure presently encroaches or otherwise does not comply with one or more setback, open space, lot coverage or building height requirements: (i) there has been no alteration, extension, reconstruction or structural change to the exterior of the structure within the past five (5) years, and (ii) the proposed alteration, extension, reconstruction or 


structural change will comply with all current setback, open space, lot coverage and building height requirements, and (iii) the cost to complete the proposed alteration, extension, reconstruction or structural change does not exceed one-third (1/3) of the assessed cost of the entire existing structure, and (iv) such alteration, extension, reconstruction or structural change does not increase the gross floor area of the structure by more than fifteen (15%) percent, or increase the height of the building by more than fifteen (15%) percent, or increase the size of any lateral dimension by more than fifteen (15%) percent of the aggregate lateral dimension, or increase in lot coverage by more than fifteen (15%) percent, or decrease the open space by more than fifteen (15%) percent. 
(b) In the event the Inspector of Buildings does not make the determination required in Section 2.2.7.3.(a) above, such extension, alteration, reconstruction or change may only be permitted by special permit issued by the Board of Appeals (so-called “Section 6 Special Permit”) upon a determination that such extension, alteration, reconstruction or change is not substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood.  A Section 6 Special Permit shall only permit conforming changes to non­conforming structures and/or conforming changes to non-conforming lots. Extensions, alterations, reconstruction or changes that will not comply with the current setback, open space, lot coverage or building height requirements shall only be permitted, if at all, upon issuance by the Board of Appeals, as applicable, of a Dimensional Special Permit in accordance with Section 2.3.6.0. below or a Dimensional Variance in accordance with Section 5.2.2.2. below.     
2.2.7.4. 	Abandonment or Non-Use. A nonconforming use or structure which has been abandoned, or not used for a period of two (2) years, shall lose its protected status and be subject to all of the provisions of this Zoning By-Law. 
2.2.7.5. 	Reconstruction of Nonconforming Structures. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, any nonconforming structure may be reconstructed after a fire, explosion, or other accident, provided that such reconstruction is completed within twelve (12) months after such fire, explosion, or other accident, and provided that the building(s) as reconstructed shall be only as great in volume or area as the original nonconforming structure, and further provided that reconstruction is, as applicable, approved by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority pursuant to Section 5.4.0.0.  Such time for reconstruction may be extended for up to an additional twelve (12) months, if the request is made before the expiration of the original 12-month period, by the Board of Appeals for good cause. 
A nonconforming structure which has been demolished or removed as a result of other than by fire, explosion or other accidental cause shall not be rebuilt except as a conforming structure unless a special permit is granted by the Board of Appeals in accordance with Sections 2.2.7.1., 2.2.7.2, or 2.2.7.3, as applicable. 
2.2.7.6. 	Reversion to Nonconformity.  No nonconforming use or structure shall, if changed to a conforming use or structure, revert to a nonconforming use or structure. 
2.2.7.7. 	Non-Conforming Signs in Residential Districts. The extension, alteration, reconstruction or change of non-conforming signs for professional offices in residential districts may only be permitted by special permit issued by the Board of Appeals (so-called “Section 6 Special Permit”) upon a determination that such extension, alteration, reconstruction or change is not substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming sign to the neighborhood; provided, however, that the extension, alteration, reconstruction or change of non­conforming signs authorized under this Section 2.2.7.7. shall be in conformity with the provisions of Section 3.2.4.1.(a)(i),(iii), (iv), and (v). Or take any other action relative thereto. 
2.2.8.0. 	Planned Development Districts. For allowed principal and accessory uses in a Planned Development District, see Section 4.5.2.0. 
2.2.9.0. 	Medical Marijuana Treatment Center: A non-profit facility or location that has been registered by the Department of Public Health where medical marijuana is grown, processed and/or made available to a qualifying patient or a personal caregiver, provided that: 
2.2.9.1. 	A medical marijuana treatment center shall not be located within one thousand feet (1,000’) of an elementary school, middle school, high school, or public library in existence at the time of enactment of the Zoning By-Law amendment establishing this use. 
Site Plan Approval Required. (ATM 5/5/2014) 
2.2.10.0. Property Redevelopment. 
2.2.10.1. 	Properties in the B-4 District that have existing commercial space that is proposed to be eliminated as part of a proposed project shall replace in the proposed project such commercial space in the same or greater amount than the existing commercial space being eliminated. Such commercial space shall be provided for on the same floor as it existed prior to construction of the new project. For the purposes of this Section 2.2.10.1, “existing commercial space” shall include occupied or vacant areas within an existing space that is currently or most 
recently has been used for a commercial purpose. 




2.3.0.0. Dimensional Regulations. 
2.3.1.0. 	General.  No structure shall be erected or used, premises used, or lot changed in size or shape except in conformity with the requirements of this section, unless otherwise provided in this By-Law or by statute. 
2.3.2.0. 	Table of Dimensional Requirements.  The dimensional requirements set forth in Appendix A, as otherwise modified by the provisions of By-Law shall apply in all districts. 
2.3.3.0. Accessory Buildings and Structures. 
2.3.3.1. 	An accessory building which is detached and not part of the main building may be built in the rear yard area, provided that not more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the required rear yard area is occupied by the accessory building. A detached accessory building shall not be located nearer than ten (10) feet to the principal building, nor nearer to the rear or side lot line than the greater of (i) five (5) feet and (ii) fifty (50%) percent of the relevant prescribed minimum set-back distance, nor nearer to the front street line than the prescribed minimum set­back distance of the respective districts.  
2.3.3.2. 	Garage or carport for not more than three (3) private automobiles is a permitted accessory use in a Residence A-1, A-2, A-3, or A-4 District. Such garage shall not be nearer to any side or rear lot line than the greater of (i) five (5) feet and (ii) fifty (50%) percent of the relevant prescribed minimum set-back distance, nor nearer to the front street line than the prescribed minimum set-back distance of the respective districts. 
2.3.3.3. 	An accessory building shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height above the ground level. 
2.3.3.4. 	No more than one (1) accessory building may be located on lot without first obtaining a special permit from the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 5.3.0.0. below. 
2.3.4.0. Multiple Principal Structures.  Except in the residential districts, more than one 
(1) principal nonresidential structure may be erected on a lot, pursuant to a special permit issued by the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 5.3.0.0. herein and the following conditions: 
2.3.4.1. 	No principal building shall be located in relation to another principal building on the same lot, or on an adjacent lot, so as to cause danger from fire; 
2.3.4.2. 	All principal buildings on the lot shall be served by access ways suitable for fire, police, and emergency vehicles as approved by the Inspector of Buildings; and 
2.3.4.3. 	All of the multiple principal buildings on the same lot shall be accessible via pedestrian walkways connected to the required parking for the premises, and to each principal building. 
2.3.4.4. 	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained within this Section 2.3.4.0., for purposes of construction of Renewable and Alternative Energy Research and Development Facilities (RE/AE R&D Facilities) within the I District under Section 2.1.1.8. and Section 2.2.3.0. of this By-Law, more than one (1) principal nonresidential structure may be erected on a lot in accordance with the conditions set forth in this Section 2.3.4.0. without the requirement of a special permit from the Board of Appeals, or take any action relative thereto. 
2.3.5.0. 	Unimproved Lots - Grandfathered or Undersized Lots.  Any unimproved lot that does not conform to the lot area or frontage requirements of this Section 2.3.0.0. shall be governed by the provisions of G.L. c. 40A, § 6, ¶ 4. 
2.3.6.0. 	Dimensional Special Permit. The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit to reduce otherwise applicable requirements for yard, height, open space, or lot coverage restrictions upon a finding that: 
2.3.6.1. 	There is no practical alternative to the proposed structure that is capable of complying with the dimensional requirement(s) for which relief is being sought and which achieves the same or more consistency with the architectural scale and style of other structures in the immediate area; and 
2.3.6.2. 	Such reduction may be accomplished without substantial detriment to the neighborhood; and 
2.3.6.3. 	The proposed structure is consistent with the architectural scale and style of those in the immediate area; and 
2.3.6.4. 	The benefit to the town and the neighborhood outweigh the adverse effects of the proposed structure, taking into account the characteristics of the site and of the proposal in relation to that site, including consideration of the items set forth in Sections 5.3.2.1. through 5.3.2.6., inclusive; and 
2.3.6.5. 	The resulting structure will not exceed a dimensional requirement by up to twenty (20%) percent of the underlying minimum yard setback requirement, up to ten (10%) percent of the underlying lot coverage or height requirement and up to fifty (50%) percent of the underlying minimum open space requirement (for example, without limitation, where the underlying dimensional requirement allows a maximum lot coverage of twenty-five (25%) percent, a dimensional special permit may only be issued to allow up to a twenty-seven and one-half (27.5%) percent maximum lot coverage; where the underlying dimensional requirement allows a minimum side yard setback of fifteen (15) feet, a dimensional special permit may only be issued to reduce the minimum side yard setback to twelve (12) feet; where the underlying dimensional requirement allows a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet, a dimensional special permit may only be issued to increase the maximum height to thirty eight and one-half (38.5) feet, where the underlying minimum open space requirement is twenty-five (25%) percent, a dimensional special permit may only be issued to decrease the minimum open space to twelve and one-half (12.5%) percent, etc.).  The percentage limitations contained in this Section 
2.3.6.5. shall not apply to (i) any project described in an application for a dimensional special permit pursuant to Section 2.3.6.0. that was filed with the Town Clerk prior to April 13, 2009, or (ii) any request for a dimensional special permit pursuant to Section 2.3.6.0. for relief from a minimum yard setback requirement, which request does not seek to extend the footprint of the structure any closer to the relevant lot line than currently exists, but which instead seeks to permit an addition to the structure that is proposed to be located the same or greater distance from the relevant lot line as the existing footprint of the structure.    
2.3.7.0. 	Height of Buildings. The provisions governing the height of buildings shall not apply to chimneys, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, non-mechanical ventilators, and other necessary appurtenant features usually carried above roofs.  Such features and structures may be erected to their required height and in excess of the height limits otherwise provided for the district in which the structure is built. This provision shall not be construed to exempt wireless communications facilities from the requirements of Section 4.3.0.0.   


2.3.8.0. Additional Regulations. 
2.3.8.1. 	Except as otherwise expressly permitted under this By-Law, every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for accessory buildings in the yard area, and except for ordinary projections of the belt courses, cornices, sills, skylights, and ornamental features projecting from the building.  Open or lattice enclosed fire escapes and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues are permitted. 
2.3.8.2. 	Projecting eaves, chimneys, bay windows, balconies, open and enclosed fire escapes and like projections which do not project more than five (5) feet from the line of the foundation wall, and unenclosed steps, unroofed porches and the like, which do not project more than ten (10) feet beyond the line of the foundation wall, need not comply with the yard regulations otherwise provided for the district in which the structure is built provided that a five (5) foot setback from all side and rear property lines is maintained. 
2.3.8.3. 	On corner lots, the set-back provisions governing the location of buildings on each of the abutting streets shall apply. 
2.3.8.4. 	A lot shall have a minimum width equal to the required frontage of the zoning district in which it lies for the entire depth of the required front yard; said width being measured parallel to the frontage for a lot having a straight frontage, and measured along a line having the same curvature as the frontage for a lot with a curved frontage.  Further, no portion of a lot shall have any width dimension less than fifty (50%) percent of the required frontage; with this lesser width being measured perpendicular to a side line.  See Appendix B, Figure 7. 
2.3.8.5. 	The minimum distance between multi-family buildings shall be forty 
(40) feet. 
2.3.8.6. 	Where a lot in a B-3, B-4, or I District abuts a residential district, the side yard setback for uses other than a single or two-family dwelling for the lot located in the B-3, B-4, or I District shall be 40 feet along the common boundary of such lot and the residential district. Where a lot in a B-2 District abuts a residential district, the side yard setback for uses other than a single or two-family dwelling for the lot located in the B-2 District shall be 30 feet along the common boundary of such lot and the residential district.  Where a lot in a B-1 District abuts a residential district, the side yard setback for uses other than a single or two-family dwelling for the lot located in the B-1 District shall be 20 feet along the common boundary of such lot and the residential district. 
2.3.8.7. 	Where a lot in a B-3, B-4, or I District abuts a residential district, the rear yard setback for uses other than a single or two-family dwelling for the lot located in the B-3, B-4, or I District shall be 40 feet along the common boundary of such lot and the residential district. Where a lot in a B-2 District abuts a residential district, the rear yard setback for uses other than a single or two-family dwelling for the lot located in the B-2 District shall be 30 feet along the common boundary of such lot and the residential district.  Where a lot in a B-1 District abuts a residential district, the rear yard setback for uses other than a single or two-family dwelling for the lot located in the B-1 District shall be 20 feet along the common boundary of such lot and the residential district. 
2.3.8.8. 	No accessory building or structure shall be located within the required front yard except for free-standing signs as set forth in Section 3.2.0.0., or appropriate fencing. 
2.3.8.9. 	No yard, court, or other open space required for a building in the B-3, B-4, and I Districts may be counted as open space for or occupied by another building. 
2.3.8.10. 	Planned Development Districts.  For dimensional regulations in a Planned Development District, see Section 4.5.3.0. and the Table of PDD Dimensional Regulations. 
[The remainder of this page is intentionally blank.] 
ARTICLE III. GENERAL REGULATIONS. 




3.1.0.0. Off-Street Parking and Loading. 
3.1.1.0. General Parking Requirements. 
3.1.1.1. 	Adequate off-street parking shall be provided to service all parking demand created by new structures, additions to existing structures, or changes of use. Existing buildings and uses need not comply unless expanded or otherwise changed to increase their parking needs. 
3.1.1.2. 	In applying for building or occupancy permits, the applicant shall demonstrate that the minimum parking requirements set forth below will be met for the new demand without counting existing parking necessary for existing uses to meet these requirements. 
3.1.1.3. 	Any parking or loading requirement set forth herein may be reduced upon the issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals if the Board finds that the reduction is not inconsistent with public health and safety, or that the reduction promotes a public benefit, and that the requirements set forth in Section 5.3.0.0. are fulfilled.  Such cases might include: 
a. 	
Use of a common parking lot for separate uses having peak demands occurring at different times; 

b. 	
Age or other characteristics of occupants of the facility requiring parking which reduces auto usage; or 

c. 	
Peculiarities of the use which make usual measures of demand invalid. 


A reserve area, to be maintained indefinitely as landscaped open space may be required sufficient to accommodate the difference between the spaces required (i.e. the sum of the spaces required for the separate uses individually) and the spaces provided.  The parking/site plan shall show (in dotted outline) how the reserve area would be laid out in full compliance with the required number of spaces. 
3.1.1.4. Applicability. The off-street parking and loading provisions of Section 
3.1.0.0. shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully existing as of the effective date of Section 3.1.1.4. or any amendment thereto, provided, however, the provisions of this Section 3.1.0.0. shall apply to the following: 
a. 	
New Structures and New Uses. For new structures erected and new uses of land established or authorized after the effective date of this Section 3.1.1.4. or any amendment thereto 

b. 	
Additions to Existing Structures. External additions of Gross Floor Area to existing structures for any use, accessory off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by the regulations for the districts in which such structures or uses are located, in which case additional off-street parking or loading facilities as required herein shall be provided for the total increase in intensity subsequent to the effective date of this Section 3.1.1.4. or any amendment thereto. 

c. 	
Expansion of Use. A expansion to an existing use within any existing structure (or lot as the case may be) where the existing use is increased through addition of dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified in Section 3.1.2.0. (but not including any uses in a new external addition to that structure, which shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (b) above), off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required for such expansion of use. 

d. 	
Change to New More Intensive Use.  A change from one use to a new use which pursuant to the parking requirements set forth in Section 3.1.2.0. below requires a greater number of off-street parking spaces than the existing use would require based on the parking requirements set forth in Section 3.1.2.0. below.   


3.1.2.0. 
Number of Spaces. For the purpose of computing the parking requirements of different uses, the number of spaces required shall be the largest whole number obtained after increasing all fractions upwards to one.  Employees shall include the largest number of owners, managers, full and part-time workers and volunteers that may be normally expected on the premises during any single shift or portion thereof. The number of seats in benches, pews, or other continuous seating arrangements shall be calculated at twenty (20) inches for each seat.  The following minimum parking requirements shall apply to Use Groups as listed below: 

3.1.2.1. In computing parking space requirements no space shall be counted which is needed for circulation or loading of vehicles. 
3.1.2.2. 	In computing gross floor area for the purposes of this Article III, eighty (80%) percent of the entire Gross Floor Area of each structure shall be included regardless of its intended use. 
3.1.2.3. 	Required spaces may be provided on the same lot with the principal use or on a contiguous or nearby lot in the same district, provided that no space is counted as meeting the requirement of more than one (1) use 2-way except as allowed below) and provided further that the distance between such parking lot and the use it serves shall not exceed two hundred (200) feet. 
3.1.2.4. 	For any uses(s) not assigned to an Off-Street Parking Group in Section 
2.2.3.0. above (except where Section 2.2.3.0. indicates “None” or “N/A”), the Inspector of Buildings shall determine the required amount of off-street parking reasonably necessary to accommodate the proposed uses(s), provided, however, where the underlying use(s) requires a Special Permit pursuant to Section 2.2.3.0. above, the Board of Appeals, and not the Inspector of Buildings, shall determine the required amount of off-street parking reasonably necessary to accommodate the proposed uses(s) for all use(s) not assigned to an Off-Street Parking Group in Section 2.2.3.0. above (except where Section 2.2.3.0. indicates “None” or “N/A”).  

3.1.3.0. 
Size of Parking Spaces. A parking space shall mean an equivalent ninety (90°) degree width of nine (9) feet by an equivalent ninety (90°) degree depth of eighteen 


OFF-STREET PARKING USE GROUP  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENT  
A  One per dwelling unit  
A-MF  One and one-half parking spaces per residential unit  
A-HO  One per each person that is employed at but does not reside at the premises  
B  One per each rented room  
C  One per employee on largest shift, plus one per guest room, plus one per one hundred square feet of space in function rooms not designed for eating  
D  One per each fifty square feet of gross floor area, or one per each three seats of rated capacity, whichever may require the larger number of spaces  
E  One per each four seats of rated capacity  
F  One per each three persons of rated capacity  
G  One per each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area  
H  One per staff member, plus one per employee, plus one per each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area  
I  One per staff member, one per employee, plus one per each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area  
J  One per each employee on the largest shift, and one for each company-owned or operated vehicle, plus space for customers' vehicles and-loading space as appropriate  
K  One space for each ATM  

(18) feet in size, provided, however, up to twenty-five (25%) percent of parking spaces may be reduced to an equivalent ninety (90°) degree width of eight and one half (8.5) feet by an equivalent ninety (90°) degree depth of sixteen (16) feet.        
3.1.4.0. Lanes for Circulation and Access. 
3.1.4.1. 	Two (2) way lanes for circulation shall be twenty-four (24) feet in width, provided, however, lanes for circulation for one-way traffic shall be no less than twenty (20) feet in width.   
3.1.4.2. 	A reasonable number of entrances from, and exits to, the highway shall be provided for the lots to be served by such highway, and shall be located with proper regard to the proposed use of the developed area and safety to the pedestrian and vehicular traffic.  Where appropriate, paved areas leading to and from entrances and exits shall also be provided. 
3.1.5.0. Parking Lot Design. 
3.1.5.1. 	A strip of land not less than six (6) feet in width shall be provided on at least two (2) sides of a parking lot or area and designated on the parking/site plan for the storage of snow plowed from the parking lot; such snow storage area may be located in landscaped areas or in areas of required setbacks from lot lines or building lines. 
3.1.5.2. 	Only light areas as required for safety and comfort.  Do not exceed eighty (80%) percent of the lighting power densities for exterior areas and fifty (50%) percent of lighting power densities for building facades and landscape features as defined in ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1 – 2004, Exterior Lighting Section, without amendments. Design exterior lighting within the B1, B2, B3, and I Districts so that all lighting produces a no more than a maximum initial luminance value greater than 0.20 horizontal and vertical footcandles at the site boundary and no greater than 0.01 horizontal footcandles 15 feet from the boundary of the property. Document that no more than five (5%) percent of the total initial designed fixture lumens are emitted at an angle of ninety (90) degrees or height from nadir (straight down).  For site boundaries that abut public rights-of-way, light trespass requirements may be met related to the curb line instead of the site boundary. The use of low intensity, shielded fixtures as well as so-called curfew controllers to turn off non-essential site lighting is highly encouraged to further reduce the effects of light pollution.  
3.1.5.3. 	The use of metal guardrails around parking drives and parking lots is not permitted.  Where guardrails are used the type provided shall be of the heavy wooden timber variety.  Metal or steel bollard, however, are permitted. 
3.1.5.4. 	Landscaping requirements are set forth in Section 3.3.0.0.  
3.1.5.5. 	Open parking lots containing six (6) or more parking spaces shall be set back twenty (20) feet from the street line and twenty (20) feet back from all other lines; provided, however, that along a boundary between business and residential use, parking lot setback shall be twenty-five 
(25) feet. 
3.1.6.0. Off-Street Loading. All buildings requiring the delivery of goods, supplies, or materials, or shipments of the same shall have bays and suitable maneuvering space for off-street loading of vehicles as the Inspector of Buildings determines is reasonably necessary to accommodate the demands of the building or use(s), provided, however, where the underlying building or use(s) requires a Special Permit, the Board of Appeals shall determine the required amount of off-street loading bays, and where the underlying building or use(s) requires a Site Plan Special Permit in accordance with Section 5.4.0.0. below, the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall determine the number of off-street loading bays reasonably necessary to accommodate the demands of the building or use(s).  Off-Street Loading Bays shall be subject to the following additional requirements: 
a. 	
All off-street loading bays shall accurately be shown on a plan, including the location of the required or proposed off-street loading spaces, access thereto, dimensions and clearance. 

b. 	
Off-street loading facilities are required by these zoning regulations so that vehicles engaged in unloading will not encroach on or interfere with the public use of streets, sidewalks, and alleys by automotive vehicles or pedestrians and so that adequate space is available for the unloading and loading of goods, materials, items or stock for delivery and shipping. 

c. 	
Off-street loading facilities provided to meet the needs of one use may not be considered as meeting the needs of another use unless it is determined that the shared use of off-street loading facilities is reasonable and appropriate given the proposed uses and the location of the off-street loading facilities. 

d. 	
Off-street parking facilities may not be used or counted as meeting off-street loading requirements. 

e. 	
Adequate on-site area exists for the loading and unloading of such trucks. Such loading and unloading activity shall not be permitted in any public right-of-way. 

f. 	
To the extent possible, access to loading areas shall be only from arterial or collector roadways and not from local streets. 

g. 	
Loading areas shall be signed to indicate “no idling” and no idling shall be permitted. 

h. 	
Any loading area located adjacent to a residential use shall not receive deliveries between the hours of 10 PM and 6 AM. 


3.2.0.0. Signs. 
3.2.1.0. Applicability.  No signs are permitted in any district other than those signs listed herein which comply with the provisions of this Section 3.2.0.0. 
3.2.2.0. General Standards – All Districts. 
3.2.2.1.  Flashing, moving, animated, or intermittently operating signs or advertising devices are not permitted except for signs showing only temperature and/or time displays.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, rotating barber poles not greater than thirty (30) inches in height are permitted.  
3.2.2.2.  Pennants, banners, flags, and streamers are not permitted in any district, except as set forth in Section 3.2.3.7. below.  

3.2.2.3. 	Billboards or off-premises signs are prohibited except as expressly provided herein. 
3.2.2.4. 	Moveable, portable, sandwich sign, or "trailer signs" are prohibited except as expressly provided herein. 
3.2.2.5. 	All signs, except temporary political signs, and other temporary signs listed in Section 3.2.5.3., shall be related harmoniously to the buildings to which they are attached or, if free-standing, to adjacent buildings. Signs shall be compatible in character, material, appearance, and scale with the general character of the Town of Swampscott and shall endeavor to enhance the visual environment. 
3.2.2.6. 	Awnings for buildings containing non-residential uses are permitted subject to the requirements of Section 3.2.5.5.  All awnings (and portions of the awnings/valences) shall be fixed or folding (retractable). Multiple awnings on a single building shall be consistent in size, profile and location and shall be limited to the first story of the building. Multi-tenant building awnings may vary in color but shall be located at the same height and have similar profiles to preserve the architectural lines of the building.  Awnings shall not span numerous storefronts. 
3.2.2.6. (a). Permitted 
a. 	
Fire-resistant, water-repellant marine canvas material. Other material may be considered through Site Plan Review process. 

b. 	
Down-lighting under an awning that is intended to illuminate the sidewalk under the awning 


3.2.2.6. (b). Not Permitted 
a. 	
Round or bull-nose awnings except for a single window or door. 

b. 	
Vinyl or vinyl-coated, metal or glass material. 

c. 	
Internally-illuminated awnings. 


Where lettering is desired on awnings, any lettering or graphics on an awning shall be counted towards the maximum area (s.f.) of exterior advertising signage otherwise permitted under this By-Law.  The valance on an awning shall not exceed 10” in height.  Awning lettering and signage shall be on a valance only and a maximum of 6” in height. 
With regard to all existing awnings, a replacement of an awning or any change or alteration of lettering or graphics on an awning shall be considered a new awning and subject to the restrictions set forth in this section. When installing awnings, both signs and awnings shall be updated to comply with current signage by-law requirements. 
All awnings shall undergo an Administrative Site Plan Review by the Planning Board. (ATM 5/5/2014) 
3.2.2.7. 	No sign or other advertising device attached to a building or roof overhang shall project more than twelve (12) inches above the roof ridge or parapet line.  All roof signs are prohibited except in the case of a building with a mansard roof in which case no part of the sign shall be higher than the top edge of the slope.  Signs may not be attached to chimneys, penthouses, rooftop equipment, or the like; provided, however, that in the case of a sloped roof (but not a mansard), a roof sign shall be permitted provided that the overall length of the sign does not exceed one-fifth (1/5) of the building length and provided that the height of the sign does not exceed one-tenth (1/10) the height of the rise of the roof (measured vertically), and provided that the sign aligns with, or is within two (2) feet of the building cornice/fascia. 
3.2.2.8. 	No sign, other than municipal signs or signs approved by the Board of Selectmen under Section 3.2.5.3. below, shall be pasted or attached to utility poles or municipal sign poles, or private or municipal fences. No signs shall be attached to trees. 
3.2.2.9. 	All exterior lighting of signs, to the extent permitted under this By-Law, shall be shielded so as not to cast light directly on adjacent streets or properties. The lighting source shall be shielded from view from adjacent roadways and properties.  The level of illumination of lighting shall be low so as to reduce the glow of ambient light perceptible on adjacent properties.  Lighting shall not exceed fifty (50%) percent of lighting power densities for building facades and landscape features as defined in ASHRAE/IESNA Standard 90.1 – 2004, Exterior Lighting Section, without amendments. 
3.2.2.10. 	All signs and their related supports shall be kept in full repair, and when not galvanized, shall be painted when necessary to prevent corrosion, decay, or an unsightly or neglected appearance.  The Inspector of Buildings shall inspect all signs and require any sign to be removed for failure to comply with the provisions of this Section 
3.2.2.10. 
3.2.3.0. Permitted Signs. 
3.2.3.1. 	In all districts, two (2) real estate signs per lot, each not over six (6) square feet in area, advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which it is located, and referring to premises. 
3.2.3.2. 	In all districts, directional and traffic signs, each not exceeding nine 
(9) square feet in area, and carrying no advertising. 
3.2.3.3. 	In all districts, one (1) contractor’s sign, not exceeding six (6) feet in area, and not exceeding six (6) feet above grade as measured to the topmost portion of the sign, may be displayed in connection with the ongoing renovation or construction of a building.  The sign shall be removed within the earlier to occur of (a) ninety (90) days following the issuance of the building permit permitting such work or project; or 
(b)
 ten (10) days following the completion of the work or project. Such sign shall be attached to the building, provided that: 

a. 	
such sign may be placed on a fence in front of the construction project solely in the event that the frame of such building is not yet constructed; or 

b. 	
such sign may be placed within ten (10) feet of the construction project, on the site of the land containing the construction project, solely in the event that: 

a. 	
the frame of such building is not yet constructed; and 

b. 	
a fence in front of the construction project is not yet constructed. 




3.2.3.4. 	In any residential district one (1) "professional offices" sign per lot on the premises of such offices provided, however, that the size of such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area, except as authorized by Section 2.2.7.7.  No other signs relating to any commercial use, except those related to permitted home occupations as provided in Section 2.2.6.2. above and those otherwise expressly permitted in this Section 3.2.0.0., shall be permitted within any residential district. 
3.2.3.5. 	In all districts, one (1) free-standing sign per lot (except where more my be allowed by other provisions of this by-law) identifying the premises of a municipal building, school, church, temple, or other religious organization building provided, however, that the size of such sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in any residential district unless a special permit is obtained and sixty (60) square feet in any other district. 
3.2.3.6. 	In all districts, one (1) free-standing sign not exceeding four (4) feet high by eight (8) feet wide on property proposed for subdivision to be removed upon completion of the development of the subdivision. 
3.2.3.7. 	In all districts the following are permitted: 
a. 	
Pennants, banners, flags, streamers, windsocks, etc. for non­commercial purposes are permitted provided such do not exceed eighteen (18) square feet in area and which are not illuminated. 

b. 	
Country, state, county, or other level of government flags for non­commercial purposes. 

c. 	
In the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and I District flags for commercial purpose are permitted provided such flags comply with the following requirements: 


1) Only one flag, projecting out from the face of the building, may be used as a sign in addition to any other sign or signs otherwise permitted in this By-Law; 
2) Such a flag shall be mounted in a temporary manner in order to be displayed only during business hours; 
3) Such a flag shall may not exceed six (6) square feet and shall be rectangular or square in shape; 
4) When displayed, the height of the bottom point of such flag or banner shall not be less than seven (7) feet from the path of travel; 
5) If such flags project over Town property, permission from the Board of Selectmen is required; 
6) The flag shall be made of woven material, manufactured using man-made or natural fibers. 
3.2.3.8. 	In the B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and I Districts, one (1) free-standing sign not exceeding four (4) feet high by six (6) feet wide advertising that space on the property is for rent, provided that such sign shall not be permitted more than six (6) months prior to the date such space will be available for occupancy and such sign shall be removed once the property is rented. 
3.2.4.0. District or Use Regulations. 
3.2.4.1. Signs in the B-1 and B-2 Districts. 
(a)
 In the B-1 and B-2 Districts, upon the issuance of a permit from the Inspector of Buildings as provided in Section 3.2.6.0. below and, as applicable, upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals where the underlying use requires or required a Special Permit in accordance with Section 2.2.3.0. or a Site Plan Special Permit by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority where the development requires or required a Site Plan Special Permit in accordance with Section 5.4.0.0., there shall be permitted for each permitted commercial use one (1) sign attached flat against the wall of the building where such use is located identifying the name, standard logo, and/or standard graphic of the user, provided, however, the following requirements are met: 

(i) 
the area of the sign does not exceed forty-five (45) square feet, provided, however, permitted commercial uses having an area of more than ten thousand (10,000) g.s.f. shall be permitted to have an area of up to ninety (90) square feet in size, provided that such sign is designed as part of the architectural decor of the building and that it is set back at least seventy-five (75) feet from the street or way on which it fronts. 

(ii) 
the sign is not internally illuminated or illuminated from behind, provided, however, the requirements of this subsection (ii) may be altered in the B-2 District by Special Permit granted by the Board of Appeals. 


(iii) where there is more than one (1) permitted commercial user in a single building, all signs must be the same height, the same geometric shape, located in a single continuous line above the storefronts, made of the same materials and quality, and there must be at least a three (3) foot buffer in between each such sign. See Figure 5 in Appendix B. 
(iv) 
the sign is not comprised of individually illuminated letters.   

(v) 
the sign does not relate to any use which is not located on the first floor of the building, provided, however, a sign for a use not located on the first floor of the building may be permitted upon issuance of a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals in accordance with the findings required under Section 5.3.2.0. below and provided that the sign is integrated as part of the architectural design of the building. 

(vi) 
in the B-1 District only, (w) each sign shall be no more than thirty (30) inches tall, (x) all graphics and lettering in the sign must be colored gold (which color shall be the same as the gold color used on all other signs on the building), (y) the signs must contain a gold colored line having a width of at least one (1) inch located no less than one (1) inch inside the perimeter of the display area of the sign (which gold colored line shall be the same as the gold color used on all other signs on the building). 



(b) 
In addition, subject to receipt of a Special Permit from the Board of Appeals under Section 5.3.0.0. below and a permit from the Inspector of Buildings as provided in Section 3.2.6.0. below, one (1) free-standing sign may be permitted per commercial development in the B-1 and B-2 Districts, provided that the off-street parking for such commercial development is located adjacent to the street or way on which the commercial development fronts, such free-standing sign does not exceed thirty (30) square feet in area, and such free-standing sign does not exceed eighteen (18) feet in height. 

(c) 
In addition to the signs permitted above, within the B-1 and B-2 Districts, upon the issuance of a permit from the Inspector of Buildings as provided in Section 3.2.6.0. below and, upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals where the underlying use requires or required a Special Permit in accordance with Section 


2.2.3.0. or a Site Plan Special Permit by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority where the development requires or required a Site Plan Special Permit in accordance with Section 5.4.0.0., one (1) or more projection signs extending at a ninety (90) degree angle from the front of a building may be permitted, in addition to the signs otherwise permitted, provided the following requirements are met: 
(i) 
the projection sign is not located any closer than thirty (30) feet from any other projection sign and only one (1) projection sign is permitted for each permitted commercial use; 

(ii) 
where more than one (1) projection sign is located on a building the top of each such sign shall be constant across the entire building; 


(iii) each projection sign shall have a height no greater than thirty 
(30)
 inches and a width no greater than twenty (24) inches, provided, however, the area of such projection sign shall be counted towards the maximum area permitted for all exterior signs on the building; 

(iv) 
the bottom of each projection sign shall be located at least seven and one-half (7.5) feet above grade; 

(v) 
each projection sign shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the front wall of the building to which it is affixed; 

(vi) 
each projection sign shall (w) be of the same or better materials and quality as all other signs on the building, (x) not be internally illuminated or illuminated from behind, (y) have a single background color, and (z) contain only the name, standard logo, and/or standard graphic of the user; 


(vii) the projection sign is located in front of the use to which it related; and 
(viii) in the reasonable judgment of the Inspector of Buildings or, as applicable, the Board of Appeals, the projection sign does not constitute a public safety concern. 
(d) In addition to the signs permitted above, within the B-1 and B-2 Districts, awnings (new or replacement) without lettering or graphics may be installed upon approval through Administrative Site Plan Review by the Planning Board. Replacement awnings without a change or alteration of lettering or graphics on the awning may be installed upon approval through Administrative Site Plan Review by the Planning Board. For the purposes of this By-law, a change or alteration shall include any change in the font size or font type, any change in the content of the text and/or the addition or removal of any graphics. New awnings with lettering or graphics or replacement awnings with a change or alteration of lettering or graphics may be installed upon approval through Administrative Site Plan Review by the Planning Board and granting of a Special Permit issued by the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 5.3.0.0. 
 Planning Board Site Plan Review  ZBA Special Permit  
New awning with no lettering or graphics  Yes  No  
Replacement awning with no lettering or graphics  Yes  No  
New awning with lettering or graphics  Yes  Yes  
Replacement with lettering or graphics but not changing  Yes  No  
Replacement with lettering or graphics that is changing  Yes  Yes  

3.2.4.2. Signs in the B-3, B-4, and I Districts. 
(a) 
In the B-3, B-4, and I-Districts upon the issuance of a permit from the Inspector of Buildings as provided in Section 3.2.6.0. below and, as applicable, upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals where the underlying use requires or required a Special Permit in accordance with Section 2.2.3.0. or a Site Plan Special 

Permit by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority where the development requires or required a Site Plan Special Permit in accordance with Section 5.4.0.0., there shall be permitted for each permitted commercial use one (1) sign attached flat against the wall of the building where such use is located identifying the name, standard logo, and/or standard graphics of the user, provided, however, uses located in the end unit of a building (i.e., where the front and side of the premises containing the  permitted use are comprised of exterior walls of the building) may have one (1) sign on each of the front and side(s) of the building.  No sign for any permitted use shall have a display area greater than sixty (60) square feet in size, provided, however, permitted commercial uses having an area of more than ten thousand (10,000) g.s.f. shall be permitted to have a display area of up to one hundred and twenty (120) square feet in size, provided that such sign is designed as part of the architectural decor of the building.  No sign shall be more than four (4) feet in height except as expressly provided herein. For the purposes of this Section 3.2.4.2. individually illuminated channel letters identifying the name of a commercial business, together with an ancillary so-called “pill sign” directly underneath the individually illuminated letters, shall be considered a single sign provided that such individual letters and the pill sign shall in no event in the aggregate exceed four (4) feet in height, and the total area of the letters and the pill sign do not exceed the maximum display area otherwise permitted for the sign (i.e., sixty (60) s.f. or one hundred twenty (120) s.f., as applicable).  Where there is more than one (1) permitted commercial user in a single building, there must be at least a three (3) foot buffer in between each sign. An example of individual channel letters and a pill sign is set forth in Figure 5 of Appendix B to this By-Law. 

(b) 
In addition to the signs permitted above, within the B-3, B-4, and I Districts, subject to receipt of a special permit from the Board of Appeals and a permit from the Inspector of Buildings as provided in Section 3.2.6.0. below, one (1) free-standing sign may be permitted per commercial development, located at any entrance to the premises, not to exceed sixty (60) square feet in area and not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. 

(c) 
In addition to the signs permitted above, within the B-3, B-4, and I Districts, upon the issuance of a permit from the Inspector of Buildings as provided in Section 3.2.6.0. below and, as applicable, upon the issuance of a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals where the underlying use requires or required a Special Permit in accordance with Section 2.2.3.0. or a Site Plan Special Permit by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority where the planned developed requires or required a Site Plan Special Permit in accordance with Section 5.4.0.0., one (1) or more projection signs extending at a ninety 

(90)
 degree angle from the front of a building may be permitted, in addition to the signs otherwise permitted, provided the following requirements are met: 

(i) 
the projection sign is not located any closer than thirty (30) feet from any other projection sign and only one (1) projection sign is permitted for each permitted commercial use; 

(ii) 
where more than one (1) projection sign is located on a building the top of each such sign shall be constant across the entire building; 


(iii) each projection sign shall have a height no greater than thirty 
(30)
 inches and a width no greater than twenty (24) inches; 

(iv) 
the bottom of each projection sign shall be located at least seven and one-half (7.5) feet above grade; 

(v) 
each projection sign shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the front wall of the building to which it is affixed; 

(vi) 
each projection sign shall (x) not be internally illuminated or illuminated from behind, (y) have a single background color, and 

(z)
 contain only the name, standard logo, or standard graphic of the user; 


(vii) the projection sign is located in front of the use to which it related; and 
(viii) in the reasonable judgment of the Inspector of Buildings or, as applicable, the Board of Appeals, the projection sign does not constitute a public safety concern. 

(d) 
In addition to the signs permitted above, within the B-3, B-4, and I Districts, awnings (new or replacement) without lettering or graphics may be installed upon approval through Administrative Site Plan Review by the Planning Board. Replacement awnings without a change or alteration of lettering or graphics on the awning may be installed upon approval through Administrative Site Plan Review by the Planning Board. For the purposes of this By-law, a change or alteration shall include any change in the font size or font type, any change in the content of the text and/or the addition or removal of any graphics. New awnings with lettering or graphics or replacement awnings with a change or alteration of lettering or graphics may be installed upon approval through Administrative Site Plan Review by the Planning Board and granting of a Special Permit issued by the 


Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 5.3.0.0. See table provided in Section 3.2.4.1. (d) for reference. 
3.2.4.3. 	At a gas station, in addition to the signs normally permitted in the district, the following signs are permitted: 
a. 	
standard and typical per-gallon price signs atop fuel pumps; 

b. 	
one location of per-gallon price signs not attached to fuel pumps; and 

c. 	
"no smoking" signs required by law. 


3.2.5.0. Specific Sign Types. 
3.2.5.1. 	Intentionally omitted. 
3.2.5.2. 	Window Signs. Temporary and permanent window signs are permitted only in the first-floor windows of a building.  The total area of all signs (temporary and permanent added together) in any window shall not exceed twenty-five (25%) percent of the glass area of the window. Window signs in the B-3, B-4, and I Districts may be illuminated.  In the B-1 and B-2 Districts window signs may not be illuminated except for one (1) “open” sign having an area no greater than two (2) square feet. See Figure 6 in Appendix B. 
3.2.5.3. 	Temporary Signs. Except as otherwise noted, there shall be no temporary or special promotional signs; provided, however, that the following temporary signs are allowed: 
a. 	
Temporary "car wash", “fair", "bazaar", and similar signs to be used for a single day (provided that any other required permits or authorization have been received). 

b. 	
Temporary one-day "garage sale" signs (provided that any other required permits or authorizations have been received). 

c. 	
Temporary one-day "open house" signs used for real estate purposes (provided that any other required permits or authorizations have been received). 

d. 	
Signs that advertise approved subdivisions as outlined in the Town of Swampscott Rules and Regulations. 

e. 	
The seasonal display of signs and exterior lighting for the purpose of celebration of holidays. 

f. 	
Special advertising displays, banners or signs, visible from a public way, for municipal purposes or by churches, civic or charitable organizations or for community drives or celebrations may be displayed only on permit from the Board of Selectmen, such permits to be good for a minimum of ten (10) days and maximum of three (3) months, as may be determined at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen. A permit may be renewed within the same calendar year at the discretion of the Board of Selectmen. 


3.2.5.4. 	Traffic Island Sponsor Signs. For the purpose of identifying the sponsor of the landscaping on a traffic island, traffic island sponsor signs shall be permitted on islands from May 1 through October 31 of each year, according to the following requirements: 
a. 	
The overall size of the sign, inclusive of the sign frame (if any), shall be twelve inches by eighteen inches (12" x 18").  The signboard shall be made of a single rigid sheet of plywood of 

M.D.O. board. One (1) or two (2) posts shall support this sign. 

b. 	
The maximum allowable distance from the grade to the top of the sign, inclusive of the sign frame, shall be twenty-six (26) inches. One (1) sign per island is permitted. 

c. 	
The sign, including letters, shall be non-illuminated, non-reflective, painted sign. The colors of the sign shall be as follows:   


Signboard: dark green (color equivalent to Benjamin Moore paint Classic Color #602 – Gondola Ride). Lettering: white. Sign frame (if any): dark green, dark brown, or black. Sign post(s): dark green, dark brown, or black. 
d. 	
The signboard shall be painted on both sides and may have lettering on one (1) or both sides.  No images other than letters or numerals shall appear on the sign. 

e. 	
The lettered message of the sign shall contain only the words: "sponsored by", followed by the name of the individual(s) or business sponsoring the landscaping on the island.  The address or the individual(s) may be included on the sign.  No other words or message shall appear on the sign. 

f. 	
No phone numbers shall appear on the sign.  No product trademarks or corporate logos shall appear on the sign. 


3.2.5.5. Projection Signs and Awnings. Except as provided in Sections 3.2.4.1. and 3.2.4.2. above, no projection sign or awning shall be erected without a Special Permit issued by the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 5.3.0.0. 
3.2.6.0. 	Permit Requirements. No sign shall be erected, altered, or relocated without a permit issued by the Inspector of Buildings (except for real estate signs, political signs, window signs, contractor signs and traffic island sponsor signs that comply with the provisions of this section, and temporary signs as defined in Section 3.2.5.3.). Such permit shall not be issued by the Inspector of Buildings until a proper certificate of public liability insurance is in force. 
3.2.6.1. 	Applications.  Applications shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the proposed location, including a photograph of the building facade where the sign is to be located and a portion of adjoining buildings, if applicable; and a dimensional sketch, showing the design, dimensions and position of the sign on the building facade, and such other pertinent information as the Inspector of Buildings may require to ensure compliance with this By-Law. 
3.2.6.2. 	A Special Permit or Site Plan Special Permit relating to the proposed sign has been obtained as required by Section 3.2.4.1. or 3.2.4.2. above. 
3.2.6.3. 	A permit shall be issued only if a sign conforms to the provisions of this By-Law and, as applicable, the conditions contained with the Special Permit or Site Plan Special Permit granted in accordance with Section 3.2.4.1. or 3.2.4.2. above. 
3.2.7.0. 	Enforcement. The Inspector of Buildings is charged with the enforcement of this section. The Inspector of Buildings shall require the proper erection and maintenance of all signs, awnings, and related supports.  The Inspector of Buildings may order the removal of any sign or awning that is not properly maintained, is deemed to constitute a public safety hazard or nuisance or that does not otherwise comply with the requirements of this By-Law.  The cost of removal shall be borne by the owner of the sign or of the property on which it is erected.  
3.3.0.0. General Landscaping and Screening Requirements. 
3.3.1.0. 	Landscaping. The following requirements for landscaping apply to parking lots with six or more spaces in all districts.  For the purpose of this section, landscaping shall consist of any of the following or combination thereof: grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, flowers, water, hedges, or trees; and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, or wood chips, but excluding asphalt or concrete. Asphalt, concrete, flagstone, etc., may be used in walkways, walls, and other landscaping features but no amount of “hard” materials such as these shall be counted (in area calculations) toward the required landscaped areas outlined below.  All landscaped areas shall be regularly maintained, including for example, appropriate watering of plantings, weeding, pruning and replacement of dead plantings. 
3.3.1.1. 	At least five (5%) percent of the interior area of the parking facility shall be landscaped. This does not include perimeter planting. 
3.3.1.2. 	Each interior and exterior planting area shall be at least twenty-five 
(25) square feet in area and have no dimension less than five (5) feet. 
3.3.1.3. 	Each interior and exterior planting area shall contain at least one (1) tree and the facility as a whole shall contain at least two (2) trees for every ten (10) parking spaces. 
3.3.1.4. 	Trees used to satisfy parking lot landscaping requirements shall be a minimum of four (4) inch caliper at planting and shall be of species suitable for survival in the parking lot environment.  Caliper of tree is measured at point on trunk four (4) feet above grade where tree is planted. 
3.3.1.5. 	Existing trees shall be preserved wherever possible. Removal of any tree exceeding six (6) inch caliper is strongly discouraged. 
3.3.1.6. 	Existing and new trees shall be protected by bollards, high curbs or other barriers sufficient to minimize damage. 
3.3.1.7. 	Extensive unbroken paved areas in large on-grade open parking facilities shall not be permitted.  In parking lots containing twenty-five 
(25) or more spaces, a row shall contain no more than fifteen (15) contiguous parking spaces without a densely planted landscaped buffer of at least the dimensions of one (1) space.  Such buffer shall also contain at least one (1) tree. 
3.3.2.0. 	Screening.  The following uses of land shall be screened from adjacent residentially used or classified properties as set forth herein: (i) Property line(s) between nonresidential and residential uses or districts; (ii) off-street parking facilities containing six (6) or more spaces and not in a structure; and (iii) refuse disposal and dumpster areas, outdoor storage areas of goods and materials. 
3.3.2.1. 	Screening shall consist of a strip of at least five (5) feet in width of densely planted shrubs or trees which are at least two (2) feet high at the time of planting and are of a type that may be expected to form within three (3) years after time of planting a continuous, unbroken year-round visual screen. 
3.3.2.2.	 Intentionally Omitted. 
3.3.2.3. 	Screening as required in this subsection shall be located so as not to obstruct vehicle sight distances, entrances and exits.  Such screening shall not be higher than two (2) feet within thirty (30) feet of an intersection or ten (10) feet of a driveway.  In no case shall the screening of parking facilities from abutting streets exceed four (4) feet in height. 
3.3.2.4. 	Plantings shall be of trees of a species common to the area and appropriate for screening, spaced to minimize visual intrusion, and providing an opaque year-round visual buffer between uses.  Such plantings shall be provided and maintained by the owner of the property used for nonresidential purposes. 
3.3.2.5. 	Screening shall be continuously maintained to as to effectively serve the purpose for which it is intended.  No advertising devices of any kind shall be allowed on screening. 
3.3.2.6. 	Screening shall be continuous except for required access. 
3.3.3.0. 	Exceptions.  These landscaping and screening regulations shall not apply to a change of use of an existing building or a change of ownership as long as the new use does not involve a substantial traffic increase over the previous use as determined by the Inspector of Buildings. 
3.3.4.0. 	Waiver or Modification. The Board of Appeals shall have by special permit, or, where a Site Plan Special Permit is required, the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall have in connection with approval of the Site Plan Special Permit, the power to waive or modify any of these requirements under Section 3.3.0.0. when in its judgment the findings set forth in Section 5.3.2.0. are met and it determines that the strict application of such requirements would result in peculiar or exceptional difficulties, or exceptional and undue hardship, or in a specific instance where for topographic reasons fences, walls and screening as herein required could not possibly screen the activities conducted at ground level on the lot from view from the normal level of a first story window on any lot in a residence district either abutting such business area or abutting on a street across from such business.  
3.4.0.0. Environmental Standards. 
3.4.1.0. Disturbances. Repealed - number is reserved for future use. 
3.4.2.0. 	Lighting. All exterior lighting, except municipal street lighting, shall be shielded so as not to cast light directly on adjacent streets or properties.  The lighting source shall be shielded from view from adjacent roadways and properties. The level of illumination of lighting shall be low so as to reduce the glow of ambient light perceptible on adjacent properties.  All exterior lighting shall also comply with other applicable requirements of this By-Law, including, for example, Sections 3.1.5.2. and 
3.2.2.9. above. 
3.5.0.0. Approved Street Plan. 
3.5.1.0. 	General. No permit for the erection of any building shall be issued unless the lot to be built upon has frontage on a street, as defined in this Zoning By-Law, or, if it is an unconstructed way, such way has, in the opinion of the Swampscott Planning Board, sufficient width and suitable grades to permit street construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed uses of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon; and further, that a street plan based on the above criteria shall have been approved by the Swampscott Planning Board, and construction of the street shall have been secured by one, or in part by one and in part by another of the methods described in the following subsections 3.5.1.1. and 3.5.1.2., which method or combination of methods may be selected and from time to time varied by the applicant: 
3.5.1.1. 	By a proper bond, sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board to secure performance of the construction of the street and the installation of municipal services required for the lot shown on the plan, and the Planning Board may require that the applicant specify the time within which such construction shall be completed. 
3.5.1.2. 	By a deposit of money or negotiable securities, sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board to secure performance of the construction of the street and the installation of municipal services required for the lot shown on the plan, and the Planning Board may require that the applicant specify the time within which such construction shall be completed. 
3.6.0.0. Assisted and Independent Living Facilities. 
3.6.1.0. 	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism for the approval of: 
3.6.1.1. 	Assisted living facilities (ALF) within a residential environment that offer supportive services to individuals who are unable to live independently in the community by offering supervision and/or assistance with basic activities of daily life, such as, but not limited to, dressing, bathing, toileting, and nutrition;  and 
3.6.1.2. 	Independent living facilities (ILF) that offer congregate living arrangements to persons over the age of fifty-five (55); and 
3.6.1.3. 	The development of ALF and ILF in a manner that conserves environmental features, woodlands, wet areas, open  space, areas of scenic beauty, views and vistas as well as encouraging the renovation and rehabilitation of older, existing buildings; and 
3.6.1.4. 	The development of ALF and ILF in a manner harmonious with the surrounding land uses while protecting natural resources and open space. 
3.6.2.0. 	Definitions. Within Section 3.6.0.0., the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Applicant: The person or persons, including a corporation or other legal entity, who applies for issuance of a special permit hereunder.  The Applicant shall own, or be the beneficial owner of, all the land included in the proposed site, or have authority from the owner(s) to act for him/her/it/them or hold an option or contract duly executed by the owner(s) and the Applicant giving the latter the right to acquire the land to be included in the site. 
Assisted Living Facility (ALF): Assisted Living Residence or Residence means any entity, however organized, whether conducted for profit or not for profit, which is licensed by the Commonwealth as an ALF and meets all of the following criteria: 
(a) 	
provides room and board; and 

(b) 
provides, directly by employees of the entity or through arrangements with another organization which the entity may or may not control or own, Personal Care Services for three (3) or more adults who are not related by consanguinity or affinity to their care provider; and 

(c)
 collects payments or third party reimbursements from or on behalf of Residents to pay for the provision of assistance with the Activities of Daily Living or arranges for the same. 


Bedroom: A separate room intended for, or which customarily could be used for, sleeping. 
Dwelling Unit: A residence, including studio units.  Each residence shall contain a living area, bathroom and, except in studio units, one (1) or more bedrooms, and may contain a kitchen area or combination kitchen/living area.  
Independent Living Facility (ILF): A facility reserved by deed for occupancy by persons over the age of fifty-five (55) who are able to care for themselves, but with some common facilities as described herein. 
Land: Land, including areas covered by water. 
Regulations: The rules and regulations of the Board of Appeals.  
Wetlands: Land subject to the provisions of M.G.L. c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A. 
3.6.3.0. 	Special Permit. The development of an ALF and/or an ILF may be permitted upon the issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals, and upon site plan approval pursuant to Section 5.4.0.0. 
3.6.4.0. 	Application. An application for a special permit shall be submitted to the Board of Appeals on forms furnished by the Board.  Each such application shall be accompanied, if applicable, by a definitive plan of land pursuant to the Regulations of the Planning Board. In addition the applicants shall submit: 
3.6.4.1. The following plans: 
a. 	
a site plan pursuant to Section 5.4.0.0.; 

b. 	
a plan at a scale of 1" = 40' showing the topography of the site at a minimum of two (2) foot intervals, as well as vegetation and special features, including wetlands, perennial streams and ponds, trees of more than eight (8) inch caliper, rock outcroppings, slopes in excess of fifteen (15%) percent, existing and proposed trails and paths, open vistas, structures of historical importance and biological or wildlife habitats, and proposed conservation and recreation easement areas; and 

c. 	
a plan illustrating preliminary landscaping and architectural design, showing types, location and layout of buildings, and typical elevations, as well as the general height, bulk and appearance of structures. Perspective drawings may be subsequently required by the Board of Appeals. 


3.6.4.2. The following narrative reports or data: 
a. 	
a proposed development schedule showing the beginning of construction, the rate of construction and development, including stages, if applicable, and the estimated date of completion; 

b. 	
a development impact statement prepared by qualified professionals, detailing the impact of the development on the Town's capacity to furnish services including, but not limited to, roads, police, fire, emergency services and water; 

c. 	
information pertaining to any organization which the Applicant proposes to form where the development is to be a condominium development, including forms and plans to be used to organize and manage the same, for approval as to form by Town Counsel; 

d. 	
copies of all proposed covenants, easements, and other restrictions which the Applicant proposes to grant to the Town, the Conservation Commission, utility companies, any condominium 


organization and the owners thereof, including plans of land to which they are intended to apply, for approval as to form by Town Counsel; and 
e. 	any and all other information that the Board of Appeals may reasonably require in a form acceptable to it to assist in determining whether the Applicant's proposed development plan meets the objectives of this section. 
3.6.5.0. 	Standards.  In order to be eligible for consideration for a special permit pursuant to this section, the proposed development shall meet all of the following standards:  
3.6.5.1. 	Applicable District. Minimum dimensional requirements for ALFs and ILFs shall be as set forth in the district in which the proposed facility is located. 
3.6.5.2. 	Buffer. A buffer area of fifty (50) feet shall be provided at the perimeter of the property where it abuts residentially zoned or occupied properties, except for driveways necessary for access and egress to and from the site. No vegetation in this buffer area will be disturbed, destroyed or removed, except for normal maintenance.  The Board of Appeals may waive the buffer requirement (i) where the land abutting the site is the subject of a permanent restriction for conservation or recreation so long as a buffer is established of at least twenty (20) feet in depth which may include such restricted land area within such buffer area calculation; or (ii) where the land abutting the site is held by the Town for conservation or recreation purposes; or 
(iii) the Board of Appeals determines that a smaller buffer will suffice to accomplish the objectives set forth herein.  
3.6.5.3. 	Removal and Replacement of Vegetation.  With the site, no clear cutting shall be permitted, except incidental to construction of buildings, roads, trails and parking areas. 
3.6.5.4. 	Roadways. The principal roadway(s) and private way(s) serving the site shall be designed to conform with the Rules and Regulations of the Planning Board. 
3.6.5.5. 	Parking. The applicant shall provide adequate parking to serve all anticipated uses on the property, with information detailing the method of computation of parking spaces. The minimum number of parking spaces provided on the site shall be three-tenths (0.3) parking space per dwelling unit in an ALF and one (1) parking space per dwelling unit in an ILF.  For both ALFs and ILFs one (1) parking space shall be provided for every three (3) employees during the largest shift.  The Board of Appeals may increase the required parking by up to ten (10%) percent to serve the needs of employees, visitors and service vehicles. All parking areas shall be screened from view from adjacent residentially zoned or occupied premises located outside the site, including public ways, by a landscaped border at least ten (10) feet in width. Parking lots in front setbacks in residential zones, and in buffer areas in all zones, with the exception of necessary access driveways, are prohibited. Parking areas in residential districts shall be located to the side or rear of all buildings. Parking lot layout shall be planned to permit landscaping, buffering, or screening to prevent direct views of parked vehicles from adjacent streets.  The use of traditional picket fencing, hedges, walls, or landscape berms to define parking areas is encouraged.  In parking areas of eleven or more parking stalls, at least one (1) tree of three inch or greater caliper shall be planted for every six (6) parking places.  Adequate tree wells and irrigation shall be provided for all parking lot landscaping.  Pedestrian access is to be taken into consideration in parking lot design.  The use of separate walkways is encouraged. Textured paving or grade separated (elevated) walkways are desired on all pedestrian access ways. 
3.6.5.6. 	Loading. Loading areas shall be at least twenty feet by nine feet (20’ x 9’), and have a minimum overhead clearance of ten (10) feet. Screening and landscaping shall be provided to block all views of loading areas (except those specifically designated for emergency vehicles) from the public right-of-way and adjacent properties. 
3.6.5.7. 	Surface Drainage. The surface drainage system shall be designed in accordance with the Regulations of the Planning Board. 
3.6.5.8. 	Utilities.  All electric, gas, telephone, and water distribution lines shall be placed underground, except upon a demonstration of exceptional circumstances.  
3.6.5.9. 	Paths.  Paths for the use of residents shall be attractively designed with proper regard for convenience, separation of vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic, adequate connectivity, completeness of access to the various amenities and facilities on the site and to pathways on adjacent sites. 
3.6.5.10. 	Paving and Curbing. Where the roadway is or may be ultimately intended for dedication and acceptance by the Town of Swampscott, granite curbing, gray in color, is required, except in areas of very low traffic volume where no curbing will be required.  Rolled asphalt (Cape Cod berm) curbing is unacceptable in all such ways.  Curbing is to be sloped or cut to provide a barrier free transition at road crossings and building entrances. Paving should be textured or of different materials at pedestrian crossings and walkways.  The use of stone, brick or cultured stone pavers for entrance walkway borders is encouraged.  The use of textured materials for walkway borders is encouraged. 
3.6.5.11. Design and Architectural Character. 
a. 	
Massing and Style.  Building massing and style shall be distinctively residential in character, drawing on the historical design elements that are contextually consistent with regional New England architecture. Historical and traditional design elements are encouraged. Front yards which use boxwood hedges, evergreen hedges, traditional style picket fences, stone walls, or iron picket fences with granite curb and pilasters is encouraged.  Fences or hedges should not exceed three (3) feet in height at the fronts of buildings.  Fences and landscaping to screen service areas may exceed this height, consistent with the intent and use of the space. 

b. 	
Roofs.  Preference shall be given to roof pitches consistent with single-family, residential design. New England traditional or vernacular styles are preferred.  Material shall be consistent with the architecture of the building.  Composition shingle material is acceptable, providing that it is of high quality and provides architectural definition to the tab shingle to emulate traditional wood shingle styles. Tile, slate, or metal roofing is permitted, provided it is consistent with the architectural style of the building. Gutters and down spouts are encouraged to provide drainage away from foundations, but shall be consistent with the other architectural elements of the building.  All buildings should have a chimney to convey the look and feel of residential use. 

c. 	
Facade Element. Design of the facade shall be highly detailed and articulated to be compatible with the scale and sensitivity to the residential uses of the project. Facades should have a well defined foundation, a modulated wall element, and pitched roof or articulated cornice which defines the character of the building, and provides relation to the human scale of typical family residences. 

d. 	
Entrances. Building entrances shall comply with all current accessibility regulations, however the use of ramps and lifts is discouraged. Buildings should be designed with entrances that are barrier free for the intended residential or commercial uses.  The use of sloping entry walks, covered entryways, porticos, arcades, and covered porches is encouraged.  Where grade separation of an entrance is required because of site topography, accommodation should be provided in the architectural detail of the entry to allow barrier free use by building residents and visitors. 

e. 	
Door and Window Openings. Doors and windows form the transition from public to private space, and should reflect residential detailing in design and placement.  The use of cornices, architectural moldings, side lights, transom lights, and raised panels in doors is encouraged. Window openings should vary between buildings, but should not be unbroken and continuous in any circumstance.  The use of opening sash windows with true divided lights, or detailing to convey the character of divided lights is encouraged. The use of shutters consistent with the architecture of a building is encouraged. A wide range of material for doors and windows is acceptable, except that the use of commercial, anodized or painted aluminum or steel storefront assemblies is discouraged. 

f. 	
Materials and Design Elements. Material chosen for exterior elements should be consistent with the intent and use of materials traditionally found in residential design in New England.  Siding materials such as clapboard and shingle are preferred, and the use of new materials which reduce maintenance, but emulate the look and feel of traditional materials is encouraged.  The use of a variety of trim material to provide detail at the eaves, comers, gables, pediments, lintels, sills, quoins, and balustrades is encouraged. The use of bays, towers, cupolas, cross gables, and dormers to provide unique character to a building and provide articulation of the facade is encouraged.  The color palette chosen for any building should be consistent with colors traditionally found in residential design in New England. 


3.6.5.12. 	The ALF or ILF shall have an integrated emergency call, telephone and other communications system to provide monitoring for its residents. There shall be sufficient site access for public safety vehicles. A plan shall be approved by the Swampscott Fire Department for the emergency evacuation of the residents with emphasis on ensuring the safety of residents with physical impairments.  
3.6.5.13. 	An ALF or an ILF may consist of a single building or multiple buildings. 
3.6.5.14. 	Structures and uses accessory to the ALF of ILF may also be provided (with the exception of covered parking areas) within the same building, including, but not limited to, the following: beauty and barber salons; recreational, physical fitness and therapy services; nondenominational chapel; library; bank automated teller machine; management offices; adult day care or adult day health facility; hospice residence; food service; laundry and covered parking areas; provided, however, that such accessory uses and structures shall be designed for the primary use of the residents and staff of the ALF or ILF. Such accessory uses may not be designed for or used as a general business by the general public. Such accessory uses shall be wholly be within a structure containing residential units, and shall have not exterior advertising display. 
3.6.5.15. 	The facility shall be served by the municipal water system. 
3.6.6.0. 	Conversion of Existing Structures. Applicants are encouraged to convert land and buildings that are no longer needed or suitable for their original use, and to permit reuses which are compatible with the character of the neighborhood and which take into consideration the interests of abutters, neighbors and the public, especially where the site abuts a residential area or the building(s) merit preservation.  
3.6.7.0. 	Action by the Board of Appeals.  The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for an ALF/ILF where it makes the following findings: 
3.6.7.1. 	The proposed ALF complies with the requirements of this section; 
3.6.7.2. 	The proposed ALF does not cause substantial detriment to the neighborhood after considering the following potential consequences: 
a. 	
noise, during the construction and operational phases; 

b. 	
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; 

c. 	
environmental harm; and 

d. 	
visual impact caused by the character and scale of the proposed structure(s). 


3.6.7.3. 	For conversions of existing structures, the Board shall find that the proposal protects the Town of Swampscott's heritage by minimizing removal or disruption of historic, traditional or significant uses, structures or architectural elements, whether these exist on the site or on adjacent properties.  If the building is a municipally owned building, the proposed uses and structures are consistent with any conditions imposed by the Town Meeting on the sale, lease, or transfer of the site. The buffer requirements, minimum open space requirements, and building height requirements shall be those physically existing as of May 2, 2000.  The Board may permit expansion of the structure to the degree reasonably necessary to comply with federal and state law. 
ARTICLE IV. SPECIAL REGULATIONS. 
4.1.0.0. Flood Plain/Wetland Protection Overlay District. 
(This section refers to those areas delineated on the Swampscott Flood Plain/Wetlands Protection District Map. See Section 4.2.0.0. for Special Regulations applicable to areas delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).) 
4.1.1.0. Purpose.  The purposes of the Flood Plain/Wetland Protection Overlay District (FPWPOD) are as follows: 
4.1.1.1. 	To provide that lands in the Town of Swampscott subject to seasonal or periodic flooding as described hereinafter shall not be used for residence or other purposes in such a manner as to endanger health or safety. 
4.1.1.2. 	To protect, preserve and maintain the water table and water recharge areas within the town so as to preserve present and potential water supplies for the public health and safety. 
4.1.1.3. 	To assure the continuation of the natural flow pattern of the water courses within the Town of Swampscott in order to provide adequate and safe flood water storage capacity to protect persons and property against the hazards of flood inundation. 
4.1.1.4. 	To protect the Town of Swampscott against the costs which may be incurred through the unsuitable use of wetland. 
4.1.1.5. 	To conserve natural conditions, wildlife, open space and generally the amenities of the Town of Swampscott and otherwise to preserve, protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
4.1.2.0. Location of District. The FPWPOD shall include all land shown on the Flood Plain/Wetland Protection District Map by contour and/or elevation markings, which were established following an evaluation of the vegetation, the high water mark, and the historical or the projected flood elevations.  The Swampscott Flood Plain/Wetland Protection District Map, dated April 1, 1976 and signed by the Town Engineer, and as thereafter amended, is hereby made a part of this By-Law and is on file at the Town Clerk's office. 
4.1.2.1. 	If any land indicated on the map as being in the FPWPOD is proved, by the applicant after public hearing, to be in fact not wetland nor subject to flooding nor unsuitable for the proposed use because of drainage and topographic conditions, and if the use of such land will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, the Board of Appeals may permit building or other uses of such land. 
4.1.3.0. Overlay District.  The FPWPOD is an overlay districts superimposed over the underlying districts set forth in this Zoning By-Law.  Within a FPWPOD, the requirements of the underlying district continue to apply, subject to the following additional provisions. 
4.1.4.0. Permitted Uses.  The following uses of low flood damage potential and causing no obstructions to flood flows are encouraged provided they are permitted in the underlying district and they do not require structures, fill or storage materials or equipment: 
4.1.4.1. 	Agricultural uses such as farming, grazing, truck farming, horticulture, etc. 
4.1.4.2. 	Forestry and nursery uses. 
4.1.4.3. 	Outdoor recreational uses including fishing, boating, play areas, foot, bicycle, and/or horse paths, etc. 
4.1.4.4. 	Conservation of water, plants and wildlife. 
4.1.4.5. 	Wildlife management areas. 
4.1.4.6. 	Temporary non-residential structures used in connection with fishing, growing, harvesting, storage, or sale of crops raised on premises. 
4.1.4.7. 	Buildings lawfully existing prior to adoption of these provisions. 
4.1.5.0. 	Emergency Work. Permission to work in the FPWPOD may be granted without the procedures outlined herein if the Board of Health and/or the Conservation Commission certify that an emergency exists.  Such permission shall be limited to the work required to alleviate the emergency and shall include a definite time limitation. 
4.1.6.0. Prohibited Uses.  No building or other structure shall be erected, constructed, enlarged or otherwise created for any residence or other purposes; no filling, dumping, excavation, removal or transfer of gravel, sand, loam, or other material which will restrict or impede water flow or reduce the normal or flood water storage capacity shall be permitted. 
4.1.7.0. Uses Available by Special Permit. The following uses are available upon the issuance of special permit by the Board of Appeals. 
4.1.7.1. 	Construction of dams and other water control devices, so as not to diminish the original dimensions. 
4.1.7.2. 	Bridges and like structures permitting passage between lands of the same owner, provided that such bridges and structures shall be constructed, maintained and used at the expense and risk of such owner. The Board of Appeals shall consider the effect of such structures on water storage and impediments to water flow. 
4.1.7.3. 	Driveways and walkways ancillary to permitted or permissive use within overlapped districts where alternative means of access are inappropriate and not reasonably feasible. 
4.1.7.4. 	Structures ancillary to recreational or educational uses, provided that the ground area covered by such structures does not exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
4.1.8.0. Special Permit Application.  Applications for a special permit shall be made in accordance with the regulations of the Board of Appeals.  The Board shall require conformance with the following standards before issuing a special permit: 
4.1.8.1. 	Any ancillary structures permitted shall be so designed and secured that during flooding the foundation will not be undermined, or the structure will not be floated off, battered off, or swept away.  
4.1.8.2. 	There shall be no danger of pollution to public or on-site water resources. 
4.1.8.3. 	Methods of drainage shall be adequate. 
4.1.9.0. Decision.  In granting a permit, the Board of Appeals may impose reasonable restrictions based upon or in addition to the considerations listed in Section 4.1.7.0. and may set time limitations on the work to be done.  The Board may require that the applicant post a cash deposit or surety bond, in form acceptable to the Town Treasurer, in amount determined by the Board to be sufficient to ensure satisfactory completion of the work in compliance with the permit and any specific restrictions and limitations thereof, or the restoration of any area or unfinished work to its original condition. 
4.2.0.0. Coastal Flood Area Overlay District. 
(This section refers to those areas delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). See Section 4.1.0.0. for Special Regulations applicable to areas delineated on the Swampscott Flood Plain/Wetlands Protection District Map.) 
4.2.1.0. 	Purpose. The purposes of the Coastal Flood Area Overlay District (CFAOD) are to provide for a review of building permit application to ensure that all proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and to promote design standards toward this goal to achieve the following: 
4.2.1.1.  Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and personal injury;  
4.2.1.2.  Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials;  
4.2.1.3.  Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from water quality, contamination, and pollution due to flooding;  
4.2.1.4.  Avoid the loss of utility services which if damaged by flooding would disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions beyond the site of the flooding;  
4.2.1.5.  Eliminate costs associated with the response and cleanup of flooding conditions; and  
4.2.1.6.  Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from flooding  

waters. 
4.2.2.0. 	Definitions. All terms used in Section 4.2.0.0. shall be defined as listed in National Flood Insurance Program Part 1909.1, which is on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board and Inspector of Buildings and can also be found in 44 CFR 59.1 (Code of Federal Regulations). 
4.2.3.0. 	Location of District. The CFAOD is herein established as an overlay district. The CFAOD includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Swampscott designated as Zone AE, AO, or VE on the Essex County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).  The map panels of the Essex County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Swampscott are panel number 25009C0531G, 25009C0532G, 25009C0533G, and 25009C0534G dated July 16, 2014. The exact boundaries of the CFAOD may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Essex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 16, 2014.  The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board and Inspector of Buildings. 
4.2.3.1. 	In order for a property included in the CFAOD to be no longer considered in the floodplain as shown of FIRM and therefore not subject to the requirements of 44 CFR 60.3 and Section 3107.0 of the Massachusetts State Building Code, a property owner must obtain a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) or a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA. 
4.2.4.0. Floodway and Base Flood Elevation Data. 
4.2.4.1. 	Floodway Data. In Zone AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available Federal, State, local or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
4.2.4.2. 	Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, within unnumbered A Zones. 
4.2.5.0. 	Overlay District.  The CFAOD is an overlay district superimposed over the underlying districts set forth in this Zoning By-Law.  Within the CFAOD, the requirements of the underlying district continue to apply, subject to the additional provisions set forth in this section. 
4.2.5.1. 	Reference to Existing Regulations. All development in the CFAOD, including structural and non-structural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit, must be in compliance with the following state statute(s) and regulations.  Any variance from the provisions and requirements of the below-referenced state regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of said regulations: 
a. 	
G.L. Chapter 131, § 40; 

b. 	
that section of the Massachusetts State Building Code which addresses floodplain and coastal high hazard areas (at the effective date hereof 780 CMR); 

c. 	
Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) (at the effective date hereof 310 CMR 10.00); 

d. 	
Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (at the effective date hereof 310 CMR 13.00); 

e. 	
Coastal Wetlands Restriction, DEP (at the effective date hereof 310 CMR 12.00); and 

f. 	
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP (at the effective date hereof 310 CMR 15, Title 5).   


4.2.5.2. 	Other Use Regulations: 
a. 	
Within Zone AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes is required to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 

b. 	
In Zone AE, along watercourses that have a regulatory floodway designated on the Swampscott FIRM, encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would result in increased flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 

c. 	
Man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE which would increase potential flood damage is prohibited. 

d. 	
All new construction within Zone VE must be located landward of the reach of mean high tide. 

e. 	
All subdivision proposals shall be reviewed to assure that (1) such proposals minimize flood damage; (2) all public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and (3) adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 

f. 	
Existing contour intervals of site and elevations of existing structures must be included on plan proposal. 

g. 	
There shall be established a “routing procedure” which will circulate or transmit one (1) copy of the development plan to the Conservation Commission, Planning Board, Board of Health and Inspector of Buildings for comments which will considered by the appropriate permitting board prior to issuing applicable permits. 


4.2.6.0. 	Permitted Uses - AE and VE Zones. Building permits for new construction or alteration of structures shall be approved subject to the following: 
4.2.6.1. 	Flood Proofing Regulations A and V Zones:  Any new construction or substantial improvement to be undertaken within Zones AE and VE shall be in accordance with the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR). 
4.2.6.2. 	Storm drainage systems shall be designed in accordance with the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR). 
4.2.6.3.  All public utility systems, including power, communications and gas, shall be designed in accordance with the Massachusetts State Building Code, Section 3107.0.  
4.2.6.4.  No mobile homes shall be placed within the areas designated on the Town’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) as AE or VE Zones.  

4.2.7.0. Special Rules - Zone VE. 
4.2.7.1. 	No land within the areas designated as VE (Velocity) Zones on the Town’s Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) shall be developed unless such development is demonstrated by the applicant to be located landward of the reach of the mean high tide, and meets the additional requirements of this Zoning By-Law. 
4.2.7.2. 	Existing uses/structures located on the land below the base flood elevation in coastal high hazard areas (Zone VE) shall not be expanded; repairs and alterations not exceeding substantial improvement shall be in accordance with the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR). 
4.2.7.3. 	Any man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE which might increase the potential for flood damage to existing structures is prohibited. 
4.2.7.4. 	New construction or substantial improvement of structures within Zone VE shall have the space below the lowest floor free of obstructions or be constructed with “breakaway walls" intended to collapse under stress without jeopardizing the structural support of the structure so that impact on the structure by abnormally high tides or wind-driven water is minimized.  Such temporary enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation. 
4.2.7.5. 	All new construction and substantial improvements within Zone VE shall be elevated on adequately anchored pilings or columns, and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so that the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood level.  A registered engineer or architect shall certify that the structure is adequately anchored to withstand velocity waters and hurricane wave wash. 
4.2.7.6. 	The use of fill for structural support for existing structures, new construction, or substantial improvement of structures within Zone VE is prohibited. 
4.2.8.0. 	Variation by Special Permit. The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit varying these requirements upon a determination that the variation is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief in the case of: 
4.2.8.1. 	New structures to be erected on a lot of one half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the flood elevation, or 
4.2.8.2. 	the restoration or reconstruction of a structure, listed on the National Register or an Official State Inventory of Historic Places. 
4.2.8.3. 	The applicant shall be notified that the issuance of a special permit to locate a structure at an elevation below the based flood elevation will result in increased actuarial rates. Upon the granting of such special permit, the Board of Appeals shall require that:  
a. 	
A notice be recorded with the title records of the property at Essex South District Registry of Deeds, stating that the proposed construction will be located in a special flood hazard area. Said notice will also contain a statement of the number of feet below the base flood elevation that the lowest non-flood-proofed floor of the proposed structure shall be located. 

b. 	
The Town Clerk maintains a record of all such special permits, including justification for their issuance and the number of special permits issued.  The Clerk shall also send an Annual Report to the Flood Insurance Administrator, of the number of special permits granted. 


4.2.9.0. Prohibitions. Special permits shall not be issued: 
4.2.9.1. 	For any new construction, substantial improvement, or other development in a designated flood zone, which would result in a significant increase in flood heights within the community during the occurrence of a base flood. 
4.2.9.2. 	Except where the Board of Appeals specifically makes a determination that the special permit issuance will not result in significantly increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflicts with existing local laws or ordinances. 
4.2.10.0. 	Duties of the Inspector of Buildings and Maintenance of Records. The Inspector of Buildings shall maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request for the determination of applicable flood insurance risk premium rates within all areas having special flood hazards identified on a FIRM any certificates of flood proofing and information on the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the level of the lowest habitable floor (including basement if habitable) of all new or substantially improved structures, and include whether or not such structures contain a basement, and if the structure has been flood proofed, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood proofed; 
4.2.10.1. 	For the purpose of the determination of applicable flood insurance risk premium rates within the Zone VE on a community’s FIRM: 
a. 	
obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest portion of all structural members supporting the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not such structures contain a basement. 

b. 	
Obtain, if the structure has been flood proofed, the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure was flood proofed. 

c. 	
Maintain a record of all such information. 


4.2.11.0. 	Notification of Watercourse Alteration. A property owner shall notify the following, in a riverine situation, of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse: Adjacent communities; NFIP State Coordinator; NFIP Program Specialist. 
4.3.0.0. Wireless Communications Services Overlay District. 
4.3.1.0. 	Purpose.  The purpose of this section is to establish a district in which wireless communications services may be provided with minimal harm to the public health, safety and general welfare. Specifically, the Wireless Communications Services Overlay District (WCSOD) has been created to:  
4.3.1.1. 	Protect the general public from hazards associated with wireless communications facilities (WCF); and 
4.3.1.2. 	Minimize visual impacts from WCF on residential districts within the Town of Swampscott.  This section does not apply to satellite dishes and antennas for residential use, particularly as set forth in Section 
2.2.4.8. 
4.3.2.0. Location of District. The WCSOD shall include the following parcels: 
4.3.2.1.1 
1 The Attorney General disapproved this subsection.  Article 3, Section 11, subsection 
C.1 of the former By-Laws, which defines the district, is reprinted in its entirety in Appendix C. 
4.3.3.0. 	Overlay District.  The WCSOD shall be construed as an overlay district with regard to said locations. All requirements of the underlying zoning district shall remain in full force and effect, except as may be specifically superseded herein. 
4.3.4.0. 	Permitted and Prohibited Uses.  Uses permitted as of right in the underlying district are allowed in the WCSOD.  Uses prohibited in the underlying districts are prohibited in the WCSOD.   
4.3.4.0. Uses Available by Special Permit. 
4.3.4.1. 	A new wireless communications facility (WCF), with or without antennas, satellite dishes and other accessory devices, and accessory structures may be erected in a WCSOD upon the issuance of a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 5.3.0.0. and subject to site plan approval as set forth in Section 5.4.0.0., and subject to all of the conditions set forth in Section 4.3.5.0.  
4.3.4.2. 	Antennas, satellite dishes and other accessory devices, whether located on an existing WCF or on an existing structure (accessory equipment), may be erected in a WCSOD upon the issuance of a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Section 5.3.0.0. and subject to site plan approval as set forth in Section 5.4.0.0., subject to all of the conditions set forth in Section 4.3.5.0.  
4.3.5.0. 	Conditions. A WCF or accessory equipment shall meet the following standards to be eligible for a special permit: 
4.3.5.1. 	The only WCFs allowed are free-standing monopoles, with associated accessory equipment and accessory structures. Lattice style towers and similar facilities requiring three or more legs and/or guy wires for support are not allowed. Accessory equipment may be allowed, whether located on a WCF or other structure, by special permit. 
4.3.5.2. 	To the extent feasible, all service providers shall co-locate on a single WCF. WCFs shall be designed to accommodate the maximum number of users technologically practical.  The intent of this requirement is to reduce the number of WCFs which will be required to be located within the community.  There shall exist no more than twelve (12) antennas, satellite dishes, or other accessory devices on any Town approved WCF, regardless of the number of users on that site. 
4.3.5.3. 	Any proposed extension in the height, addition of accessory equipment, construction of a new WCF, or replacement of a WCF, shall be subject to a new application for an amendment to the Special Permit. 
4.3.5.4. 	New WCFs shall be considered by the Zoning Board of Appeals only upon a finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals that existing or approved WCFs cannot accommodate the accessory equipment planned for the proposed WCF. 
4.3.5.5. 	The site in question shall contain at least forty thousand (40,000) square feet. 
4.3.5.6. 	No WCF or attached accessory equipment shall exceed sixty (60) feet in height as measured from ground level at the base of the WCF.  In the event that accessory equipment is affixed to an existing structure, such accessory equipment shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height above the level of the point of its attachment to the structure. 
4.3.5.7. 	All WCFs shall be designed to be constructed at the minimum height necessary to accommodate the anticipated and future use. 
4.3.5.8. 	A WCF shall not be erected nearer to any property line than a distance equal to the vertical height of the WCF (inclusive of any appurtenant accessory equipment). 
4.3.5.9. 	Siting shall be such that the view of the WCF from adjacent abutters, residential neighbors and other areas of Town shall be as limited as possible. All WCFs shall be painted or otherwise colored so they will blend in with the landscape or the structure on which they are located. A different coloring scheme shall be used to blend the WCF with the landscape below and above the tree or building line. 
4.3.5.10. 	WCFs shall be suitably screened from abutters and residential neighborhoods. 
4.3.5.11. 	Fencing may be required to control access to WCFs and accessory equipment and shall be compatible with the scenic character of the Town of Swampscott. 
4.3.5.12. 	Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
4.3.5.13. 	There shall be no signs, except for announcement signs, no trespassing signs and a required sign giving a phone number where the owner can be reached on a twenty-four (24) hour basis.  All signs shall conform with Section 3.2.0.0., herein. 
4.3.5.14. 	Night lighting of the WCF shall be prohibited unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration.  Lighting shall be limited to that needed for emergencies and/or as required FAA. 
4.3.5.15. 	There shall be a minimum of one (1) parking space for each WCF, to be used in connection with the maintenance of the WCF and the site, and not to be used for the permanent storage of vehicles. 
4.3.5.16. 	To the extent technologically feasible, all network interconnections from the WCF shall be via land lines. 
4.3.5.17. 	Applicants proposing to erect WCFs on municipally owned land or structures shall provide evidence of contractual authorization from the Town of Swampscott to conduct wireless communications services on municipally owned property. 
4.3.5.18. 	Traffic associated with the WCF and accessory equipment and structures shall not adversely affect abutting ways. 
4.3.5.19. 	Accessory equipment may be located on structures or may be freestanding. 
4.3.5.20. 	Accessory equipment shall be situated on a structure in such a manner it is screened, preferably not being visible from abutting streets.  Free standing dishes or antenna shall be located on the landscape in such a manner so as to minimize visibility from abutting streets and residences and to limit the need to remove existing vegetation.  All equipment shall be colored, molded and/or installed to blend into the structure and/or the landscape. 
4.3.6.0. 	Special Permit Application.  Applications for a special permit shall be made in accordance with the regulations of the Board of Appeals.  In addition to the requirements for site plan review under Section 5.4.0.0., five (5) copies of the following information shall be submitted for an application to be considered complete. 
4.3.6.1. 	A locus plan at a scale of 1" = 200' which shall shows all property lines, the exact location of the proposed WCF or accessory equipment, street, landscape features, residential dwellings and neighborhoods and all buildings within five hundred (500) feet of the WCF or accessory equipment. 
4.3.6.2. 	A color photograph or rendition of the WCF with proposed accessory equipment.  For accessory equipment, a color photograph or rendition illustrating the dish or antenna at the proposed location is required.  A rendition shall also be prepared illustrating a view of the monopole, dish or antenna from the nearest street or streets. 
4.3.6.3. 	The following information shall be prepared by a professional engineer: 
a. 	
a description of the WCF and the technical, economic and other reasons for the proposed location, height and design; 

b. 	
confirmation that the WCF complies with all applicable Federal and State standards; 

c. 	
a description of the capacity of the WCF including the number and type of panels, antennas and/or transmitter receivers that it can accommodate and the basis for these calculations; 

d. 	
if applicable, a written statement that the proposed WCF complies with, or is exempt from applicable regulations administered by the Federal Aviation Administration (FFA), Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and the Massachusetts Department of Public Health; and 

e. 	
the applicable review and advertising fees as noted in the application guidelines. 


4.3.7.0. Exemptions.  The following types of WCF are exempt from Section 4.3.0.0: 
4.3.7.1.  Amateur radio towers used in accordance with the terms of any amateur radio service license issued by the Federal Communications Commission provided that the tower is not used or licensed for any commercial purpose.  
4.3.7.2.  Facilities used for the purposes set forth in G.L. c. 40A, § 3.    

4.3.8.0. Certification and Removal. 
4.3.8.1. 	Annual certification demonstrating continuing compliance with the standards of the Federal Communications Commission, Federal Aviation Administration and the American National Standards Institute and required maintenance shall be filed with the Inspector of Buildings by the Special Permit Holder. 
4.3.8.2. 	All unused WCF or part thereof or accessory equipment or structures which have not been used for one (1) year shall be dismantled and removed at the owner's expense. 
4.4.0.0. Regulations Pertaining to Specific Uses. 
4.4.1.0. 	Garages, Service Stations, and Liquor Establishments. No permit shall be issued for the erection or enlargement of a garage or other structure for the storage of more than five (5) motor vehicles (each referred to for the purposes of this Section 
4.4.1.0. as a “garage”), nor for a motor vehicle service station, or gasoline filling station, nor for a commercial establishment selling or serving liquor, nor for the conversion of any premises not so used to be used for such purposes, if the principal entrance to the premises used for such purpose, or any use accessory thereto, is situated within a radius of two hundred (200) feet from a lot used or reserved to be used for a park, school, church, or library. No existing garage or service or filling station shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use through the subsequent erection of any such park, school, church or library. 
4.4.2.0. 	Access to Commercial or Industrial Buildings. No driveway or other means of access for vehicles other than accepted streets shall be maintained or used in the Residence A1, A2, A3, or A4 Districts for the servicing of a commercial or industrial building in the Business B1, B2, B-3, B-4, or I Districts. 
4.4.3.0. 	Obstructions to Traffic. On any lot in any district, no wall, fence, or other structure shall be erected or altered, and no hedge, tree, shrub or other growth shall be maintained, which may cause danger to traffic on a street by obscuring the view. 
4.4.4.0. 	Stripping, Excavating or Mining. No person, firm, or corporation shall strip, move, excavate or mine soil, sand or gravel in the Town, for use other than on the premises from which the same shall be taken except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such premises and excavation or grading incidental thereto. 
4.4.5.0. 	Multi-Family and Mixed-Use Developments in the B-4 District. All multi-family and mixed-use developments must meet the following design criteria and the Permit Granting Authority shall, in addition to the findings set forth in Sections 5.3.2.0 and 5.4.0.0, make findings confirming that each of the following design criteria has been met: 
4.4.5.1. 	There shall be a continuous open green space across the entirety of the required front yard setback. Only access points for sidewalks and driveways shall be allowed to extend into this open green space. 
4.4.5.2. 	All off-street parking areas shall be located behind or to the side of the principal structure on the lot. No parking area shall be located closer to the front lot line than the front building façade. 
4.4.5.3. 	In order to ensure the production of a significant number of more reasonably-priced dwelling units (whether rental or for sale), unless waived or modified by the Special Permit Granting Authority, no more than 30% of the total dwelling units in a multi-family or mixed-use development in the B-4 District shall contain two (2) or more bedrooms. 
4.5.0.0. Regulations Pertaining to Planned Development Districts (PDD). 
4.5.1.0. 	Purposes. The purposes of this Section 4.5.0.0. are to: (1) provide the opportunity for a variety of housing types at certain locations in the Town at greater densities and with reduced dimensional requirements than would otherwise be allowed; (2) expand the possible uses on the land in the districts; (3) promote the efficient use of land in the districts; (4) provide the opportunity to redevelop the land in the districts to benefit the Town and the public including facilitating, as appropriate, the removal or significant rehabilitation of abandoned and dilapidated buildings that pose a hazard to public safety and welfare; (5) provide diversity and variety in housing types; (6) promote design and land planning to achieve aesthetic qualities of the Town; and (7) encourage development of new housing that is affordable to low and moderate-income households. 
4.5.1.1. 	Definition. A planned development is a residential plan for the use and development of a parcel of land, improved or unimproved, which plan conforms to the purposes and provisions of Section 4.5.0.0. and is not subject to Section 2.2.3.0. – Table of Principal Uses and Section 
2.3.2.0. – Table of Dimensional Regulations in Appendix A and Illustrations in Appendix B. 
4.5.1.2. 	Location of Districts. The Planned Development Districts are mapped as follows: 
Phillips Fire Station PDD, Assessor’s Map 29, Lot 45, 2 Phillips 
Avenue; 
Burrill Senior Center PDD, Assessor’s Map 1, Lot 23, 89 Burrill 
Street;  
Greenwood PDD, Assessor’s Map 19, Lot 87, 71 Greenwood 
Avenue; 
Temple PDD, Assessor’s Map 29, Lots 4 and 3A, 837 Humphrey 
Street. 

4.5.2.0. 	Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses.  Uses permitted in the Planned Development Districts. 
4.5.2.1. 	In the Phillips Fire Station PDD, a single family dwelling and an accessory garage or storage space for private automobiles are allowed as of right. 
4.5.2.2. 	In the Burrill Senior Center PDD, a single, two-family, or three-family dwelling is allowed as of right. 
4.5.2.3. 	In the Greenwood PDD, multi-family dwellings, up to three accessory garages, one accessory structure and a maximum of two wireless telecommunications facilities (WTF) integrated into the building design are allowed as of right, provided that such WTF shall comply with the conditions set forth in Section 4.3.5.0. of the Bylaw, except for the requirement set forth in Section 4.3.5.15 requiring a parking space for each WTF.   
4.5.2.4. 	In the Temple PDD, single-family or multi-family dwellings and an accessory garage or storage area, located beside or under the dwellings, for private automobiles are allowed as of right. 
4.5.3.0. 	Dimensional Regulations.  The dimensional regulations in the following table apply in the Planned Development Districts. 
Minimum Lot 
Area (sf: square feet) 
Minimum Lot 
Frontage Front Yard Setback Rear Yard Setback 
Side Yard Setback Maximum Gross 
Floor Area 
Open Space Requirement 
Total Lot Coverage 
Maximum Building Coverage 
Maximum Height * 
Minimum Parking Spaces per Dwelling Unit 
Minimum Parking Space Size 
Table of PDD Dimensional Regulations 
Burrill Senior  Greenwood  
Center PDD  PDD  
9,165 sf  96,600 sf  
79 feet  250 feet  
17 feet  60 feet  
25 feet  60 feet  
10 feet  35 feet  
Not Applicable  65,000 sf  
Not Applicable  35%  
25 percent  None Required  
2 1/2 stories up to 35 feet  65 feet  
2 spaces  2 spaces  
9 ft by 18 ft  9 ft by 18 ft  

Phillips Fire 
Station PDD 

10,442 sf 
120 feet 
30 feet 
35 feet 
11 feet (west 
side) 
9 feet (east side) 
Not Applicable 

Not Applicable 
25 percent 
2 1/2 stories up to 35 feet 
2 spaces 
None Required 
Temple PDD 
Multi-Family 
97,567 sf 
392 feet 
40 feet 
40 feet (north side) 
20 feet (south side) 20 feet (east side) 
70,000 sf 
45% 
None 
Required 

45 feet 
2 spaces 
9 ft by 18 ft Single-Family 
4,500 sf 
50 feet 
15 feet 
10 feet 
10 feet 
Not 
Applicable 

35 percent 
35 feet 
8 ft by 16 ft Minimum Width of 
Parking Lot Circulation Lanes 
Maximum Number 
of Dwelling Units 
Setback For Garage or storage space for private automobiles 
Maximum Number 
of Principal Structures per Lot 
Maximum Number of Accessory Structures (other than Detached Garages) 
Maximum Number of Detached Garages 
Minimum Landscape Buffer Between Parking Spaces and Adjacent Property Line 
Off-Street Loading 
Phillips Fire 
Station PDD 
None Required 
1 
20 feet from rear lot line, 0 feet from western lot line 
1 
Burrill Senior 
Center PDD 

None 
Required 

3 
By-Law 
1 
Greenwood 
PDD 

20 feet 
28 
Rear Yard: 25 feet Side Yard: 10 feet Front Yard: 60 feet 
1 
1 
one – 4 car detached garage; and two – 5 car detached garages 
15 feet 
None 
Temple PDD 
Multi-Family By-Law  Single-Family  
42  14  
None Required  
2  1  

* Maximum height is measured to the peak of the finished roof. 
** Excluding the existing cupola. 
*** By-Law means that the provisions of the Swampscott Zoning By-Law other than those 

applicable to a Planned Development District apply. See Section 4.5.5.0. 
4.5.3.1. 	No Relief / Waivers to Requirements within the Greenwood PDD: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Zoning Bylaw, within the Greenwood PDD no relief or waiver of any kind may be issued or granted from the use, dimensional, landscaping, parking lot, loading and parking requirements set forth within Section 
4.5.3.0 (Table of PDD Dimensional Regulations) or otherwise in the Zoning Bylaw. 
4.5.4.0. 	Parcel Subdivision. No parcel of land in in the Phillips Fire Station Planned Development District, the Burrill Senior Center Planned Development District, or the Greenwood Planned Development District may be subdivided. 
4.5.5.0. 	Zoning Conformance. Unless specifically provided in Section 4.5.0.0., all other provisions of the Swampscott Zoning By-Law apply to uses and structures in a Planned Development District, including, but not limited to, Site Plan Review. 
4.5.6.0. 	Affordable Housing Requirement. With respect to the development of the Greenwood Planned Development District, any Developer of this locus shall contribute to the local stock of affordable housing units in accordance with one of the following two affordability options: 
4.5.6.1. 	On-Site Affordable Housing Units. At least 15% of the units in the Greenwood Planned Development District shall be established as affordable housing units constructed on the locus. 
a. 	
As a condition of development of the locus, all affordable housing units shall be subject to an affordable housing restriction and a regulatory agreement in a form acceptable to the Board of Selectmen. The regulatory agreement shall be consistent with any applicable guidelines issued by the Department of Housing and Community Development and shall ensure that affordable units can be counted toward the Town’s Subsidized Housing Inventory. The regulatory agreement shall also impose limitations to preserve the long­term affordability of the units and to ensure their continued availability for affordable income households. Resale controls shall be established through a restriction on the property and shall be in force in perpetuity. Any Developer of the Greenwood Planned Development District shall not be granted a building permit until the restriction and regulatory agreement are recorded at the Registry of Deeds and copies are provided to the Inspector of Buildings, the Town Planner/Director of Community Development and the Town Clerk. 

b. 	
Any Developer of the Greenwood Planned Development District shall submit a marketing plan to the Board of Selectmen for its approval, which shall describe how the 


affordable units will be marketed to potential home buyers or tenants. This plan shall include a description of the lottery or other process to be used for selecting buyers or tenants. 
c. 	All affordable units constructed under this By-law shall be situated within the development so as not to be in less desirable locations than market-rate units in the development. Affordable housing units shall be integrated with the rest of the development and shall be compatible in design, appearance, construction and quality of materials with other units. Interior features and mechanical systems of affordable units shall conform to the same specifications as apply to market-rate units. 
4.5.6.2. 	Fee-in-Lieu of Units. As an alternative to the requirements of Section 4.5.6.1, any Developer of the Greenwood Planned Development District may make a monetary contribution to the Town’s Affordable Housing Trust, which funds shall be designated for the development of affordable housing in lieu of constructing and offering affordable units within the locus of the Greenwood Planned Development District. 
a. 	
Calculation of fee-in-lieu of units. Any Developer of the Greenwood Planned Development District may pay fees-in-lieu of the construction of affordable units to the Town’s Affordable Housing Trust. For purposes of this By-law, the fee-in-lieu of the construction of affordable units shall be the greater of (i) 20% of the total number of proposed units multiplied by $25,000, and (ii) such other higher amount determined by the Swampscott Board of Selectmen.  

b. 	
Fees-in-lieu of units made to the Town’s Affordable Housing Trust in accordance with this By-law shall be used only for purposes of providing affordable housing for low- or moderate-income households. Using these contributions, affordable housing may be provided through a variety of means, including but not limited to the provision of favorable financing terms, subsidized prices for purchase of sites, or construction of affordable units within larger developments. 


4.6.0.0. Regulations Pertaining to Smart Growth (MGL 40R) Zoning Overlay District (ATM 5/5/2014) 
4.6.1.0. Purposes. The purposes of Smart Growth (SG) Overlay Districts are: 
4.6.1.1. 	To promote low-impact, green, and sustainable development that is pedestrian friendly. 
4.6.1.2. 	To ensure high-quality site planning, architecture and landscape design that is consistent with SG's visual character and identity of the Town of Swampscott. 
4.6.1.3. 	To establish development standards that ensure context-sensitive design and creative site planning in the reuse of existing buildings and construction of new buildings. 
4.6.1.4. 	To provide for diversified housing stock at a variety of costs in close proximity to the local bus lines, including AFFORDABLE HOUSING, that meets the needs of the Town's population and promotes diversity. 
4.6.1.5. 	To generate positive tax revenue, and to benefit from the financial incentives provided by MGL c. 40R, while providing the opportunity for housing choice among households of varying incomes, ages and sizes. 
4.6.2.0. 	Scope and authority. An SG is established pursuant to the authority of MGL c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00, and shall be deemed to overlay the parcels as shown on the Zoning Map of the Town of Swampscott, as amended. The regulations for use, dimensions, and all other provisions of the Zoning By-law governing the Underlying Zoning district shall remain in full force, except for those projects undergoing development pursuant to this By-law.  At the option of the owner, development of land within an SG may be undertaken either by means of a Plan Approval pursuant to the zoning controls set forth in this By-law or by complying with all applicable zoning controls set forth in the Town’s Zoning By-law (Underlying Zoning). When a building permit is issued for any development project for which Plan Approval has been granted under this By-law, all of the land shown on the approved Plan shall be developed pursuant to this By-law and shall not be developed pursuant to the Underlying Zoning. Development projects proposed pursuant to this By-law shall be subject to all other applicable local, state and federal regulations.  Applications for Plan Approval by the Approving Authority shall not be subject to any other provisions of the Zoning By-law, including limitations upon the issuance of building permits for residential uses related to a rate of development or phased growth limitation or to a local moratorium on the issuance of such permits, or to other building permit or dwelling unit limitations. 
4.6.3.0. 	Establishment and delineation of Smart Growth Overlay Districts. The Vinnin Square SG is an overlay district having a land area of approximately 2.3 acres in that is superimposed over the Underlying Zoning district and is shown on the Town’s Zoning Map (located at the end of the By-law) and shall comprise the property identified as assessor map 17 parcel 29, currently in the B1 Zoning District.  
4.6.4.0. 	Definitions. All definitions are as they appear in the Zoning By-law. As used in this By-law, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth  below. To the extent that there is any conflict between this By-law and MGL c. 40R and/or 760 CMR 59.00 et seq., the latter shall control: 
AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP UNIT — An Affordable Housing Unit required to be sold to an Eligible Household in accordance with the requirements of this By-law. 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing that is affordable to and occupied by Eligible Households. 
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION — A deed restriction of AFFORDABLE HOUSING meeting the requirements in MGL c. 184, § 31, and the requirements of this By-law. 
AFFORDABLE RENTAL UNIT — An Affordable Housing Unit required to be rented to an Eligible Household in accordance with the requirements of this By-law. 
APPLICANT — A landowner or other petitioner that files a Plan for a Development Project subject to the provisions of the SG By-law. 
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board of the Town of Swampscott acting as the authority designated to review Development Projects and issue approvals under this By-law. 
AS-OF-RIGHT DEVELOPMENT — A development project allowable under this By-law without recourse to a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, or other form of zoning relief. A development project that is subject to the Plan Review requirement of this By-law shall be considered an As-of-Right Development. 
DESIGN STANDARDS — The document entitled Swampscott Smart Growth Overlay District Design Standards, adopted pursuant to MGL c. 40R, § 10. The Design Standards are applicable to all Development Projects within an SG that are subject to Plan Review by the Approving Authority. Design Standards are subject to approval by the Department of Housing and Community Development.  
DEVELOPMENT LOT — One or more lots meeting the dimensional requirements of this By-law which are designated as a Development Lot on a Plan for a Development Project proposed within an SG and for which Plan Approval is required under the provisions of this By-law. The lots comprising a Development Lot need not be in the same ownership but within the application review period the APPLICANT must demonstrate site control of all land shown on the Plan. 
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A residential or mixed-use development undertaken under this this By-law. The limits of a Development Project shall be identified on the Plan which is submitted to the Approving Authority for Plan Review. 
DHCD — The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) or any successor agency. 
ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD — An individual or household whose annual income is below 80% of the area-wide Median Household Income as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), adjusted for household size, with income computed using HUD's rules for attribution of income to assets. 
HOUSEHOLD INCOME, MEDIAN — The median income, adjusted for household size, as reported by the most recent information from, or calculated from regulations promulgated by, the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
 MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A development that includes a building or buildings with a minimum of 25% of the floor area on the street level devoted to one or more Nonresidential Use. A minimum of 50% of the total gross floor area in a Mixed-Use Development Project shall be devoted to residential uses. 
MONITORING AGENT — A qualified housing organization designated by the Board of Selectmen with the power to monitor and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this By-law related to Affordable Housing Units, including but not limited to computation of rental and sales prices; income eligibility of households applying for Affordable Housing Units; administration of an approved housing marketing and resident selection plan; and recording and enforcement of an Affordable Housing Restriction for each Affordable Housing Unit in an SG. 
MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A residential development that contains only a building or buildings(s) with more than three dwelling units. 
NONRESIDENTIAL USE — A use that is listed as an allowed retail and consumer service use or an allowed institutional and recreational use in the B-1 Zoning District, without need for a special permit, in the Table of Principal Uses, Section 2.2.3.0. 
OFFICE — A place of business of a professional organization or the administration facility of a commercial or industrial organization. 
PLAN — Plans depicting a proposed Development Project for all or a portion of the SG and which is submitted to the Approving Authority for its review and approval in accordance with the provisions of this By-law and the Design Standards. 
PLAN APPROVAL — The Approving Authority's authorization for a proposed Development Project based upon a finding of compliance with this By-law and Design Standards after the conduct of a Plan Review. 
PLAN REVIEW — The review procedure established by this By-law and administered by the Planning Board of the Town of Swampscott as the Approving Authority. 
RENOVATION — Physical improvement that adds to the value of the real property. Painting, ordinary repairs, and other normal maintenance do not constitute a Renovation. 
SETBACK — Dimensional Setback requirements as set forth in Appendix A - Table of Dimensional Requirements: Section 2.3.2.0 of the By-law. Until such time that the Town has qualified for a density bonus payment under 760 CMR 
59.06 (2) for one or more 40R bonus units permitted within the SG, any amendments to Appendix A – Table of Dimensional Requirements: Section 2.3.2.0, as in effect upon adoption of the SG, shall not apply to the SG until DHCD has received written notice of such amendments. 
SG or DISTRICT — The Smart Growth Overlay District, an overlay zoning district adopted pursuant to MGL c. 40R, in accordance with the procedures for zoning adoption and amendment as set forth in MGL c. 40A and approved by DHCD pursuant to MGL c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00. 
UNDERLYING ZONING — The zoning requirements adopted pursuant to MGL c. 40A that are otherwise applicable to the geographic area in which the SG is located, as said requirements may be amended from time to time. 
UNDULY RESTRICT — A provision of the SG or a Design Standard that adds unreasonable costs or unreasonably impairs the economic feasibility of a proposed development project in an SG. 
UNRESTRICTED UNIT — A dwelling unit that is not restricted as to rent, price or eligibility of occupants. 
ZONING BY-LAW — The Zoning By-law of the Town of Swampscott, Massachusetts, adopted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40A. 
ZONING MAP — The Zoning Map of the Town of Swampscott, Massachusetts, adopted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40A. 
4.6.5.0. 	Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the following districts as-of-right upon Plan Approval, but shall not exceed residential densities specified in the Table of Dimensional and Density Requirements below: 
 Allowable Uses Table 
Residence Uses  SG Vinnin Square District  
 Multifamily Development Project  Yes  
Mixed-Use Development Project  Yes  

4.6.6.0. Prohibited uses or activities in the SG. 
4.6.6.1. 	Any use prohibited by the Underlying Zoning. 
4.6.6.2. 	Nonresidential uses permitted as-of-right pursuant to the Underlying Zoning are permitted pursuant to this By-law as part of a Mixed-Use Development Project. 
4.6.7.0. Dimensional and other requirements. 
4.6.7.1. 	New buildings within the SG shall be subject to the bulk, dimensional and density requirements in the Table of Dimensional and Density Requirements: 
Max. Residential density 30 units per acre
Table of Dimensional and Density Requirements 
District  Min. Lot Area (sq. ft.)  Max. Residential Density (units/ acre)  Min. Frontage (linear ft.)  Min. Front Setback (linear ft.)  Min. Side Setback (linear ft.)  Min. Rear Setback (linear ft.)  Min. Open Area (%)  Max. Height (ft.)  
SG Vinnin Square District  10,000  30  35  N  (1)  (1)  (2)  42  

NOTES: 
N – None 
(1)
 – Except as to any boundary abutting any other business district, six feet; as to any boundary abutting any residential district, nine feet.  May be reduced at the discretion of the Approving Authority. 

(2)
 – One square foot of open land area (in addition to the areas of required parking spaces for such lot) for each two square feet of gross floor area.  


4.6.7.2. 	Building Renovation. Renovation of existing buildings may maintain existing building footprints, and may only expand such footprints insofar as such expansion is in compliance with the required dimensional requirements for new buildings. 
4.6.7.3. 	Portions of the lot in the SG Vinnin Square District are located in the Town of Marblehead, and in the City of Salem. If a Development Project proposed in the SG Vinnin Square District includes development in another municipality, allowable density in the Town of Swampscott will be calculated based on the area of land within the Town of Swampscott. 
4.6.7.4. 	Fractional units. When the application of the allowable densities specified in the Table of Dimensional and Density Requirements, results in a number that includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
4.6.7.5. 	Signage. Commercial signage proposed within a Mixed-Use Development Project shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of the Sign By-law, Section 3.2.0.0., unless otherwise granted written approval by DHCD. 
4.6.7.6. 	Noise. An Application proposing the installation of exterior venting air conditioners, ventilators, blowers and similar equipment shall be required to demonstrate to the Approving Authority that the noise produced by such equipment will not be in excess of 60 decibels at 20 feet in any direction, or the distance to the nearest building having a residential use, whichever is the lesser. Upon construction and occupancy, noise from the Development Project, including resulting from air conditioners, ventilators, blowers and similar equipment, shall at all times comply with this requirement. 
4.6.7.7. 	Stormwater. Proposed Development Projects shall be subject to Swampscott By-law requirements regarding Stormwater Management and Erosion Control, as applicable. Until such time that the Town has qualified for a density bonus payment under 760 CMR 59.06(2) for one or more 40R bonus units permitted within the SG, any amendments to the Swampscott By-law requirements regarding Stormwater Management and Erosion Control, as in effect upon adoption of the SG, shall not apply to the SG until DHCD has received written notice of such amendments. 
4.6.8.0. Off-Street parking. 
4.6.8.1. 	Off-street parking in the District shall be provided in order to meet or exceed the following minimum requirements: 
Off-Street Parking Minimum Required Parking 
Use  Vinnin  
Dwelling unit (1 bedroom)  2.0 spaces  
Dwelling unit (2 bedrooms)  2.0 spaces  

Off-Street Parking Minimum Required Parking 
Use  Vinnin  
Dwelling unit (3 bedrooms)  2.0 spaces  
Dwelling unit (4 bedrooms)  2.0 spaces  
Nonresidential Use  1.0 space/300 square feet  

4.6.8.2. 	Fractional spaces. When the application of the minimum required parking standards in this this By-law results in a number that includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number if the fraction is 0.5 or more. If the result includes a fraction below 0.5, the fraction shall be rounded down to the next whole number. 
4.6.8.3. 	Location of parking. Any surface parking lot shall be located at the side or rear of a building, relative to any public right-of-way or public open space. In no case shall surface parking for new construction be permitted within the required front Setbacks. Subsurface parking that requires blasting may be disallowed if the Approving Authority finds, based on the results of a geotechnical analysis, that it is not possible to mitigate any extraordinary adverse impact of blasting on nearby properties. 
4.6.8.4. 	The Approving Authority may grant a Plan Approval making such modifications in the parking standards or prescribe safeguards and conditions as it shall warrant appropriate, provided that it finds that it is impractical to meet the standards and that such modifications are appropriate by reason of the proposed use and will not result in or worsen parking or traffic problems in or in proximity to the SG. The Approving Authority may impose conditions of use or occupancy appropriate to such modifications. 
4.6.8.5. 	Shared use of required parking. At the discretion of the Approving Authority, shared use may be made of required parking spaces by intermittent use establishments such as churches, assembly halls, or theaters whose peak parking demand is only at night or on Sundays and by other uses whose peak demand is only during the day. In order for such shared parking to be eligible to satisfy required off-street parking standards in whole or in part, prior to Plan Approval, a formal agreement shall be made in writing by the owners of the uses involved concerning the number of spaces involved, substantiation of the fact that such shared use is not overlapping or in conflict, and the duration of the agreement. Required spaces shall be within 300 feet of the main entrance to the principal buildings served by the shared parking. 
4.6.8.6. 	The Approving Authority may require additional visitor parking beyond the maximum required spaces per unit if deemed appropriate given the design, layout, use and/or density of the proposed development project. 
4.6.8.7. 	Construction standards. Each parking space shall be at least nine feet wide and 20 feet long and shall be designed with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street as well as maneuvering areas. Access and maneuvering areas shall not be obstructed or used for the parking of motor vehicles. Parking shall be designed and constructed to comply with all applicable disability access requirements including but not limited to the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (AAB). 
4.6.9.0. 	Design Standards. To ensure that new development shall be of high quality, and shall meet the standards envisioned by the Town in adopting this By-law, the Approving Authority shall adopt the Smart Growth Overlay District Design Standards, to the extent such standards have been approved by DHCD, governing the issuance of Plan Approvals for Development Projects within the SG and shall file a copy with the Town Clerk. In addition to the standards set forth in this By-law, the physical character of Development Projects within the SG shall comply with such Design Standards. In the event of any conflict between this By-law and the Design Standards, this By-law shall govern and prevail. 
4.6.9.1. 	The Approving Authority may adopt, by simple majority vote, amendments to the Design Standards. 
4.6.9.2. 	Before adopting any amendment to the Design Standards, the Approving Authority shall submit the proposed amendment to DHCD for approval. Any amendment to the Design Standards shall not take effect until approved by DHCD and filed with the Town Clerk. 
4.6.9.3. 	Design Standards shall be objective and may address the scale and proportions of buildings, the alignment, width, and grade of streets and sidewalks, the type and location of infrastructure, the location of building and garage entrances, off-street parking, the protection of significant natural site features, the location and design of on-site open spaces, exterior signs, and buffering in relation to adjacent properties.. 
4.6.9.4. 	An application for Plan Approval that has been submitted to the Town Clerk pursuant to this By-law shall not be subject to any Design Standard that has not been approved by DHCD and filed with the Town Clerk. 
4.6.10.0. AFFORDABLE HOUSING. 
4.6.10.1. 	Number of Affordable Housing Units. Twenty percent of all dwelling units constructed in a Development Project shall be Affordable Housing Units provided, however, that 25% of all rental dwelling units in a Development Project shall be Affordable Housing Units. For Development Projects in which all of the dwelling units are limited to occupancy by elderly persons and/or by persons with disabilities, 25% of the dwelling units shall be Affordable Housing Units, whether the dwelling units are rental or ownership units.  Any Development Project which includes age-restricted residential units shall comply with applicable federal, state and local fair housing laws and regulations. 
4.6.10.2. 	Fractional units. When the application of the percentages specified in Subsection 4.6.10.1 results in a number that includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
4.6.10.3. 	Affordable Housing Units shall comply with the following requirements: 
a) 	The monthly rent payment for an AFFORDABLE RENTAL UNIT, including utilities and parking, shall not exceed 30% of the maximum monthly income permissible for an Eligible Household, with price determined assuming a household size equal to the number of bedrooms in the unit plus one unless other affordable program rent limits approved by DHCD shall apply; 
b) 	For an Affordable Homeownership Unit, the monthly housing payment, including mortgage principal and interest, private mortgage insurance, property taxes, condominium and/or homeowners' association fees, insurance, and parking, shall not exceed 30% of the maximum monthly income permissible for an Eligible Household, assuming a household size equal to the number of bedrooms in the dwelling unit plus one; and 
c) Affordable Housing Units required to be offered for rent or sale shall be rented or sold to and occupied only by Eligible Households. 
4.6.10.4. 	Design and construction. 
a) Design. Affordable Housing Units must be comparable in initial construction quality and exterior design to the Unrestricted Units. Units of Affordable Housing shall be equitably dispersed throughout the Development Project of which they are part, proportionately across all unit types, and in accordance with a housing marketing and selection plan approved by the Monitoring Agent and DHCD. However, nothing in this section is intended to limit a homebuyer's rights to renovate a dwelling unit under applicable law. The Affordable Housing Units must have access to all on-site amenities. The total number of bedrooms in the Affordable Housing Units shall be at least proportionate to the total number of bedrooms in all units in the Development Project. 
b) 	Timing. All Affordable Housing Units must be constructed and occupied not later than concurrently with construction and occupancy of unrestricted units. For any Development Project that is approved in phases, the proportion of Affordable Housing Units shall be consistent across all phases. 
4.6.10.5. 	Affordable Housing Restriction. Each Affordable Housing Unit shall be subject to an Affordable Housing Restriction which is recorded with the Essex County Registry of Deeds or Land Court Registry District of Essex County. The Affordable Housing Restriction shall provide for the implementation of the requirements of this By-law. All Affordable Housing Restriction s must include, at minimum, the following: 
a) Description of the Development Project, including whether the Affordable Housing Unit will be rented or owner-occupied. 
b) A description of the Affordable Homeownership Unit, if any, by address and number of bedrooms; and a description of the overall quantity and number of bedrooms and number of bedroom types of AFFORDABLE RENTAL UNITs in a project or portion of a project which are rental. Such restriction shall apply individually to the specifically identified Affordable Homeownership Unit and shall apply to a percentage of rental units of a rental project or the rental portion of a project without specific unit identification. 
c) 	The term of the Affordable Housing Restriction shall be the longest period customarily allowed by law but shall be no less than 30 years. 
d) 	The name and address of the Monitoring Agent with a designation of its power to monitor and enforce the Affordable Housing Restriction. In a case where the Monitoring Agent cannot adequately carry out its administrative duties, upon certification of this fact by the Board of Selectmen or by DHCD such duties shall devolve to and thereafter be administered by a qualified housing entity designated by the Board of Selectmen. 
e) Reference to a housing marketing and resident selection Plan, to which the Affordable Housing Unit is subject, and which includes an affirmative fair housing marketing program, including public notice and a fair resident selection process. If approved by DHCD, the housing marketing and selection Plan may provide for preferences in resident selection. The Plan shall designate the household size appropriate for a unit with respect to bedroom size and provide that preference for such unit shall be given to a household of the appropriate size. 
f) 	A requirement that buyers or tenants will be selected at the initial sale or initial rental and upon all subsequent sales and rentals from a list of Eligible Households compiled in accordance with the housing marketing and selection Plan. 
g) 	Reference to the formula pursuant to which rent of a rental unit or the maximum resale price of a homeownership unit will be set. 
h) A requirement that only an Eligible Household may reside in an Affordable Housing Unit and that notice of any lease or sublease of any Affordable Housing Unit to another Eligible Household shall be given to the Monitoring Agent. 
i) 	Provision for effective monitoring and enforcement of the terms and provisions of the Affordable Housing Restriction by the Monitoring Agent. 
j) 	Provision that the restriction on an Affordable Homeownership Unit shall run in favor of the Monitoring Agent and the Town of Swampscott, in a form approved by Town l Counsel, and shall limit initial sale and resale to and occupancy by an Eligible Household. 
k) 	Provision that the restriction on Affordable Rental Units in a rental development project or rental portion of a Development Project shall run with the rental Development Project or rental portion of a Development Project and shall run in favor of the Monitoring Agent and the Town, in a form approved by Town Counsel, and shall limit rental and occupancy to an Eligible Household. 
l) 	Provision that the owner(s) or manager(s) of Affordable Rental Unit(s) shall file an annual report to the Monitoring Agent, in a form specified by that agent certifying compliance with the provisions of this By-law and containing such other information as may be reasonably requested in order to ensure affordability. 
m) A requirement that residents in Affordable Housing Units provide such information as the Monitoring Agent may reasonably request in order to ensure affordability eligibility and compliance. 
n) Designation of the priority of the Affordable Housing Restriction over mortgages and other restrictions. 
4.6.10.6. 	Administration. The Monitoring Agent shall ensure the following: 
a) 	Prices of Affordable Homeownership Units are properly computed; rental amounts of Affordable Rental Units are properly computed. 
b) 	Income eligibility of households applying for Affordable Housing Units is properly and reliably determined. 
c) The housing marketing and resident selection Plan conforms to all requirements and is properly administered. 
d) 	Sales and rentals are made to Eligible Households chosen in accordance with the housing marketing and resident selection Plan with appropriate unit size for each household being properly determined and proper preference being given. 
e) Affordable Housing Restrictions meeting the requirements of this section are recorded with the Essex County Registry of Deeds or Land Court Registry District of Essex County. 
4.6.10.7. 	The housing marketing and selection Plan may make provision for payment by the Applicant of reasonable costs to the Monitoring Agent to develop, advertise, and maintain the list of Eligible Households, to conduct the housing lottery, and to monitor and enforce compliance with affordability requirements over time. 
4.6.11.0. 	Administration. The Approving Authority shall adopt and file with the Town Clerk administrative rules relative to the application requirements and contents for Plan Review. Such administrative rules may be included as a separate section within the approved Design Standards. Such administrative rules and any amendment thereto must be approved by DHCD. The Plan Review process encompasses the following, as may be supplemented by the administrative rules: 
4.6.11.1. 	Preapplication review. The APPLICANT is encouraged to participate in a preapplication review with the Approving Authority at a regular meeting(s) of the Approving Authority. The purpose of the preapplication review is to obtain the advice and direction of the Approving Authority prior to filing the application, including determining whether additional technical analyses listed in Section 
4.6.11.2.c.2 of this By-law may be required. At the preapplication review the APPLICANT shall outline the proposal and seek preliminary feedback from the Approving Authority, other municipal review entities, and members of the public. The APPLICANT is also encouraged to request a site visit by the Approving Authority and/or its designee in order to facilitate preapplication review. 
4.6.11.2. 	Application Procedures. 
a) 	An application for Plan Approval shall be filed by the APPLICANT with the Town Clerk and a copy of the application, including the date of filing certified by the Town Clerk, shall be filed forthwith with the Approving Authority. The APPLICANT shall also file 17 copies of the application with the Building Inspector and with the Approving Authority. Said filing shall include any required forms provided by the Approving Authority. An application must include a site plan prepared by a certified architect, landscape architect, and/or a civil engineer resisted in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and that all Plans shall be signed and stamped, and drawings be prepared at a scale approved in advance by the Approving Authority. 
b) As part of any application for Plan Approval, the APPLICANT must submit the following documents to the Approving Authority and the Monitoring Agent: 
1. 	
Evidence that the Development Project complies with the cost and eligibility requirements in Section 4.6.10.3 of the By-law; 

2. 	
Development Project Plans that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Section 4.6.10.4 of the By-law; and 

3. 	
A form of AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION that satisfies the requirements of Section 4.6.10.5 of the By-law. 


c) As part of any application for Plan Approval, the Applicant may be required to submit one or more of the following technical analyses to the Approving Authority: 
1. 	
Surface and water pollution. A report on the impact of stormwater runoff on adjacent and downstream surface water bodies, subsurface groundwater and the water table. 

2. 	
Soils. A geotechnical report that details the potential dangers of erosion and sedimentation caused by the operation and maintenance of the proposed development. The report is to be prepared by a qualified professional geotechnical engineer. 

3. 	
Geotechnical analysis. If subsurface blasting is proposed, an analysis by a certified geotechnical engineer shall be required in accordance with MGL c. 148 showing whether such blasting will have any extraordinary adverse impacts on nearby property. 

4. 	
Traffic impact. A report from a registered professional engineer on existing street capacities, estimated average daily traffic generation, composition, peak hour levels and directional flows resulting from the proposed development, proposed methods to mitigate the estimated traffic impact and methodology and sources used to derive existing data and estimations. 

5. 	
Sample board. Identification of all major exterior materials, colors and finishes. 

6. 	
Noise. Documentation as necessary to demonstrate that the noise produced by exterior venting air conditioners, ventilators, blowers and similar equipment will not be in excess of 60 decibels at 20 feet in any direction, or the distance to the nearest building having a residential use, whichever is the lesser. 


d) 	Review fees. Pursuant to MGL c.40R, §11(a), the APPLICANT shall be required to pay for reasonable consulting fees to provide peer review of the application for the benefit of the Approving Authority. Such fees shall be held by the Town in an interest-bearing escrow account, and shall be used only for expenses associated with the use of outside consultants employed by the Approving Authority in reviewing the Plan application. Any surplus funds remaining after the completion of such review, including any interest accrued, shall be returned to the APPLICANT forthwith. 
e) Upon receipt by the Approving Authority, applications for Plan Approval shall be distributed to the Board of Selectmen, Board of Health, Housing Committee, Building Inspector, Conservation Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Department of Public Works, the Fire and Police Departments and the Water and Sewer Commission. Any reports from these parties shall be submitted to the Approving Authority within 60 days of filing of the application. 
f) 	Within 30 days of filing of an application with the Approving Authority, the Approving Authority or its designee shall evaluate the proposal with regard to its completeness and shall submit an advisory report, in writing, to the APPLICANT certifying the completeness of the application. Where an application is found to be incomplete, the Approving Authority or its designee shall provide a statement describing required items that were missing from the application. The Approving Authority or its designee shall forward to the APPLICANT, with its report, copies of all recommendations received to date from other boards, commissions or departments. 
4.6.11.3. 	Public hearing. The Approving Authority shall hold a public hearing and review all applications according to the procedure specified in MGL c. 40R, § 11. 
4.6.11.4. 	Prior to the granting of any Plan Approval for a Development Project, the APPLICANT must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Monitoring Agent, or, in the event that a Monitoring Agent has not yet been named, to the satisfaction of the Approving Authority, that the method by which such affordable rents or affordable purchase prices are computed shall be consistent with state or federal guidelines for affordability applicable to the Town. 
4.6.11.5. 	Plan Approval decision. 
a) The Approving Authority shall make a decision on the application for Plan Approval by a simple majority vote and shall file said decision with the Town Clerk within 120 days of the receipt of the application by the Town Clerk. The time limit for public hearings and taking of action by the Approving Authority may be extended by written agreement between the APPLICANT and the Approving Authority. A copy of such agreement shall be filed with the Town Clerk. 
b) Failure of the Approving Authority to take action within 120 days or extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be an approval of the application. 
c) An APPLICANT who seeks approval because of the Approving Authority's failure to act on an application within the 120 days or extended time, if applicable, must notify the Town Clerk, in writing, within 14 days from the expiration of said time limit for a decision, of such approval and that a copy of that notice has been sent by the APPLICANT to parties in interest by mail and that each such notice specifies that appeals, if any, shall be made pursuant to MGL c. 40R and shall be filed within 20 days after the date the Town Clerk received such written notice from the APPLICANT that the Approving Authority failed to act within the time prescribed. 
d) The Approving Authority's findings, including the basis of such findings, shall be stated in a written decision of approval, conditional approval or denial of the application. The written decision shall contain the name and address of the APPLICANT, identification of the land affected and its ownership, and reference by date and title to the Plans that were the subject of the decision. 
e) The decision of the Approving Authority, together with the detailed reasons therefor, shall be filed with the Town Clerk, the Board of Appeals and the Building Inspector. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the APPLICANT and to the owner if other than the APPLICANT by the Approving Authority certifying that a copy of the decision has been filed with the Town Clerk and that all Plans referred to in the decision are on file with the Approving Authority. A notice of the decision shall be sent to parties in interest and to persons who requested a notice at the public hearing. 
f) 	Effective date. If 20 days have elapsed after the decision has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk without an appeal having been filed or if such appeal, having been filed, is dismissed or denied, the Town Clerk shall so certify on a copy of the decision. If the application is approved by reason of the failure of the Approving Authority to timely act, the Town Clerk shall make such certification on a copy of the application. A copy of the decision or application shall be recorded with the title of the land in question in the Essex County Registry of Deeds or the Essex Land Registry District, and indexed in the grantor index under the name of the owner of record or recorded and noted on the owner's certificate of title. The responsibility and the cost of said recording and transmittal shall be borne by the APPLICANT. 
4.6.11.6. 	Criteria for approval. The Approving Authority shall approve the Development Project upon finding that it complies with the requirements of the SG and applicable Design Standards. 
4.6.11.7. 	Criteria for conditional approval. The Approving Authority may impose conditions on a Development Project as necessary to ensure compliance with this this By-law and applicable Design Standards, or to mitigate any extraordinary adverse impacts of the Development Project on nearby properties, insofar as such conditions are compliant with the provisions of MGL c. 40R and applicable regulations and do not unduly restrict opportunities for development. The Approving Authority may require construction of an approved Development Project to be phased for the purpose of coordinating the Development Project with any mitigation required to address extraordinary adverse Development Project impacts on nearby properties. 
4.6.11.8. 	Criteria for denial. The Approving Authority may deny an application for Plan Approval pursuant to this By-law if it finds one or more of the following: 
a) The Development Project does not meet the conditions and requirements set forth in the SG and applicable Design Standards. 
b) 	The APPLICANT failed to submit information and fees required by the SG and necessary for an adequate and timely review of the design of the Development Project or potential Development Project impacts. 
c) 	It is not possible to adequately mitigate significant adverse Development Project impacts on nearby properties by means of suitable conditions. 
4.6.11.9. 	Time limit. A Plan Approval shall remain valid and shall run with the land indefinitely, provided that construction has commenced within two years after the decision issues, which time shall be extended by the time required to adjudicate any appeal from such approval. Said time shall also be extended if the APPLICANT is actively pursuing other required permits for the project or if there is good cause for the failure to commence construction, or as may be provided in an approval for a multiphase development project. 
4.6.11.10. 	Appeals. Pursuant to MGL c. 40R, § 11, any person aggrieved by a decision of the Approving Authority may appeal to the Superior Court, the Land Court Department, or the Housing Court Department within 20 days after the Plan decision has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk. 
4.6.12.0. 	Waivers. The Approving Authority may at its discretion authorize waivers in the Plan Approval with respect to the dimensional and other standards set forth in this this By-law and in the Design Standards upon a finding that such waiver will allow the Development Project to achieve the density, affordability and/or physical character allowable under this By-law. However, the Approving Authority may not waive any portion of the Affordable Housing requirements in Section 4.6.10.0 of this By-law, except insofar as such waiver results in the creation of a number of Affordable Housing Units in excess of the minimum number of required Affordable Housing Units and receives prior written approval by DHCD under the 40R program. 
4.6.13.0. 	Fair housing requirement. All Development Projects within the SG shall comply with applicable federal, state and local fair housing laws. 
4.6.14.0. 	Annual update. On or before July 31 of each year, the Board of Selectmen shall cause to be filed an annual update with DHCD in a form to be prescribed by DHCD. The annual update shall contain all information required in 760 CMR 59.07, as may be amended from time to time, and additional information as may be required pursuant to MGL c. 40R and accompanying regulations. The Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of all updates transmitted to DHCD pursuant to this By-law, with said copies to be made available upon request for public review. 
4.6.15.0. 	Notification of issuance of building permits. Upon issuance of a residential building permit within the SG, the Building Inspector shall cause to be filed an application to the DHCD in a form to be prescribed by DHCD, for authorization of payment of a one-time density bonus payment for each residential building permit pursuant to MGL c. 40R. The application shall contain all information required in 760 CMR 59.06(2), as may be amended from time to time, and additional information as may be required pursuant to MGL c. 40S and accompanying regulations. The Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of all such applications transmitted to DHCD pursuant to this By-law, with said copies to be made available upon request for public review. 
4.6.16.0. 	Date of effect. The effective date of this By-law shall be the date on which such adoption is voted upon by Town Meeting pursuant to the requirements of MGL 
c. 40A § 5 and MGL c. 40R; provided, however, that an APPLICANT may not proceed with construction pursuant to this By-law prior to the receipt of final approval of this By-law and accompanying Zoning Map by both DHCD and the Office of the Massachusetts Attorney General. 
4.6.17.0. 	Severability. The provisions of this section are severable. If any provision of this section is held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force. 
4.7.0.0. Humphrey Street Overlay District 
4.7.1.0. Purpose 
The Humphrey Street Overlay District (HSOD) is meant to promote development and define a sense of place in the historic downtown of Swampscott that enhances and encourages a mix of uses, protects historic and cultural resources, and fosters a harmonious connection between the district and the natural environment of the waterside. This bylaw is meant to promote future economic, cultural and environmental opportunities and development within the downtown area. 
The purposes of the HSOD are as follows: 
. 	To establish preferred patterns and a design framework for the HSOD and to protect and enhance the overall quality of the built environment in the district while balancing aesthetic concerns; 
. 	To respect the scale and character of the residential and commercial mix in the HSOD and surrounding districts by applying a high level of attention to site and building design which promotes attractive and functional development; 
. 	To promote compact development that is pedestrian oriented and preserves the historic value and character of the area; 
. 	To encourage building designs and practices that are adaptable to multiple uses and add flexibility for responding to conditions and constraints inherent to specific sites;  
. 	To that connect residents and visitors to the built and natural environment through a thoughtful mix of business, residential, cultural, educational, and civic uses; and 
. 	To apply to all types of development in the HSOD including public and private. 
4.7.2.0. Overlay District & Boundaries The HSOD is an overlay district superimposed over the underlying zoning districts set forth in the Zoning By-law and as designated on the Zoning Map. Within the HSOD, the requirements of the underlying district continue to apply, subject to the following additional provisions established by the HSOD bylaw. To the extent there is a conflict between the requirements of the Zoning By-law and the HSOD bylaw, the latter shall control. 
The boundaries of the HSOD shall be as shown on the Town of Swampscott Zoning Map on file in the office of the Town Clerk and shall encompass those lots and rights­of-way shown on the map designated as lying within the HSOD. 
4.7.3.0. Permitted Uses and Review Processes The permitted uses in the underlying zoning districts (Section 2.2.3.0. Table of Principal Uses) are modified by the HSOD bylaw to encourage compliance with the HSOD standards and to achieve the purposes of this bylaw. 
The following uses are permitted in the HSOD in accordance with the “Table of Additional Uses within the HSOD” below (4.7.3.1). Uses permitted by right in the underlying zoning districts which are not specifically listed in Section 4.7.3.1 are still permitted by right, but must adhere to the requirements of a “Y” as defined below and obtain building permit approval. Uses permitted by a special permit in the underlying zoning districts which are not specifically listed in Section 4.7.3.1 must adhere to the requirements of a “HSSP” as defined below and obtain building permit approval. 
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant a variance for any use not allowed under this bylaw. 
Symbols employed shall mean the following: 
Y = 	A use permitted as a matter of right, subject to Humphrey Street Design Review approval by the Planning Board (Section 4.7.3.2) 
HS SI-P = A use permitted by Humphrey Street Design Review approval by the Planning Board and a Humphrey Street Site Plan Special Permit by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 5.4.0.0 of this By-law and in accordance with the Humphrey Street Site Plan Special Permit approval criteria (Section 4.7.8.0) 
HSSP = 	A use authorized by Humphrey Street Design Review approval by the Planning Board (Section 4.7.4.2) followed by a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 
5.3.0.0 of this By-law and in accordance with the Humphrey Street Special Permit approval criteria (Section 4.7.9.0) 
N = 	An excluded or prohibited use 
4.7.3.1. 	Table of Additional Uses Within the HSOD 
PRINCIPAL USE  A-4 DISTRICT  B-1 DISTRICT  
Residential  
Multi-family of less than six units  HSSP  HS SI-P  
Multi-family of six units or more  HSSP  HSSP  
Mixed-Use Residential – up to ten units and 20,000 square feet (SF) of gross floor area (GFA) of non-residential  HS SI-P  HS SI-P  
Institutional  
Theatre; museum; performing, cultural, or arts facility; hall for public gathering  HSSP  HS SI-P  
Commercial  
Retail containing less than 2,000 SF of GFA  HS SI-P  Y  
Retail containing 2,000 to 5,000 SF of GFA  HSSP  HS SI-P  
Bakery containing less than 2,000 SF of GFA  HS SI-P  Y  
Bakery containing 2,000 to 5,000 SF of GFA  HSSP  HS SI-P  
Restaurant of coffee shop containing less than 2,000 SF of GFA  HSSP  Y  
Restaurant or coffee shop containing 2,000 to 7,500 SF of GFA  N  Y  
Restaurant or coffee shop containing more than 7,500 SF of GFA  N  HS SI-P  
Restaurant abutting one or more residentially-zoned properties that are being used for residential purposes  HSSP  HSSP  
Restaurant providing delivery service (using more than one  N  HS SI-P  

delivery vehicle/shift)  
Catering establishment  N  HS SI-P  
Personal service establishment containing 2,000 to 5,000 SF of GFA  N  Y  
Personal service establishment containing more than 5,000 SF of GFA  N  HS SI-P  
Bank or financial service containing 2,000 to 5,000 sf (with no drive-through)  N  Y  
Automatic Teller machine (freestanding)  HSSP  HS SI-P  
Any allowed use containing outdoor seating, display or storage on the front sidewalk without alcohol)  HSSP  Y  
Hotel, Inn (See §5.13.0.0.)  HSSP  HS SI-P  
Motel (See §5.13.0.0.)  N  HSSP  
Bed & Breakfast (See §5.13.0.0.)  HS SI-P  HS SI-P  

4.7.3.2. 	Humphrey Street Design Review All applications for new construction, additions, and projects involving exterior renovations in the HSOD must receive design review approval by the Planning Board. To receive design review approval, an application: 
1. 	
Must meet requirements of the basic design standards as outlined in Section 4.7.4.0 (all applications) and 

2. 	
Should meet guidance and goals as outlined in Section 4.7.5.0 (HS SI-P and HSSP applications). 


4.7.4.0. Humphrey Street Overlay District Design Standards 
4.7.4.1. 	Purpose and Applicability The purpose of the HSOD Design Standards is to establish basic design standards that promote the purposes of the HSOD as outlined in Section 4.7.1.0. 
The Design Standards shall apply to all new construction, additions or projects involving exterior renovation. If a use is permitted as a matter of right, the Planning Board may waive its review for applicants at its discretion; such applicants may proceed to apply for a building permit with a signed design review waiver from the Planning Board. 
4.7.4.2. 	Basic Design Standards All applications to the Planning Board under this bylaw shall provide detailed design on all street-facing walls (45 degrees or less from lot line). The Planning Board will issue an advisory recommendation to the Building Inspector and Special Permit Granting Authority, where applicable. 
Applications shall include at least four (4) of the architectural features illustrated in Appendix B Figure 9, except for residential-only structures in the underlying A-4 district. It is not within the Planning Board’s authority to prescribe specific elements except when the Planning Board may require specific design elements or changes to promote compatibility with adjacent uses and to achieve the desired community character or pedestrian orientation. 
All qualifying structures must meet the following standards: 
A. Regularly-spaced and	 similarly-shaped windows shall be provided on all building stories; 
B. Ground floor windows or window displays shall be provided along at least 30 percent of the building’s (ground floor) street-facing elevation(s) except for residential-only structures in the underlying A-4 district; windows and display boxes shall be integral to the building design and not mounted to an exterior wall; 
C. Display windows shall be trimmed, recessed, or otherwise defined by wainscoting, sills, water tables, or similar architectural features; 
D. On multi-story buildings except for residential-only structures in the underlying A-4 district, ground floors shall be defined and separated from upper stories by appropriate architectural features that visually identify the transition from ground floor to upper story; such features should be compatible with the surrounding architecture; such features may be provided by: 
a. 	
A cornice above the ground level; 

b. 	
An arcade; 

c. 	
Changes in material or texture; or 

d. 	
A row of clerestory windows on the building’s street-facing elevation; 


E. The tops of flat roofs shall be treated with appropriate detailing (e.g., cornice, pediment, flashing, trim, or other detailing) that is compatible with the surrounding architecture, and pitched roofs shall have eaves, brackets, gables with decorative vents, or other detailing that is consistent with the surrounding architecture; 
F. 	Primary building entrances except for residential-only structures in the underlying A-4 district, shall open directly to the outside and, if not abutting a street, shall have walkways connecting them to the street sidewalk; every building shall have at least one primary entrance that does not require passage through a parking lot or garage to gain access; and shall include weather protection features, such as awnings, canopies, or overhangs. 
4.7.5.0. Humphrey Street Design Guidelines In addition to ensuring compliance with the Design Standards above, the Planning Board shall encourage adherence to the following guidelines before issuing a Humphrey Street Site Plan Special Permit or providing recommendations to the Zoning Board of Appeals for HSSP applications. 
HSOD proposals should follow local development patterns (e.g., open space and view corridors, common setbacks, streetscapes). The continuation of such patterns should contribute to a unified visual appearance within an area. Not all established development patterns present opportunities for a desirable interface. Applicants should be prepared to address such situations with respect to the current design proposal and how the departure from the existing pattern benefits the community. 
4.7.5.1. Hard Surface Sidewalk Extension 
A. The area between a building and the front lot line should be hard surfaced for use by pedestrians as an extension of the sidewalk as shown in Appendix B Figure 10, except that this area may contain tree wells, planting strips and gardens. 
B. For each	 one hundred (100) square feet of hard-surface area between a building and the front lot line, at least one of the following amenities should be provided (as shown in Appendix B Figure 10): 
a. 	
A bench or other seating; 

b. 	
A tree; 

c. 	
A landscape planter; or 

d. 	
A bicycle parking facility. 


C. Wherever possible, mixed-use and commercial buildings should be located directly adjacent and parallel to the sidewalk. 
D. Clearly visible and direct pedestrian paths should be established between neighboring mixed-use and commercial buildings, between buildings and outlying parking areas and between buildings and transit facilities. 
E. Where pedestrian paths cross vehicular routes, a change in paving materials, textures or colors should be provided to emphasize the conflict point, improve visibility, enhance safety and provide added aesthetic appeal. 
F. 	The placement of patios, plazas and similar spaces (including outdoor dining areas) should take into consideration the impact of solar orientation. 
4.7.5.2. 	Reinforcement of the Corner On sites located at public street right-of-way intersections (corners): 
A. primary structures located within thirty (30) feet from	 the corner should be within ten (10) feet of both front lot lines; 
B. At least one of the street-facing walls should be at least forty 
(40) feet long; 
C. The highest point of the building’s street-facing elevation should be within twenty-five (25) feet of the corner; 
D. A main entrance into the building should be on a street-facing wall and either at the corner or within twenty-five (25) feet of the corner; and 
E. Off-street parking is discouraged within forty (40) feet of the corner. 
4.7.5.3.	 Main Entrance 
A. At least one entrance of the principal building should face the front 
lot line. Where there is more than one (1) front lot line, the entrance may face either a front lot line or diagonally towards the corner. 
B. For residential buildings that have more than one (1)	 main entrance, only one entrance should face the front lot line. 
4.7.5.4. 	Ground Floor Treatment 
A. Where the underlying district is B-1, the ground floor facing the street for new structures should be designed for non-residential use by following the requirements for windows and entrance doors in Section 4.7.4.2. This does not prohibit residential use of such ground floor spaces. 
B. Windows on street frontages should comply with the following: 
a. 	
Where the underlying district is B-1, new facades that face a street should maintain a minimum ratio of two-thirds (2/3) glass to one-third (1/3) solid material on the ground floor. 

b. 	
No reflective sheeting or other window blocking techniques should be permitted other than cloth drapery and window shades. 


4.7.5.5. 	Awnings and Canopies New and replacement awnings must meet the requirements of Section 
3.2.2.6 with the following additional allowances: 
A. Awnings should project at least three (3) feet from the building wall façade; 
B. Awning covers should be made of durable material that look like natural fabric and have no gloss sheen; 
C. Awnings may be flat or angled; 
D. Hand-cranked or “traditional” awnings are preferred; 
E. Awnings proposed under an HSOD application are exempt from the Administrative Site Plan Review by the Planning Board, but instead are subject to HSOD design review. 
4.7.5.6.	 Roof-Mounted Equipment All roof-mounted equipment, including satellite dishes and other communication equipment, excluding solar panels, should be screened in one of the following ways: 
A. A parapet as tall as the tallest part of the equipment; 
B. A screen around the equipment that is as tall as the tallest part of the equipment; or 
C. A setback of the equipment from the street-facing perimeters of the building of at least three (3) feet for each foot of height of the equipment. 
4.7.5.7.	 Roof Dormer windows are encouraged for pitched roofs. Buildings should have either: 
A. A sloped roof with a pitch no flatter than 6/12; or 
B. A roof with a pitch of less than 6/12 and a cornice that meets the following requirements as shown in Appendix B Figure 11. 
a. 	
The top part of the cornice should project at least six (6) inches from the face of the building and be at least two (2) inches further from the face of the building than the bottom part of the cornice; and 

b. 	
The height of the cornice is based on the height of the building as follows: 


i. 	Buildings ten (10) feet or less in height should have a cornice at least twelve (12) inches high. 
ii. 	Buildings greater than ten (10) feet and less than thirty (30) feet in height should have a cornice at least eighteen (18) inches high. 
iii. 	Buildings thirty (30) feet or greater in height should have a cornice at least twenty-four (24) inches high. 
4.7.6.0. Humphrey Street Site Plan and Special Permit Standards All proposed uses or activities in the HSOD that are being reviewed for a Humphrey Street Site Plan Special Permit (HS SI-P) or a Humphrey Street Special Permit (HS SP) are subject to the Lot Area, Building Height, Parking and Sign Regulations of the underlying zone, except as noted below. 
Applications for residential-only uses shall be made in accordance with the content requirements of Section 5.4.6.0 (Contents of Plan – Residential). Applications for mixed or commercial-only uses shall be made in accordance with the content requirements of Section 5.4.5.0 (Contents of Plan – Commercial). Plans shall be prepared as outlined in Section 5.4.4.0 (Preparation of Plans).  
Applications as a matter of right shall include nine (9) copies of application packet (six (6) copies for Planning Board, two (2) copies for Town Clerk, one (1) copy for Inspector of Buildings); applications for an HS SI-P shall include thirteen (13) copies of application packet (six (6) copies for Planning Board, two (2) copies for Town Clerk, one (1) copy for each: Board of Health, Inspector of Buildings, Town Engineer, Fire Department, Conservation Commission); Applications for an HSSP shall include seventeen (17) copies of application packet (nine (9) copies for Zoning Board of Appeals, two (2) copies for Town Clerk, one (1) copy for each: Board of Health, Inspector of Buildings, Town Engineer, Fire Department, Conservation Commission, Planning Board). 
Any applicant applying for a Section 6 Special Permit within the HSOD must still go before the Planning Board for design review. After the Planning Board has made their recommendations available to the ZBA, a determination will be made by the ZBA if such an extension, alteration, reconstruction or change is not substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure or use to the neighborhood. 
4.7.6.1. 	Dimensional Requirements and Exceptions  Uses and structures within the HSOD shall conform to the following dimensional requirements. Exceptions to the following dimensional requirements may be granted by the approval of an HS SI-P from the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority (Planning Board) for uses permitted as a matter of right or HS SI-P. Exceptions to the following dimensional requirements may be granted by the approval of an HSSP from the Special Permit Granting Authority (Zoning Board of Appeals) for uses permitted by HSSP. 
A. Minimum Lot Area = 7,500 square feet Minimum Lot Frontage = 70 feet Minimum Front Yard Setback = 0 feet (commercial / mixed-    
use) / 15 feet (residential-only) Minimum Side Yard Setback = 0 feet (commercial / mixed- 
use) / 7.5 feet (residential-only) Minimum Rear Yard Setback = 15 feet Maximum Building Height = 35 feet (3 stories, except for  those properties that abut Nahant Bay which carry a 2.5-  story limit) 
Minimum Open Space = 15% (commercial / mixed-use) / 20%  (residential-only) 
Maximum Building Coverage = 80% (commercial / mixed-use)  / 40% (residential-only) 
B. Exception – At least sixty (60) percent of the frontage of a lot, measured in percentage of linear feet of the lot frontage, shall be occupied by buildings that are set back no more than ten (10) feet from the front lot line and that are at least twenty (20) feet in depth. This requirement may be waived for additions to existing buildings where the addition does not increase the setback of the existing building or where the addition is not visible from any street. A deeper setback may be allowed for a forecourt when a garden and/or hard-surfaced terrace are provided. This requirement is waived for residential-only buildings located in the A-4 district. 
C. Exception – The minimum separation between two or more buildings on the same lot shall be twenty (20) feet. 
D. Exception – The permit granting authority may modify all dimensional requirements (except building height) outlined in Section 4.7.6.1 (A) if, in its opinion, such modifications will result in improved design that is in keeping with Section 4.7.1.0. 
E. Exception – The permit granting authority may, as part of the special permit, reduce the lot frontage requirement for a development that provides consolidated or shared access for two or more adjoining parcels, subject to a legally-enforceable agreement or restriction in a form acceptable to the permit granting authority and approved by Town Counsel (Section 4.7.7.1). 
F. 	Exception – Building height is measured from mean street level to the absolute top of the structure, not including weather vanes, spires less than six (6) inches in diameter, or other minimally-sized adornments as deemed by the Planning Board. A waiver may be sought by the applicant with regards to height, but may not exceed forty (40) feet. For residential-only buildings in the underlying A-4 district, the permit granting authority may waive the height requirement if there is at least twenty-five (25) feet between the building of the applicant and each building on abutting properties, or when there is a total distance of fifty (50) feet between the building of the applicant and each building on abutting properties added together. For buildings in the underlying B-1 district, the permit granting authority may waive the height requirement if a public open space is created on the property. 
a. 	
Public open space must be outside, and shall be in the form of a park, courtyard, walking trail, or plaza. 

b. 	
Public open space shall be accessible and generally be at or near grade level to facilitate use. 

c. 	
Locked gates or restricted passages negate the purpose of “open” space. All outdoor ground level features which are accessible from the public sidewalk should always be open to the public during daylight hours. 

d. 	
Public open space shall be no less than ten (10) percent of the area of the lot in question. 


4.7.6.2.	 Parking 
A. All off-street parking areas shall be located behind or to the side of the principal structure on the lot. No parking area shall be located closer to the front lot line than the front building façade. This provision may be waived at the discretion of the permit granting authority for residential-only multi-family uses in the underlying A-4 district. 
B. The required setback from side and rear lot lines specified for off-street parking shall consist entirely of landscaped area, except for required access drives. 
C. In establishing parking requirements for uses in the Humphrey Street Overlay District, consideration shall be given to the Town’s goal of making this overlay a “park-once” district where on-street and municipal off-street spaces are used to enable customers to use one space for multiple destinations. Reference Section 4.7.7.0. Alternative Parking Solutions for guidance. 
4.7.6.3. 	Off-Street Loading, Parking of Trucks, Buses and Commercial Vehicles 
A. Within the Humphrey Street Overlay District, off-street loading shall only be required if it is a practical option due to the availability of adequate space in a rear parking lot or alley. 
B. Parking stalls for trucks, buses, or other commercial vehicles exceeding either seven and a half (7.5) feet in width or eighteen 
(18) feet in length shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from the nearest dwelling unit in the underlying A-4 residential district. 
C. Stalls for delivery vehicles or other commercial vehicles shall be specifically identified in the site plan, and shall be of such dimensions as to accommodate the specified type of vehicle. Such vehicles shall be permitted to park only in the stalls so identified and approved. 
4.7.6.4. Screening – Generally 
A. Refuse Areas 
All refuse containers for uses other than single-family and two-family homes shall meet the following conditions, which may only be waived by the permit granting authority at its discretion. 
a. 	
Refuse containers shall not be visible from the street. 

b. 	
Refuse containers shall be set back from the front property line at least as far as the primary structure on the property. No refuse container shall be located in the front yard. 

c. 	
Refuse containers shall be enclosed or screened by a structure constructed out of the same or similar materials to the primary structure on the property or an approved alternative. The enclosure shall screen the containers from view from the public way and protect the containers from raccoons, rodents, and other pests. 

d. 	
Outdoor refuse containers shall not be stored within ten 


(10) feet of exterior windows or doors that open directly into habitable space within housing units on the basement, ground, or first floors of buildings contained residential units. 
B. Buffers between Districts 
Where two (2) land use districts abut each other, the more intense district use must provide a buffer planting strip when adjacent to residential districts or to less intense residential districts. All development must follow the buffer and screening requirements in the table below and illustrated in Appendix B Figure 12. 
Subject Lot in District where Side or Rear Lot Line abuts Residential District (or a less intense residential district)  Buffer Width  
Residence A-1, A-2, A-3  None  
Residence A-4  5 feet  
Business B-1  10 feet  

4.7.7.0. Alternative Parking Solutions 
4.7.7.1. Shared Parking 
A. Where an application for an HS SI-P or HSSP proposes shared parking with one (1) or more other separately-owned properties and such shared parking has been approved by the permit granting authority, the owners of the properties shall enter into a legal agreement guaranteeing access to, use of, and management of designated shared parking spaces. 
B. The agreement shall be in a form approved by Town Counsel and shall be included as a condition to any approved HS SI-P or HSSP. 
4.7.7.2. Fee in Lieu of Providing On-Site Parking Spaces 
A. Where the required off-street parking spaces cannot be provided on-site and are not currently available on the street and/or in municipal parking lots, the applicant may, at the option of the permit granting authority, pay a fee in lieu of one (1) or more required spaces, in an amount established by the Board of Selectmen and sufficient to cover the estimated cost of providing additional public parking spaces in the general location of the proposed use. 
B. Such fees shall be kept in a dedicated fund for municipal parking purposes and shall be used for such purposes within four (4) years or returned to the applicant (or the applicant’s successor). 
4.7.8.0. Humphrey Street Site Plan Special Permit Approval Criteria In addition to the standards in Section 4.7.4.0 and the design guidelines and standards in sections 4.7.5.0 and 4.7.6.0, the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall make a finding as to whether the proposed development meets the following criteria: 
4.7.8.1. 	All new construction or additions that would (1) alter the building gross floor area by more than eight hundred (800) square feet or (2) increase gross floor area by fifteen (15) percent or more, shall be designed consistent with the architectural context in which they are located. This requires meeting the following criteria: 
A. There is continuity in building sizes between new and existing buildings; 
B. The ground floor and upper floor elevations and architectural detailing are compatible with adjacent buildings; 
C. The roof is compatible in elevation, roof pitch, shape, and height step-down with adjacent buildings; 
D. There is continuity of building sizes on the site, if more than one building is proposed; 
E. There is continuity in the rhythm of windows and doors on the proposed building(s); 
F. 	The relationship of buildings to public spaces, such as streets, plazas, and public parking, including on-street parking, is strengthened by the proposed building(s). 
4.7.8.2. 	The proposed development meets the purpose of the HSOD (4.7.1.0.); 
4.7.8.3. 	The proposed development meets the standards in Section 4.7.6.0. and design standards in Section 4.7.4.0. and in as much as possible the design guidelines in Section 4.7.5.0. 
4.7.8.4. 	Final action by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall not take place until the earlier of (a) twenty (20) days after filing the HS SI-P application, and (b) receipt of written reports by Board of Health, Inspector of Buildings, Town Engineer, Fire Department, and Conservation Commission. 
4.7.9.0. Humphrey Street Special Permit Approval Criteria Applications for a special permit shall be made in accordance with the regulations of the Special Permit Granting Authority, who shall require conformance with the following standards before issuing a Humphrey Street Special Permit: 
4.7.9.1. 	The proposed development meets the purpose of the HSOD (4.7.1.0.); 
4.7.9.2. 	The proposed development meets the standards in Section 4.7.6.0. and design standards in Section 4.7.4.0. and in as much as possible the design guidelines in Section 4.7.5.0.; and 
4.7.9.3. 	The Planning Board has performed a design review, submitted recommendations, and recommendations have been considered by the Special Permit Granting Authority. 
4.7.9.4. 	Final action by the Special Permit Granting Authority shall not take place until the earlier of (a) thirty-five (35) days after filing the HSSP application, and (b) receipt of written reports by Board of Health, Inspector of Buildings, Town Engineer, Fire Department, Conservation Commission, and Planning Board. 
4.7.10.0. Decision In granting a Humphrey Street Site Plan Special Permit or a Humphrey Street Special Permit, the permit granting authority may impose reasonable conditions and restrictions based upon or in addition to the considerations listed in the HSOD bylaw and may set limitations on the work to be done. 
4.8.0.0. Inclusionary Housing Regulations 
4.8.1.0. Purpose 
The purpose of this bylaw is to encourage development of new housing that is affordable to low and moderate-income households. At minimum, affordable housing produced through this regulation should be in compliance with the requirements set forth in MGL c. 40B sect. 20-24 and other affordable housing programs developed by state, county and local governments. It is intended that the affordable housing units that result from this bylaw be considered as Local Initiative Units, in compliance with the requirements for the same as specified by the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD). Definitions for affordable housing units (homeownership and rental) and eligible household can be found in “4.6.4.0. Definitions.” 
4.8.2.0. Applicability 
4.8.2.1. 	In all zoning districts, the inclusionary zoning provisions of this section shall apply to the following uses: 
Any project that results in a net increase of ten (10) or more dwelling units, whether by new construction or by the alteration, expansion, reconstruction, or change of existing residential or non-residential space; 
Any subdivision of land for development of six (6) or more dwelling units; and. 
Any assisted or independent living facility development that includes five (5) or more assisted or independent living units and accompanying services. 
4.8.2.2. 	The inclusionary zoning provisions of this section do not apply to the following districts and overlays: 
Greenwood Planned Development District; and 
Smart Growth (MGL 40R) Zoning Overlay District. 
4.8.2.3. 	Failure to comply with or evasion this section of the Swampscott Zoning By-laws is prohibited. Non-compliance or evasion includes, but is not limited to, segmenting land or properties in such a manner so as to avoid inclusionary housing requirements by either subdividing one parcel of land into six parcels of land in such a manner that each parcel will have less than six dwelling units or purposefully dividing a large development into phases that would develop less than six dwelling units during each phase. 
4.8.3.0. Special Permit The development of any project set forth in “4.8.2.0. Applicability” shall require the grant of a Special Permit from the Board of Appeals, or the Planning Board in the cases of a subdivision. A Special Permit shall be granted if the proposal meets the requirements of this bylaw. The application procedure for the Special Permit shall be as defined in “Article V. Administration and Procedures” of the Zoning By-laws. 
4.8.4.0. Mandatory Provision of Affordable Units 
4.8.4.1. 	As a condition of approval for a Special Permit, the applicant shall contribute to the local stock of affordable units in accordance with the following requirements: 
A. At least ten (10) percent of the units in a division of land or multiple unit development subject to this bylaw shall be established as affordable housing units in any one or combination of methods provided for below:. 
1. 	
constructed or rehabilitated on the locus subject to the Special Permit (see “4.8.5.0. Provisions Applicable to Affordable Housing Units On- and Off-Site”); 

2.
 constructed or rehabilitated on a locus different than the one subject to the Special Permit (see “4.8.6.0. Provision of Affordable Housing Units Off-Site”); 

3. 	
an equivalent fees-in-lieu of payment may be made (see “4.8.7.0. Fees-in-Lieu-of Affordable Housing Unit Provision”); or 

4. 	
An applicant may offer, and the SPGA may recommend, subject to the approval of the appropriate Town board or body, the acceptance of donations of land in fee simple, on or off-site, that the SPGA in its sole discretion determines are suitable for the construction of affordable housing units. The value of donated land shall be equal to or greater than the value of the construction of the number of affordable units that would otherwise be required to be constructed under this by-law. The SPGA may require, prior to recommending that the appropriate Town board or body accept land as satisfaction of the requirements of this by­



law, that the applicant must submit appraisals of the land in question, as well as other data relevant to the determination of equivalent value. 
B. The applicant may offer, and the SPGA may accept, any combination of the Section 4.8.4.1.(A)(1)-(4) requirements provided that in no event shall the total number of units or land area provided be less than the equivalent number of affordable units or value of affordable units required to be constructed or set-aside under this by-law. 
C. As a condition for the granting of a Special Permit, all affordable housing units shall be subject to an affordable housing restriction and a regulatory agreement in a form acceptable to the Planning Board. The regulatory agreement shall be consistent with any applicable guidelines issued by the DHCD and shall ensure that affordable units can be counted toward Swampscott’s Subsidized Housing Inventory. The regulatory agreement shall also address all applicable restrictions listed in “4.8.9.0. Preservation of Affordability; Restrictions on Resale” of this bylaw. The Special Permit shall not take effect until the restriction, the regulatory agreement and the Special Permit are recorded at the Registry of Deeds and a copy provided to the Planning Board and the Inspector of Buildings. 
4.8.4.2. 	To facilitate the objectives of “4.8.4.0. Mandatory Provision of Affordable Units,” modifications to the dimensional requirements in any zoning district may be permitted for any project under these regulations, as the applicant may offer and the SPGA may grant, subject to the conditions below: 
A. 	Density Bonus. The SPGA may allow the addition of two market-rate units for each affordable unit provided as part of compliance with the Special Permit. The minimum lot area, maximum height, and/or maximum building coverage normally required in the applicable zoning district may be reduced by that amount necessary to permit up to two (2) additional market-rate units on the lot for each one (1) affordable unit required in Section 4.8.4.1. 
B. 	Voluntary Inclusionary Housing Bonus. New affordable housing development that is not subject to Section 4.8.2.0. and exceeds the requirements specified in Section 4.8.4.1.(A) may receive the same benefits specified in Section 4.8.4.2.(A) when the development is approved by the SPGA by a grant of a Special Permit pursuant to this provision. The net increase in housing units shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the original property yield, meaning the number of units that would be allowed to be constructed in compliance with these Zoning By-laws but for this Voluntary Inclusionary Housing Bonus, before any density bonuses were applied. 
4.8.5.0. Provisions Applicable to Affordable Housing Units On- and Off-Site 
4.8.5.1. 	Siting of Affordable Units. All affordable units constructed or rehabilitated under this by-law shall be situated within the development so as not to be in less desirable locations than market-rate units in the development and shall, on average, be no less accessible to public amenities, such as open space, as the market-rate units. 
4.8.5.2. 	Minimum Design and Construction Standards for Affordable Units. Affordable housing units shall be integrated with the rest of the development and shall be compatible in design, appearance, construction, and quality of materials with other units. Interior features and mechanical systems of affordable units shall conform to the same specifications as apply to market-rate units. 
4.8.5.3. 	Timing of Construction or Provision of Affordable Units or Lots. 
Where feasible, affordable housing units shall be provided coincident to the development of market-rate units, but in no event shall the development of affordable units be delayed beyond the schedule noted below. 
Market-Rate Unit (% Complete)  Affordable Housing Unit (% Required)  
< 30%  - 
30% plus 1 unit  10%  
Up to 50%  30%  
Up to 75%  50%  
75% plus 1 unit  70%  
Up to 90%  100%  

Fractions of units shall not be counted. 
4.8.5.4. 	Marketing Plan for Affordable Units. Applicants under this by-law shall submit a marketing plan or other method approved by the Town through its Planning Board, to the SPGA for its approval, which describes how the affordable units will be marketed to potential homebuyers or tenants. This plan shall include a description of the lottery or other process to be used for selecting buyers or tenants. 
4.8.6.0. Provision of Affordable Housing Units Off-Site As an alternative to the requirements of Section 4.8.5.0., an applicant subject to the by-law may develop, construct or otherwise provide affordable units equivalent to those required by Section 4.8.4.0. off-site. All requirements of this by-law that apply to on-site provision of affordable units, shall apply to provision of off-site affordable units. In addition, the location of the off-site units to be provided shall be approved by the SPGA as an integral element of the Special Permit review and approval process. 
4.8.7.0. Fees-in-Lieu-of Affordable Housing Unit Provision 
4.8.7.1. 	As an alternative to the requirements of Section 4.8.5.0. or 4.8.6.0., an applicant may contribute to the Town’s Affordable Housing Trust to be used for the development of affordable housing in lieu of constructing and offering affordable units within the locus of the proposed development or at an off-site locus. 
A. 	Calculation of Fee-in-Lieu-of-Units. The applicant for development subject to this by-law may pay fees-in-lieu of the construction of affordable units. For the purposes of this bylaw, the fee-in-lieu of the construction or provision of affordable units will be determined as a per-unit cost as calculated from regional construction and sales reports. The Swampscott Affordable Housing Trust will make the final determination of acceptable value. 
B. 	Schedule of Fees-in-Lieu-of-Units Payments. Fees-in-lieu-of­units payments shall be made according to the schedule set forth in 4.8.5.3. 
C. 	Creation of Affordable Units. Cash contributions and donations of land and/or buildings made to the Town or its Housing Trust in accordance with Section 4.8.7.1. shall be used only for purposes of providing affordable housing for low- or moderate-income households. Using these contributions and donations, affordable housing may be provided through a variety of means, including but not limited to the provision of favorable financing terms, subsidized prices for purchase of sites, or affordable units within larger developments. 
4.8.8.0. Maximum Incomes and Selling Prices: Initial Sale 
4.8.8.1. 	To ensure that only eligible households purchase affordable housing units, the purchaser of an affordable unit shall be required to submit copies of the last three (3) years’ federal and state income tax returns and certify, in writing and prior to transfer of title, to the developer of the housing units or his/her agent, and within thirty (30) days following transfer of title, to the Town’s Affordable Housing Trust, that his/her or their family’s annual income level does not exceed the maximum level as established by DHCD, and as may be revised from time to time. 
4.8.8.2. 	The maximum housing cost for affordable units created under this by­law is as established by DHCD, Local Initiative Program or as revised by the Town. 
4.8.9.0. Preservation of Affordability; Restrictions on Resale 
4.8.9.1. 	Each affordable unit created in accordance with this by-law shall have limitations governing its resale through the use of a regulatory agreement (Section 4.8.4.1(C)). The purpose of these limitations is to preserve the long-term affordability of the unit and to ensure its continued availability for affordable income households. The resale controls shall be established through a restriction on the property and shall be in force in perpetuity. 
A. 	Resale Price. Sales beyond the initial sale to a qualified affordable income purchaser shall include the initial discount rate between the sale price and the unit’s appraised value at the time of resale. This percentage shall be recorded as part of the restriction on the property noted in Section 4.8.9.1, above. 
B. 	Right of First Refusal to Purchase. The purchaser of an affordable housing unit developed as a result of this bylaw shall agree to execute a deed rider prepared by the Town, consistent with model riders prepared by DHCD, granting, among other things, the municipality’s right of first refusal to purchase the property in the event that a subsequent qualified purchaser cannot be located. 
C. The SPGA shall require, as a condition for Special Permit under this by-law, that the applicant comply with the mandatory set-asides and accompanying restrictions on affordability, including the execution of the deed rider noted in Section 4.8.9.1.(B), above. The Building Inspector shall not issue an occupancy permit for any affordable unit until the deed restriction is recorded. 
4.8.10.0. Conflict with Other Bylaws 
The provisions of this by-law shall be considered supplemental to existing zoning by­laws. To the extent that a conflict exists between this by-law and others, the more restrictive by-law, or provisions therein, shall apply. 
4.8.11.0. Severability 
If any provision of this by-law is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the by-law shall not be affected thereby. The invalidity of any section or sections or parts of any section or sections of this by-law shall not affect the validity of the remainder of Swampscott’s zoning by-laws. 
4.9.0.0. Tourist Lodging Overlay District 
4.9.1.0. Purpose 
The Tourist Lodging Overlay District (TLOD) is meant to promote tourism within the Town and to specifically define the locations where lodging establishments may be allowed. This bylaw is meant to promote future economic, cultural and environmental opportunities and encourage establishments that would attract tourists to Swampscott. 
4.9.2.0. Overlay District & Boundaries 
The TLOD is an overlay district superimposed over the underlying zoning districts set forth in the Zoning By-law and as designated on the Zoning Map. Within the TLOD, the requirements of the underlying district continue to apply, subject to the following additional provisions established by the TLOD bylaw. To the extent there is a conflict between the requirements of the Zoning By-law and the TLOD bylaw, the latter shall control. The boundaries of the TLOD shall be as shown on the Town of Swampscott Zoning Map on file in the office of the Town Clerk and shall encompass those lots and rights-of-way shown on the map designated as lying within the TLOD. 
4.9.3.0. Permitted Uses 
The permitted uses in the underlying zoning districts (Section 2.2.3.0. Table of Principal Uses) are modified by the TLOD bylaw to encourage compliance with the TLOD standards and to achieve the purposes of this bylaw. The following uses are permitted in the TLOD in accordance with the “Table of Additional Uses within the TLOD” below (4.9.3.1)...Uses permitted by special permit in Section 4.9.3.1. must adhere to the requirements of the TLOD as defined below. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not grant a variance for any use not allowed under this bylaw... Symbols employed in the “4.9.3.1. Table of Additional Uses within the TLOD” shall mean the following:  
SP = A use authorized by a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the criteria defined Section 5.13.0.0. of this By-law. 
N = An excluded or prohibited use 
4.9.3.1. 	Table of Additional Uses within the Tourist Lodging Overlay District (TLOD) 
PRINCIPAL USE  A-1  A-2  A-3  A-4  B-1  B-2  B-3  B-4  I  OFF­STREET PARKING GROUP  
Hotel  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  C, E*  
Motel  N  N  N  N  N  SP  SP  SP  N  C  
Inn  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  C  
Bed & Breakfast Establishment  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  SP  N  C  

* = Applicable to restaurant and café portion only 
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES. 
5.1.0.0. General. 
5.1.1.0. 	Permits. This By-Law shall be administered by the Inspector of Buildings. Pursuant to the State Building Code, the Inspector of Buildings may require such plans and specifications as may be necessary to determine compliance with all pertinent laws of the Commonwealth and may request advisory reviews by other municipal boards and officials. Buildings, structures or signs may not be erected, substantially altered, moved, or changed in use and land may not be substantially altered or changed with regard to size or shape or principal use without written certification by the Inspector of Buildings that such action is in compliance with then applicable zoning, and that all necessary permits have been received under federal, state, or local law.  Issuance of a Building Permit or Certificate of Use and Occupancy, where required under the Commonwealth's State Building Code, may serve as such certification. 
5.1.2.0. 	Enforcement. The Inspector of Buildings shall institute and take any and all such action as may be necessary to enforce full compliance with any and all of the provisions of this By-Law and of permits, special permits, variances, and site plan approval issued thereunder, including notification of noncompliance and request for legal action through the Selectmen to Town Counsel. 
5.1.3.0. 	Penalties. The penalty for violation of any provision of this By-Law, of any of the conditions under which a permit is issued, or of any decision rendered by the Board of Appeals, any special permit granting authority, or the site plan approval board shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense.  Each day that each violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
5.2.0.0. Board of Appeals. 
5.2.1.0. 	Establishment. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members and three (3) associate members. 
5.2.2.0. 	Powers. The Board of Appeals and the Planning Board shall have and exercise all the powers granted to it by Chapters 40A, 40B, and 41 of the General Laws to the extent conferred upon it by this By-Law.  The Board of Appeal's powers are as follows: 
5.2.2.1. 	The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide applications for special permits, including, without limitation, dimensional special permits, site plan special permits and any other special permits permitted under this By-Law.  Unless otherwise specified herein, the Board of Appeals shall serve as the special permit granting authority, to act in all matters in accordance with the provisions of this By-Law. The Planning Board shall have the power to hear and decide applications for site plan special permits where it serves as the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority pursuant to Section 5.4.3.0. below. 
5.2.2.2. 	The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals or petitions for variances from the terms of this By-Law, with respect to particular land or structures, as set forth in G.L. c. 40A, § 10, and more specifically set forth in Section 5.5.0.0. below. The Board of Appeals shall not grant use variances. 
5.2.2.3. 	The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved by reason of his inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from any administrative officer under the provisions of G.L. c. 40A, §§ 7, 8 and 15. 
5.2.2.4. 	The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide comprehensive permits for construction of low or moderate income housing by a public agency or limited dividend or nonprofit corporation, as set forth in G.L. c. 40B, §§ 20-23. 
5.2.3.0. 	Regulations. The Board of Appeals and the Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations for the administration of the powers granted to it under this By-Law.  To promote consistency in the administration of Site Plan Special Permits, the Board of Appeals and the Planning Board shall within sixty (60) days of the effective date of this By-Law jointly adopt rules for the administration of Site Plan Special Permits. 
5.2.4.0. 	Fees. The Board of Appeals may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees for petitions for special permits, variances, administrative appeals, and applications for comprehensive permits, provided, however, with regard to the administrative and other fees relating to Site Plan Special Permits such fees shall be jointly established by the Board of Appeals and the Planning Board. 
5.3.0.0. Special Permits. 
5.3.1.0. 	Special Permit Granting Authority.  Unless specifically designated otherwise, the Board of Appeals shall act as the special permit granting authority under this By-Law. 
5.3.2.0. 	Criteria. Special permits shall be granted by the special permit granting authority, unless otherwise specified herein, only upon its written determination that the benefit to the town and the neighborhood outweigh the adverse effects of the proposed use, taking into account the characteristics of the site and of the proposal in relation to that site.  In addition to any specific factors that may be set forth in this By-Law, the determination shall include consideration of each of the following: 
5.3.2.1. 	Social, economic, or community needs which are served by the proposal; 
5.3.2.2.  Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading;  
5.3.2.3.  Adequacy of utilities and other public services;  
5.3.2.4.  Neighborhood character and social structures;  
5.3.2.5.  Impacts on the natural environment; and  
5.3.2.6.  Potential fiscal impact, including impact on town services, tax base,  
and employment.  

The provisions of this Section 5.3.2.0. shall not apply to requests for dimensional special permits pursuant to Section 2.3.6.0. of this By-Law and requests for special permits pursuant to Section 2.2.7.0. of this By-Law.   
5.3.3.0.	  The burden of proof is on the party requesting a special permit to prove that its application meets the criteria to be eligible for a special permit.   
5.4.0.0. Site Plan Special Permit. 
5.4.1.0. 	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the protection and promotion of health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Swampscott, and for promoting acceptable site planning practices and standards, and for promoting attractive, quality design and layout of commercial, industrial and residential development compatible with the Town of Swampscott neighborhoods, environment and character. 
5.4.2.0. 	Applicability. For the purpose of computing the total gross floor area of a site plan, all extensions or additions to projects/developments approved within the five (5) previous calendar years shall be aggregated.  The following types of activities require a site plan special permit by the special permit granting authority: 
5.4.2.1. 	Commercial. Construction, exterior alteration or exterior expansion of a non-residential structure that either: (i) changes or alters the building footprint of a development that previously required site plan approval or a site plan special permit, or (ii) involves more than eight hundred 
(800) square feet of gross floor area. For the purposes of this Section 5.4.2.1., a multi-family structure shall be considered a non-residential structure. 
5.4.2.2. 	Residential - Addition.  Construction, exterior alteration or exterior expansion of a single or two-family residence that either: (i) changes or alters the footprint of a residence that previously required site plan approval or a site plan special permit, or (ii) involves an addition of more than eight hundred (800) square feet of gross floor area. 
5.4.2.3. 	Residential - New.  Any new construction of a single or two-family residence involving more than three thousand (3,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
5.4.2.4. 	Parking Area or Lot.  Construction or expansion of a parking lot for an exempt, municipal, institutional, commercial, industrial, or multi­family structure or purpose, or for single- or two-family residential purposes where a parking area or lot capable of accommodating more than three (3) vehicles is proposed. For the purposes of this Section 5.4.2.4., a parking area or lot serving a development containing more than three (3) dwelling units shall be subject to site plan approval. Any change in size, location or number of parking spaces, circulation lanes, curb cuts, or landscaped areas of parking areas or lots that previously required site plan or a site plan special permit shall require a site plan special permit. 
5.4.2.5. 	Subdivision.  Any subdivision of land and subsequent construction of structures thereon. 
5.4.2.6. 	Adult Uses. Any proposed Adult Use, whether in a new or existing structure, it being the intent that the entire lot, not just the individual Adult Use, shall be subject to review under this Section 5.4.0.0. 
5.4.2.7. 	Site Preparation.  In all districts, no site preparation shall be undertaken on a vacant lot until approval for a construction project requiring a site plan special permit is obtained from the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority and the Inspector of Buildings.  Site preparation is herein defined as a change in topography or cover, i.e.: excavation; dredging; filling; changing the grade; blasting; removal of trees or other vegetation. Borings and test pits to determine subsoil conditions are not included in this definition.  If the rights under such a building permit have not been exercised within the limits provided by existing statutes, and site preparation has already commenced, the land shall be restored by means of placing a top soil and/or plantings by the applicant. Ordinary maintenance of vacant lots shall be exempt from this subsection. 
5.4.3.0. 	Procedures. In order to streamline the permitting process, the special permit granting authority for the purposes of site plan special permits under this Section 
5.4.0.0. (the “Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority”) shall be (i) the Board of Appeals if the project or development requiring the site plan special permit also requires one (1) or more additional special permits or variances from the Board of Appeals, or (ii) the Planning Board in all other cases.  In the case where a project or development requires a site plan special permit and one (1) or more additional special permits or variances, the applicant shall submit a single application for all such special permits or variances to the Board of Appeals.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, any application for a Site Plan Special Permit filed with the Board of Appeals shall be automatically transferred to the Planning Board, and the Planning Board shall become the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority and the Board of Appeals shall take no further action with regard to an application for a Site Plan Special Permit, in either of the following circumstances: (a) the application pending before the Board of Appeals is amended so as to no longer require any other special permits or variances (except for a Site Plan Special Permit), or (b) all of the applicant’s requests for other special permits or variances (except for the Site Plan Special Permit) are denied by the Board of Appeals. 
Applicants for site plan special permits shall submit six (6) copies of the site plan to the Planning Board if it is the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority for review, nine (9) copies of the site plan to the Board of Appeals if it is the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority, two (2) copies of the site plan review materials with the application to the Town Clerk, and within three (3) days thereafter shall also submit a copy of the site plan materials to the Board of Health,  Inspector of Buildings, Town Engineer, Fire Department, Conservation Commission and, if the Planning Board is not the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority, the Planning Board, for each of their advisory review and written recommendations and/or comments.  Where the Board of Appeals is the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority, the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall not take final action on any Site Plan Special Permit until the earlier of (i) thirty-five (35) days after filing of the Site Plan Special Permit application with the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority, and (ii) receipt by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority of written reports from the Board of Health, Inspector of Buildings, Town Engineer, Fire Department, Conservation Commission and, if the Planning Board is not the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority, the Planning Board.  Where the Planning Board is the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority, the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall not take final action on any Site Plan Special Permit until the earlier of (i) twenty (20) days after filing of the Site Plan Special Permit application with the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority, and (ii) receipt by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority of written reports from the Board of Health,  Inspector of Buildings, Town Engineer, Fire Department, and Conservation Commission.  The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall review the site plan and approve it in accordance with the requirements and procedures otherwise applicable to special permits under G.L. c.40A and this By-Law, except as otherwise expressly provided in this Section 5.4.0.0.  No deviation from an approved site plan shall be permitted without modification thereof which has received approval from the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority. 
5.4.4.0. 	Preparation of Plans. Site Plans shall be submitted on 24-inch by 36-inch sheets. Plans shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer, Registered Land Surveyor, Architect, or Landscape Architect, as appropriate.  Dimensions and scales shall be adequate to determine that all requirements are met and to make a complete analysis and evaluation of the proposal.  Except where expressly provided otherwise, all plans shall have a minimum scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet. 
5.4.5.0. Contents of Plan - Commercial. The contents of the site plan are as follows: 
5.4.5.1. For construction activities identified in Sections 5.4.2.1., 5.4.2.4., 
5.4.2.5. and 5.4.2.6., the following six (6) separate plans prepared at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet, or other such scale as may be approved by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority, shall be submitted.  The plans are as follows: 
a. 	
Site layout which shall contain the boundaries of the lot(s) in the proposed development, locations and dimensions of proposed structures, driveways, internal roadways and access ways to adjacent public roadways, all parking areas, loading areas, walkways, and areas for snow storage after plowing. The first sheet of this plan shall be a locus plan, at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, showing the entire project and its relation to existing areas, buildings and roads for a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from the project boundaries or other distance as may be required by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority. 

b. 	
Topography and drainage plan showing location of all existing natural features, including ponds, brooks, streams and wetlands, and which shall contain the existing and proposed final topography at two (2) foot intervals, and plans for handling stormwater drainage. 

c. 	
Utility and landscaping plan, which shall include the locations and dimensions of all utilities, gas, telephone, electrical, communications, water, drainage, sewer and other waste disposal facilities, the location of all hydrants, fire alarms and firefighting facilities on and adjacent to the site, the location and type of external lighting, all proposed recreational facilities and open space areas, and all wetlands including floodplain areas. 

d. 	
Architectural plans, at a scale of one inch equals forty (40) feet, which shall include the ground floor plan and elevations for all sides of the building(s), and a color rendering. Elevations shall show architectural styles intended and shall indicate exterior materials and colors proposed. 

e. 	
Landscaping plan, showing the limits of work, existing tree lines, and all proposed landscape features and improvements including screening, planting areas with size and type of stock for each shrub or tree, and including proposed erosion control measures. 

f. 	
Photometric plan if the project is located within the B1, B2, B3 or I District and proposes the addition of five (5) or more outdoor 


parking spaces with outdoor lighting, prepared by a lighting professional that is certified by the National Council on Qualifications for the Lighting Professions (NCQLP), or a State licensed professional engineer, architect, landscape architect or land surveyor and containing the following information: 
a. 	
Location and limits of the canopy or outdoor display area at a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet (1" = 40'); 

b. 	
Location and height of all canopy lighting for service stations and service station/mini-marts and all pole, building or ground mounted lighting fixtures for an outdoor display area at a vehicle sale, rental and ancillary service establishments; and 

c. 	
A photometric diagram showing predicted maintained lighting levels produced by the proposed lighting fixture facilities. 


5.4.5.2. 	Time and Cost Statement. The site plan shall be accompanied by a written statement indicating the estimated time required to complete the proposed project and any and all phases thereof.  
5.4.5.3. 	Summary. A written summary of the contemplated projects shall be submitted with the site plan indicating, where appropriate, the number of dwelling units to be built and the acreage in residential use, the evidence of compliance with parking and off-street loading requirements, the forms of ownership contemplated for the property and a summary of the provisions of any ownership or maintenance thereof, identification of all land that will become common or public land, and any other evidence necessary to indicate compliance with this By-Law. 
5.4.5.4. 	Drainage Calculations. The site plan shall be accompanied by drainage calculations by a registered professional engineer.  Storm drainage design shall conform to Town of Swampscott subdivision regulations. 
5.4.5.5. 	Development Impact Statement.  The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority may require a Development Impact Statement (DIS) as set forth in Section 5.6.2.0. below. 
5.4.5.6. 	Traffic Impact Report. The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority may require a report on existing traffic volume, composition, peak hour levels, and existing street capacities, estimated daily traffic generation, composition, peak hour levels, and directional flow resulting from the proposed development, proposed methods to mitigate the estimated traffic impact, and the methodology and sources used to derive existing data and estimations. 
5.4.6.0. 	Contents of Plan - Residential. The contents of the site plan for single and two-family residences are as follows (plans with regard to multi-family residences shall meet the plan requirements for commercial developments set forth in Section 5.4.5.0 above): 
5.4.6.1. 	For construction activities identified in Sections 5.4.2.2. and 5.4.2.3., the following plans prepared at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet (or at such other scale as otherwise required herein or as may be approved by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority), shall be submitted.  The plans are as follows: 
a. 	
Locus plan showing the applicant’s lot and adjacent streets, and footprints of the applicant’s house and proposed addition, and showing the footprints of houses and other buildings on abutting lots. Distances of adjacent homes to the applicant’s property lines shall be dimensional on the plan. 

b. 	
Dimensional site plan of the entire lot showing all existing and proposed buildings, structures, driveways, curb cuts, and exterior lighting, at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet.  Said plan shall be dimensional to show distances to all setback lines. 

c. 	
Landscape plan showing the limits of the work, existing trees and vegetation, vegetation to be removed, proposed new landscaping with size, type and quantity of vegetation at a scale of one (1) inch equals forty (40) feet. The site plan and the landscape plan may be combined into one (1) plan if all required information can be clearly shown on one (1) plan. 

d. 	
Dimensional floor plans and building elevations (all sides) of existing structures and proposed additions at a scale of one-quarter (1/4) inch equals one (1) foot.  Elevations shall indicate exterior materials proposed. 


5.4.7.0. 	Waiver of Compliance. The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority may, upon written request of the applicant, waive any of the plan requirements set forth in Section 5.4.4.0., 5.4.5.0., or 5.4.6.0. above if it determines that the project involves relatively simple development plans or the plan requirement is not necessary to adequately review and decide the petition before it.   
5.4.8.0. 	Approval. The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall make the following findings, in additions to the findings set forth in Section 5.3.2.0. above, in connection with approving any Site Plan Special Permit:  (i) any new building construction or other site alteration shall provide adequate access to each structure for fire and service equipment and adequate provision for utilities and stormwater drainage consistent with the functional requirements of the Planning Board`s Subdivision Rules and Regulations; and (ii) new building construction or other site alteration shall be designed in the Site Plan, after considering the qualities of the specific location, the proposed land use, the design of building form, grading, egress points, and other aspects of the development, so as to:  
5.4.8.1. 	Minimize the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed trees six 
(6) inch caliper or larger, the length of removed stone walls, the area of wetland vegetation displaced, the extent of stormwater flow increase from the site, soil erosion, and threat of air and water pollution; 
5.4.8.2. 	Maximize pedestrian and vehicular safety both on the site and egressing from it; 
5.4.8.3. 	Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations; 
5.4.8.4. 	Minimize visual intrusion by controlling the visibility of parking, storage, or other outdoor service areas viewed from public ways or premises residentially used or zoned; 
5.4.8.5. 	Minimize glare from headlights and lighting intrusion; 
5.4.8.6. 	Minimize unreasonable departure from the character, materials, and scale of buildings in the vicinity, as viewed from public ways and places;   
5.4.8.7. 	Minimize contamination of groundwater from on-site waste-water disposal systems or operations on the premises involving the use, storage, handling, or containment of hazardous substances; 
5.4.8.8. 	Ensure compliance with the provisions of this Zoning By-Law, including parking and landscaping; and 
5.4.8.9. 	Minimize adverse traffic impact of the proposed project. 
The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority may impose reasonable conditions at the expense of the applicant, including performance guarantees, to promote these objectives. 
5.4.9.0. 	Applicability.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this By-Law, at the election of the project applicant, a project that requires a Site Plan Special Permit under this By-Law shall not be required to obtain a Site Plan Special Permit for such project, but shall continue to be subject to the Pre-Existing Site Plan Approval (as defined herein), where (i) site plan approval for the project was voted on and approved by the Planning Board (regardless of when the decision was filed) on or after July 1, 2008 but prior to April 17, 2009 (referred to for the purposes of this Section 5.4.9.0. as a “Pre-Existing Site Plan Approval”), (ii) a building permit for the project was duly issued by the Inspector of Buildings on or before January 1, 2010, and (iii) the project is substantially completed on or before January 1, 2011. Notwithstanding that the Pre-Existing Site Plan Approval was originally issued by the Planning Board, a Pre-Existing Site Plan Approval may be  amended by (a) the Board of Appeals if the project subject of the Pre-Existing Site Plan Approval requires but has not yet received one (1) or more approvals from the Board of Appeals and such amendment is required due to changes to the project required by the Board of Appeals in connection with the approvals sought from the Board of Appeals, or (b) in all other cases, the Planning Board. Any amendment of a Pre-Existing Site Plan Approval referenced in the immediately preceding sentence shall not be considered nor shall it require a Site Plan Special Permit under this By-Law.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained within this Section 5.4.0.0., for the purposes of construction of Renewable and Alternative Energy Research and Development Facilities within the I District under Section 2.1.1.8 and Section 2.2.3.0. of this By-Law (RE/AE R&D Facilities) and projects located within the Planned Development Districts (PDDs) under Section 2.1.1.7. and Section 4.5.0.0. of this By-Law, site plan review for such facilities and projects shall not be a special permit process and shall not be subject to the special permit requirements of G.L.c. 40A or this By-Law.  All RE/AE R&D Facilities and projects within the PDDs shall be subject  to administrative site plan review by the Planning Board, and the Planning Board shall only have the right to (i) approve the site plan, (ii) approve the site plan with reasonable conditions, or (iii) deny the site plan only if the site plan fails to furnish adequate information required by this By-Law.  Site plan review for RE/AE R&D Facilities and projects within the PDDs shall be subject to the requirements of Sections 5.4.1.0., 5.4.4.0., 5.4.5.0. or 5.4.6.0., as applicable, and 5.4.7.0. of this By-Law.  In connection with approving or approving with conditions a site plan for RE/AE R&D Facilities and projects within the PDDs, the Planning Board shall make the findings contained within Section 
5.4.8.1. through 5.4.8.9. of this By-Law. 
5.5.0.0. Variances. 
The Board of Appeals shall take the following items into consideration in determining whether or not a variance requested under Section 5.2.2.2. above should be granted: 
5.5.1.0.	  It is only in rare instances and under exceptional circumstances that variances shall be granted. 
5.5.2.0.	  Variances shall only be granted upon a finding that owing to circumstances related to the (i) soil conditions, (ii) shape, or (iii) topography of such land or structures and especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this By-Law would involve substantial hardship and that desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of such By-Law.  
5.5.2.1. 	Circumstances. A lot lacking sufficient area is not eligible for a variance based solely on the fact that it has insufficient area.  A lot lacking sufficient frontage is not eligible for a variance based solely on the fact that it has insufficient frontage.  
5.5.2.2. 	Hardships. Any hardship demonstrated by an applicant must arise from and directly relate to the circumstance (i.e., soil conditions, shape or topography) alleged by the applicant.  By way of example, but not limitation, the following shall not be considered hardships for the purposes of obtaining a variance: 
5.5.2.2(a). 	Self created hardships. 
5.5.2.2(b). Hardships which would not be shared generally by anyone attempting to make a reasonable and permitted use of the same property (i.e., hardships that are personal or specific to this applicant). 
5.5.2.2(c).	 Personal hardships. 
5.5.3.0.	  The burden of proof is on the party requesting the variance to prove that its application meets all of the criteria to be eligible for a variance.   
5.6.0.0. Procedures for Special Permits and Variances. 
5.6.1.0. 	Procedures. Applications shall be filed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the special permit granting authority.  An application shall not be deemed complete until all copies of required information and documentation have been filed with the special permit granting authority. 
5.6.2.0. 	Development Impact Statement (DIS). In connection with any request for any special permit or any variance, the special permit granting authority, in its sole and absolute discretion, may require an applicant to submit to it at the sole cost and expense of the applicant, a development impact statement (DIS).  The special permit granting authority may deny any request for a special permit or variance where the DIS discloses that the proposed use does not comply with the provisions of this By-Law. At the request of the special permit granting authority, the DIS shall be prepared by an interdisciplinary team including a Registered Landscape Architect or Architect, a Registered Professional or Civil Engineer, and/or a Registered Surveyor, and may include all or some of the following information in addition to any other such information requested by the special permit granting authority:  
5.6.2.1. Physical Environment. 
a. 	
Describe the general physical conditions of the site, including amounts and varieties of vegetation, general topography, unusual geologic, archeological, scenic and historical features or structures, location of significant viewpoints, stone walls, trees over sixteen 

(16) inches in diameter, trails and open space links, and indigenous wildlife. 

b. 	
Describe how the project will affect these conditions, providing a complete physical description of the project and its relationship to the immediate surrounding area. 


5.6.2.2. Surface Water and Subsurface Conditions. 
a. 	
Describe location, extent, and type of existing water and wetlands, including existing surface drainage characteristics, both within and adjacent to the site. 

b. 	
Describe any proposed alterations of shorelines or wetlands. 

c. 	
Describe any limitations imposed on the project by the site's soil and water conditions. 

d. 	
Describe the impact upon ground and surface water quality and recharge, including estimated phosphate and nitrate loading on groundwater and surface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer, and other activities within the site.    


5.6.2.3. Circulation Systems. 
a. 	Project the number of motor vehicles to enter or depart the site per average day and peak hour. Also state the number of motor vehicles to use streets adjacent to the site per average day and peak hour. Such data shall be sufficient to enable the special permit granting authority to evaluate (i) existing traffic on streets adjacent to or approaching the site, (ii) traffic generated or resulting from the site, and (iii) the impact of such additional traffic on all ways within and providing access to the site.  Actual study results, a description of the study methodology, and the name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for implementing the study, shall be attached to the DIS. 
5.6.2.4. 	Support Systems. 
a. 	
Water Distribution: Discuss the water system proposed for the site, means of providing water for firefighting, and any problems unique to the site. 

b. 	
Sewage Disposal: Discuss the sewer system to be used, and evaluate impact of sewage disposal on the wastewater treatment facility. 

c. 	
Refuse Disposal: Discuss the location and type of facilities, the impact on existing Town refuse disposal capacity, hazardous materials requiring special precautions. 

d. 	
Fire Protection: Discuss the type, location, and capacity of fuel storage facilities or other flammables, distance to fire station, and adequacy of existing firefighting equipment to confront potential fires on the proposed site. 

e. 	
Recreation: Discuss the distance to and type of public facilities to be used by residents of the proposed site, and the type of private recreation facilities to be provided on the site. 

f. 	
Schools:  Project the increase to the student population for nursery, elementary, junior high school, and high school levels, also indicating present enrollment in the nearest public schools serving these categories of students. 


5.6.2.5. 	Phasing. Where development of the site will be phased over more than one (1) year, indicate the following: 
a. 	
Describe the methods to be used during construction to control erosion and sedimentation through use of sediment basins, mulching, matting, temporary vegetation, or covering of soil stockpiles. Describe the approximate size and location of portion of the parcel to be cleared at any given time and length of time of exposure. 

b. 	
Describe the phased construction, if any, of any required public improvements, and how such improvements are to be integrated into site development. 


5.6.3.0. 	Conditions. Special permits and variances may be granted with such reasonable conditions, safeguards, or limitations on time or use, including performance guarantees, as the special permit granting authority may deem necessary to serve the purposes of this By-Law. 
5.6.4.0. 	Plans. An applicant for a special permit or variance shall submit a plan in substantial conformance with the requirements of Section 5.4.0.0., herein. 
5.6.5.0. 	Lapse. Special permits shall lapse if a substantial use thereof or construction thereunder has not begun, except for good cause, within twelve (12) months following the issuance of the special permit approval (plus such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal referred to in G.L. c. 40A, § 17, from the grant thereof) with the Town Clerk.  Variances shall lapse in accordance with the provision of G.L. c.40A, § 10. 
5.6.6.0. 	Regulations.  The special permit granting authority may adopt rules and regulations for the administration of this section. 
5.6.7.0. 	Fees. The special permit granting authority may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees for applications for special permits and variances. 
5.7.0.0. Applicability/General Provisions. 
5.7.1.0. 	Other Laws. Where the application of this By-Law imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by any other regulations, permits, restrictions, easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this By-Law shall control. 
5.7.2.0. 	Conformance. Construction or operations under a Building Permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this By-Law unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of six (6) months after the issuance of the permit, and in cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. 
5.7.3.0. 	Section Headings. Headings contained within this By-Law are for convenience and are not intended to have substantive meaning. 
5.8.0.0. Partial Invalidity. 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this By-Law shall not invalidate any other section or provision herein. 
5.9.0.0. Amendments. 
This By-Law may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition, or repeal by the Town Meeting in the manner provided in G.L. c. 40A, § 5, and any amendments thereto. 
5.10.0.0. Adult Uses. 
5.10.1.0. 	Purpose and Intent.   The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations of adult entertainment uses within the Town of Swampscott.  The intent of the By-Law is to address and mitigate the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment uses. Numerous studies have documented that the quality of life in a community is degraded by adult entertainment establishments as a result of increased levels of crime including crimes against children, prostitution and drugs; depreciation of property values; adverse impacts on public health including noise, litter, unsanitary conditions, and traffic. The provisions of this By-Law have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials including sexually oriented materials; and it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of adult entertainment to their intended market.  It is neither the intent nor the effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene or other illegal matter or materials. 
5.10.2.0. Definitions. 
(a) 
Adult Uses:  A business, including Adult Bookstores, Adult Motion Picture Theaters, Adult Paraphernalia Stores, Adult Video Stores and any other business which display live nudity located in a building or portion thereof, or a use of land having a substantial or significant portion of its business activity, stock in trade or other matter or materials for sale, rental, distribution or exhibition, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL Chapter 272, Section 31.  For purposes of this By-Law, each of the businesses defined, as an adult use herein shall constitute a separate adult use business even if operated in conjunction with another adult use business at the same establishment.   

(b) 
Adult Bookstore:  A business having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, periodicals, pictures and other matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL Chapter 272, Section 31. 

(c) 
Adult Motion Picture Theater:  An enclosed building or outdoor venue used for public uses, for presenting material (motion pictures, films, video cassettes, cable television, slides, DVDs or any other such visual or electronic media) distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL Chapter 272, Section 31. 

(d) 
Adult Paraphernalia Store:  A business having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in devices, objects, tools, toys or electronic media which are distinguished or characterized by their association with sexual activity, including sexual intercourse, sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL Chapter 272, Section 31. 

(e) 
Adult Video Store: A business having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade (for sale or rent) motion pictures, films, video cassettes, DVDs and other film material or similar audio/visual media and electronic media which 

are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in MGL Chapter 272, Section 31. 

(f) 
Businesses Which Display Live Nudity: A business offering activities or goods or providing services where employees or entertainers are engaging in full or partial nudity, sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined In MGL Chapter 272, Section 31. 

(g) 
Nudity as defined in M.G.L. c. 272, §31. 

(h) 
Sexual Conduct as defined in M.G.L. c. 272, §31. 

(i) 
Sexual Excitement as defined in M.G.L. c. 272, §31. 

(j) 
Substantial or significant portion of stock:  Used within this By-Law shall mean any of the following: 

(i) 	
twenty (20%) percent or more of the business square footage, inventory or stock of merchandise for sale, rental, distribution, or exhibition during any period of time; 

(ii) 	
twenty (20%) percent or more of the annual number of gross sales, rentals, or other business transactions; or 


(iii) 	twenty (20%) percent or more of the annual gross business inventory; or 
(iv) 	
twenty (20%) percent or more of the hours during which the establishment is open. 

(k) 
Business:  The term "business", used within this By-Law, refers to certain types of goods and services. 


5.10.3.0. Applicability / Eligibility Requirements. 
(a)
 Adult Uses shall be prohibited in all zoning districts, except for the I District. 

(b)
 No more than one (1) Adult Use shall be allowed to operate within the same building, structure or portion thereof. 

(c)
 All Adult Uses are subject to a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals 

(d)
 All Adult Uses located within a building, structure or portion thereof require a Site Plan Special Permit from the Board of Appeals.   

(e)
 A special permit for an adult use shall lapse upon any of the following: 

(f)
 Any adult use granted a special permit shall comply with all other Town By-Laws and all Federal and State statues regarding public nuisances, sexual conduct, lewdness, obscene or harmful matter, or the exhibition or public display thereof. 

(g)
 Adult Book Stores, Adult Paraphernalia Stores and Adult Video Stores shall not be permitted to open for business earlier than 10:00 a.m. and close no later than 9:00 p.m. 

(h)
 Businesses which display live nudity and adult motion picture theaters shall not be permitted to open for business earlier than 10:00 a.m. and close no later than 9:00 p.m. 

(i)
 No adult use special permit shall be issued to any person, corporation, officer, director, general partner convicted of violating the provisions of M.G.L. c.119, S. 63 or M.G.L. c. 272, S. 2, 3, 4, 4A, 6, 7, 8, 12, 13, 28 and M.G.L c. 265 S. 13B, 13F, 13H, 22, 22A, 23, 24, and 24B.  If any person so identified is found to be convicted of violating these MGL's, such Special permit shall immediately null and void. 

(j)
 No adult use shall be allowed to disseminate or offer to disseminate adult matter or paraphernalia to minors or suffer minors to view displays or linger on the premises. 

(k)
 Any adult use special permit granted shall expire after a period of two (2) calendar years from its date of issuance and shall be automatically renewable for successive two (2) year periods thereafter, provided that a written request for such renewal is made to the special permit granting authority prior to the expiration of the then-existing two (2) year period, subject to the request being noticed as specified in MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9.  Said notice shall state that the renewal request will be granted unless, prior to the expiration of the then existing permit, a written objection from any individual or entity is received by the Zoning Board of Appeals. In the event of such an objection, a public hearing on the renewal shall be held in accordance with MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9.  The existing Special Permit shall remain in effect until the conclusion of the public hearing and decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals either granting or denying the Special Permit renewal, in accordance with the provisions of Section 5.10.7.0.  In granting any such renewal, the Board of Appeals may impose additional conditions, including, without limiting the foregoing, time limits to correct violations, hours of operations and additional screening, upon which a specified 


(i)  A change in the location of the adult uses;  
(ii)  A sale, transfer or assignment of the business or the license;  
(iii)  A change in the ownership or management of the applicant.  

lapse of time without correction or compliance shall result in a revocation of the Special Permit. 
5.10.4.0. 	Location Requirements. Adult uses shall be setback from the following uses as follows: 
(a)
 five hundred (500) feet, measured from the structure to the property line of any lot used for residential purposes, including, but not limited to, such uses as elderly housing, assisted living and nursing homes.  Hotels and motels are not considered residential uses for purposes of this section of the By-Law. 

(b)
 five hundred (500) feet, measured from the structure to the property line of any lot used for a public or private school, state approved childcare facility, or nursery school. 

(c)
 five hundred (500) feet, measured from the structure to the property line of any lot used for a church or other place used for religious purposes.  

(d)
 five hundred (500) feet, measured from structure to structure for any of the following uses where children congregate, including, without limitation, as listed below: 

i. 
Bowling Alleys 


ii. 	Video (electronic) arcades 
iii. 	Ice Skating Rinks 
iv. 	
Laser Tag arcades 

v. 	
Billiard (pool) halls 


vi. 	Roller Skating Rink 
vii. Mini Golf 
viii. Golf / Driving Range 
ix. 	
Baseball Batting Cages 

x. 	
Basketball Courts 


xi. 	Sports Fields 
(e)
 five hundred (500) feet, measured from structure to the property line of any park or playground. 

(f)
 five hundred (500) feet, measured from one adult use to another adult use. 


The distances specified above shall be measured by a straight line from the nearest exterior wall of the structure in which the proposed adult use is to be located to the nearest property line. For purposes of measuring the required five hundred (500) feet separation between two adult uses and the required five hundred (500) feet separation between an adult use and a use where children congregate, as listed above, located within a free standing building or structure, the distance shall be measured by a straight line between the nearest exterior walls of the building or structure.  Where an adult use or any of the other uses, as specified above, are located within a portion thereof of a building or structure, the distance shall be measured by a straight line between the nearest patron entrance to the nearest patron entrance. 
5.10.5.0. Site Development Standards. 
(a)
 All adult use businesses shall comply with the dimensional requirements of the underlying zoning district. 

(b)
 The establishment or maintenance of more than one (1) adult business in the same building, structure or portion thereof is prohibited. 

(c)
 For all new construction, a continuous landscaped buffer strip shall be installed along the entire perimeter of the lot, except that portion directly needed for access / egress.  In the case of an existing structure, whether free-standing, free-standing as part of a larger development or attached as a group of individual stores, the site shall be modified to the maximum extent reasonable to provide a continuous landscaped buffer strip along the entire perimeter of the lot.  For purposes of this provision, a continuous landscaped buffer strip shall be defined as a mix of deciduous and evergreen vegetation for a minimum width of ten (10) feet. 

(d)
 No signs, advertisement, display or other implements or items shall be displayed in the windows of the business. 

(e)
 All building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment by the public. 

(f)
 No adult use shall have any flashing lights visible from outside the establishment. 


5.10.6.0. 	Application Requirements.  The application for a Special Permit for an Adult Use shall include the following information: 
(a)
 A completed Adult Use Special Permit application and application fee as required. 

(b)
 A sworn statement stating that neither the applicant, nor the manager, in the Adult use business has been convicted of violating the provisions of MGL Chapter 119, Section 63 or MGL Chapter 272, Section 28; 

(c)
 Proposed provisions for securing the safety of the public inside and outside the Adult Use business; 

(d) 
The present and proposed physical layout of the interior of the Adult Use business. 

(e)
 A locus map highlighting the subject property, displaying the property lines of adjacent lots and building footprints, where applicable, within 1000 feet and the distance measurements to the uses as listed in Section 5.10.4.0 above.  This map shall be a minimum size of 24" x 36" and a minimum scale of 1"=500'.  For purposes of verifying distance measurements, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require a smaller scale than 1"=500'. 

(f)
 A Site Plan in accordance with Section 5.4.0.0. of this zoning By-Law. Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 5.4.0.0. of this zoning By-Law, for an application without any exterior construction or modification, the Site Plan shall consist of an existing conditions and proposed landscape Plan. 

(g)
 A letter from the property owner acknowledging submittal of the proposed application. 

(h)
 Identification of the type of adult use business that is being requested 

(i)
 If the applicant is a person, then he /she shall sign the application under the pains and penalties of perjury 

(j)
 If the applicant is a corporation or other entity other than an individual, each officer, director, general partner, trustee, or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management shall sign the application under the pains and penalties of perjury and each person signing the application shall be considered a permittee, 

(k)
 Each person signing the application must be qualified in accordance with Section 5.10.6.0.(b) 


5.10.7.0. 	Criteria for Approval. For purposes of a special permit to allow an Adult Use, the criteria for approval shall be limited and narrowed based upon definite and objective standards, regardless of all other approval criteria within this By-Law.  The Board of Appeals shall grant a special permit for an Adult Use in accordance with this section unless it finds that the proposed adult business taken alone or in combination with other special permitted activities on the premises, would adversely affect the public health, safety or order in that the permitted activities cannot be conducted in a manner as to:   
(a)
 Protect employees, patrons and members of the public inside or outside the business from disruptive conduct, from criminal activity, or from health, safety or fire hazards;  

(b)
 Prevent an unreasonable increase in the level of noise in the area caused by the adult business or caused by patrons entering or leaving the business;  

(c)
 Prevent an unreasonable increase in the level of pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the area of the business or an unreasonable increase in the number of vehicles to be parking in the area of the business;    

(d)
 Compliance with the dimensional, parking and other requirements of this By-Law, where applicable; and 

(e)
 Compliance with any and all requirements for Adult Uses as set forth in this By-Law, and any and all other state, federal or local regulations or statutes. 


5.10.8.0. 	Severability. The provisions of this section are severable and, in the event that any provision of this section is determined to be invalid for any reason, the remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect. 
5.11.0.0. Accessory Apartments   
The provisions of this Section 5.11.0.0. outline the considerations and requirements for approval of Accessory Apartments (“AA”).  The intent and purpose of this Section 5.11.0.0. is as follows: 
5.11.0.1. 	Provide for flexibility within the existing zoning By-Law to afford an opportunity to accommodate additional living arrangements; 
5.11.0.2. 	A plan for changing demographics and economic climate; 
5.11.0.3. 	Increase supply of affordable housing; 
5.11.0.4. 	Provide housing options for extended family; and 
5.11.0.5. Ensure compliance of new and existing AA’s with building, safety, fire code standards and zoning provisions. 
5.11.1.0. Definitions 
5.11.1.1. 	Accessory Apartment or AA: an area contained within an owner occupied single-family dwelling unit that maintains internal access and circulation to the dwelling unit, restricted to not more than two (2) bedrooms and no more than three (3) occupants, consisting of provisions for bathing, cooking and sleeping. The inclusion of an AA within a single family dwelling unit does not create a two-family dwelling. Furthermore, internal walls and doors, for purposes of privacy, and additional means of access / egress are not precluded.  The AA shall be ancillary / subordinate in size, location and function to the dwelling unit.  An AA shall only be permitted within a single-family dwelling and not within a detached accessory building. 
5.11.2.0. 	Applicability / Eligibility The Board of Appeals may issue a special permit to allow an AA in a single family home or for an expansion of an existing lawfully existing AA. 
5.11.3.0. Design Standards for Accessory Apartments 
5.11.3.1.     Only one (1) AA may be created per lot.  
5.11.3.2.     All new entrances shall be located on the side or rear of the structure, if proposed.  
5.11.3.3.     The AA shall not have more than three (3) occupants.  
5.11.3.4.     The AA shall not have separate or independent utilities, such as water, sewer and electricity, from the dwelling unit.   
5.11.3.5.     An AA shall not exceed eight hundred (800) sq. ft.  
5.11.3.6.  The owner(s) of the residence in which the AA is created must continue to occupy either the primary dwelling unit or the AA as their primary residence, except for bona fide temporary absences.  
5.11.3.7.  The Board of Appeals shall have the discretion to review and require additional on-site parking. All parking requirements for the AA shall be provided on the property within existing  

designated parking areas. 
5.11.4.0. 	Use Restriction To ensure continued compliance with owner-occupancy and other By-Law requirements by current as well as by any subsequent owners, AA’s permitted under this By-Law shall be subject to a Use Restriction, to be recorded in the Essex Registry of Deeds. The Use Restriction, to be provided by the Inspector of Buildings, shall be the only form acceptable and shall include the following: 
a. 	
Notice that the existence of the AA is predicated upon occupancy by the owner, to whom the permit has been issued; 

b. 	
Notification to a buyer of the AA By-Law 

c. 	
Upon sale of the property, the new owner shall be required to file an application for a new special permit to maintain the AA; 

d. 	
Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a letter from the Inspector of Buildings determining a violation, a special permit shall be sought for the continuation of the AA.  Failure to apply for the Special permit within thirty (30) days shall result in the AA being discontinued and the special permit shall automatically lapse and be null and void; 

e. 	
Require that current and future property owners notify the Inspector of Buildings in the event the AA has been or will voluntarily be discontinued; and 

f. 	
The dwelling unit remains a single family dwelling unit and the AA cannot be used except in accordance with the requirements of this By-Law and any conditions set forth in the applicable special permit.    


5.11.5.0. 	Procedural Requirements The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing, in accordance with M.G.L Chapter 40A, Section 9, for AA’s allowed by special permit.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the property owner shall file a copy of the executed use restriction required pursuant to Section 5.11.4.0. above, and submit to the Inspector of Buildings evidence that it has been recorded in the Essex Registry of Deeds. 
5.11.6.0. 	Application Requirements Prior to a building permit being issued for an AA, the applicant shall provide the following to the Inspector of Buildings: 
a. 	
A completed application and filing fee as required. 

b. 	
Adequate information to determine compliance with the provisions set forth herein. This shall include, but not be limited to, a site plan, interior floor plans and building elevations. 

c. 	
A copy of the recorded Use Restriction in accordance with Section 5.11.4.0. above 


5.11.7.0. 	Criteria for Approval The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for an AA based upon making the findings set forth in Section 5.3.2.0. and upon determining that the proposed AA otherwise complies with the requirements of this By-Law. In order to provide adequate dwelling units for disabled and handicapped individuals, the Board of Appeals will allow reasonable deviation from the stated conditions where necessary to install features that facilitate access and mobility for disabled persons in addition to any requirements in accordance with the Mass. State Building Code and as exempt pursuant M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3. 
5.11.8.0. 	Monitoring, Inspections & Enforcement   The following methods are available to ensure continued compliance with these regulations as set forth: 
1. 	
In accordance with Section 5.11.4.0.(c), upon the sale of the property, the new owner shall be required to file a new application with the Inspector of Buildings. Upon filing, the Inspector of Buildings shall conduct an inspection of the AA for purposes of verifying compliance. 

2. 	
The Inspector of Buildings shall keep a cumulative list of all lawfully existing AAs in the Town of Swampscott and shall conduct annual inspectors of each such AA to confirm its compliance with the requirements of this By-Law, the applicable special permit and all applicable legal requirements.  The Inspector 


of Buildings shall impose a inspection fee to be paid annually by each owner of an AA, provided, however, (i) such fee shall in no event be less than $100.00, (ii) such fee shall be due and payable on or before February 1st of each year, and (iii) failure of an owner of an AA to pay such fee within thirty 
(30) days of the date required shall be deemed a violation of this By-Law and a violation of the applicable special permit.  If a complaint is filed with the Inspector of Buildings with regard to an unauthorized AA, the Inspector of Buildings shall inspect the AA for purposes of determining whether there is a violation. If a violation exists, the owner shall apply to the Board of Appeals, within thirty (30) days from the receipt of letter from the Inspector of Buildings for a special permit for the continuation of the AA.  Failure to apply for the special permit within thirty (30) days shall result in the AA being discontinued. 
5.11.9.0 	Pre-Existing AA’s. AA’s that were in existence prior to January 1, 2007 may be continued regardless of whether it complies with the Design Standards set forth in Section 5.11.3.0. and without the requirement of a Special Permit as set forth in Section 5.11.2.0 above provided that the following conditions are fulfilled: 
1. 	
Said AA was in existence prior to January 1, 2007 and has been occupied for at least six (6) months since January 1, 2007 (The owners shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate such by furnishing evidence the existence of said AA); and 

2. 	
Provided that an application to the Inspector of Buildings is submitted within 90 days from the date of approval of these regulations by the Attorney General, together with an non-refundable application fee in the amount of $350.00; and 

3. 	
Provided that the applicant otherwise complies with the requirements set forth in Section 5.11.4.0. and 5.11.8.0. 


The owner of any AA that was in existence prior to January 1, 2007 that does not comply with the requirements of this Section 5.11.9.0.shall not be entitled to the protections of this Section 5.11.9.0. and must within 90 days from the date of approval of these regulations by the Attorney General either (i) immediately vacate and discontinue the use of such AA, or (ii) apply to the Board of Appeals for a Special Permit pursuant to Sections 2.2.3.0. and 5.11.2.0. of this By-Law and the AA will be subject to all of the requirements of Section 5.11.0.0. of this By-Law. 
5.12.0.0. Drive-Throughs.  The provisions of this Section 5.12.0.0. outline the considerations and requirements for approval of Drive-Throughs.   
5.12.1.0. 	Design Criteria All Drive-Throughs must meet the following design criteria and the Board of Appeals shall, in addition to the findings set forth in Section 5.3.2.0. above, make findings confirming that each of the following design criteria have been met: 
5.12.1.1. 	The design and location of the Drive-Through will not contribute to increased congestion on public or private streets or alleys adjacent to the subject property. 
5.12.1.2.	   The design and location of the Drive-Through will not impede access to or exit from the parking lot serving the business, impair normal circulation within the parking lot or impede pedestrian movement. 
5.12.1.3. The design and location of the Drive-Through will not create a 
nuisance for adjacent properties. 

5.12.1.4. 	   The vehicle stacking standards of this subsection shall apply unless otherwise expressly approved by the Board.  The Board may require additional stacking spaces where trip generation rates suggest that additional spaces will be needed.  
A minimum number of off-street vehicle stacking spaces for queuing purposes shall be based upon the approved use type. For the purposes of this Section 5.12.1.4., the dimension of each vehicle for the purposes of planning the stacking shall be twenty (20) feet in length by ten (10) feet in width. 
Allowed Use Type  Minimum Stacking Spaces  
Bank or Financial Institution  5  
Pharmacy  5  
Restaurant / Fast Food (ordering point and pick-up point are same window)  10  
Restaurant / Fast Food (ordering point and pick-up point are separate)  6 (prior to ordering point) 4 (between ordering point and pick-up window)  
Other Allowed Uses  At the discretion of the Board  

(ATM 5/5/2014) 
5.12.1.5. 	Entrances to drive-up lanes shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from driveways entering a public or private street or alley. 
5.12.1.6.	    Drive-through service facilities shall not be considered as justification for reducing the number of required parking spaces.  
5.12.1.7.	    The minimum width of each drive-through lane shall be ten (10) feet.  The entrance to the lane and the direction of traffic flow shall be clearly designated by signs and pavement marking or raised curbs.  
5.12.1.8.	   The drive-through lane shall be designed to permit vehicles to leave or escape the drive-through lane without reversing the vehicle and without any obstruction that would prevent such vehicle to leave or escape. The Board may waive such requirement based on the site layout, traffic patterns, parking, and stacking space requirements. (ATM 5/5/2014) 
5.13.0.0. Travel and Tourist Lodging Establishments 
5.13.1.0. Purpose 
The provisions of this section provide guidelines for the creation and regulation of Travel and Tourist Lodging Establishments within the Town of Swampscott and outline the considerations and requirements for their approval. Informed through public input from the “Swampscott 2025: The Master Plan,” the Town recognizes the value of the tourist trade industry and the benefits that it provides to the community. One of the mainstays of the tourist trade industry is the availability of accommodations and lodging options to attract visitors for short-term and temporary visits. The intent of this bylaw is to encourage Tourist and Travel Lodging Establishments within the Town of Swampscott. For purposes of this bylaw, Travel and Tourist Lodging Establishments (herein referred to as ‘Lodging Establishments”) have been further categorized as hotels, motels, inns, and bed and breakfast establishments.  General regulations that are common to all types of lodging establishments as well as specific regulations for each type of lodging establishments are given in the sections below. 
5.13.2.0. General Regulations for All Types of Travel and Tourist Lodging Establishments 
This section describes the provisions related to all types of lodging establishments regardless of their sub-classification. 
5.13.2.1. 	Lodging establishments are intended for transient, overnight or short-term occupancy guests on intermittent visits, and shall not be used as long-term rental units or apartments. 
5.13.2.2. 	Allowable length of stay in a lodging establishment is no less than one 
(1) night and no greater than thirty (30) nights. 
5.13.2.3. 	No guest of any lodging establishment may claim residency at such location. 
5.13.2.4. 	Lodging establishments shall have on-site management at all times. 
5.13.2.5. 	Lodging establishments are subject to the provisions of the signage regulations in section 3.2.0.0. Additionally, lodging establishments in the A-1, A-2, A-3, and A-4 districts shall comply with the requirements of section 3.2.4.1. 
5.13.2.6. 	Parking requirements for each type of lodging establishment are given in sections “2.2.3.0. Table of Principal Uses” and “4.9.3.1. Table of Additional Uses within the Tourist Lodging Overlay District (TLOD),” and further defined in section “3.1.2.0. Number of Spaces.” 
5.13.2.7. 	Lodging establishments shall not have independent in-room cooking facilities. 
5.13.3.0. Hotel A building or buildings intended and designed primarily for providing overnight transient lodging to the general public for compensation.  Hotels may also provide ancillary facilities and services for added comfort and enjoyment of its guests and incidentally to the non-guest general public.  The following regulations pertain specifically to hotels. 
5.13.3.1. 	Hotels shall have at least six (6) bedrooms available for guest accommodation. 
5.13.3.2. 	Hotels shall have a common entrance through which guests enter the establishment into a common area such as a lobby or atrium from the parking area. Primary access to individual guest bedrooms is through common areas connected by an interior network of hallways, stairwells, and elevators within the building. 
5.13.3.3. 	Hotels may provide full food service to its guests. 
5.13.3.4. 	Ancillary facilities and services are allowed in a hotel that are available to guests as well as being open and available to the general public including restaurants, cafes, spas, boutiques, salons, gift shops, and entertainment, as deemed acceptable by the Special Permit Granting Authority.  These facilities shall be accessed from within the common interior area of the building and shall be accessible to the public. 
5.13.3.5. 	Allowable amenities that are only available to registered guests include swimming pool, sauna, fitness room, recreation center, business center, and laundry as deemed acceptable by the Special Permit Granting Authority.  These facilities may be located in areas that require special guest access.  Non guest pay per use and visitor access to these facilities shall not be allowed. 
5.13.3.6. 	Hotels may offer a function hall, reception hall, or banquet hall which is intended for the purpose of hosting a party, banquet, wedding or other reception, or other social event. These halls are spaces that are rented out for specific events which may be catered and may include musical entertainment during such event. 
5.13.3.7. 	Hotels may offer a conference hall, convention center, or meeting room which is intended for the purpose of hosting singular events such as business conferences, seminars, or other business related meetings. These halls are spaces that are rented out for specific events, which may include catering. 
5.13.4.0. Motel A building or buildings intended and designed primarily for providing overnight transient lodging to the general public for compensation.  Motels provide a basic functional lodging option for accommodation only and do not provide ancillary facilities or services to its guests or to the non-guest general public.  The following regulations pertain specifically to motels. 
5.13.4.1. 	Motels shall have at least six (6) bedrooms available for guest accommodation. 
5.13.4.2. 	Primary access to individual guest bedrooms in a motel shall be directly accessible from the exterior of the building, either directly from the parking area or by external, open staircases. 
5.13.4.3. 	Motels shall not provide food service. 
5.13.4.4. 	Motels shall not provide ancillary facilities or services such as swimming pools, fitness rooms, etc. 
5.13.5.0. Inn A building intended and designed primarily for providing overnight transient lodging to the general public for compensation.  Inns may also provide limited ancillary facilities and services for added comfort and enjoyment of its guests, but not to the non-guest general public. The following regulations pertain specifically to inns. 
5.13.5.1. 	Inns shall have at least four (4) but no more than sixteen (16) bedrooms available for guest accommodation. 
5.13.5.2. 	Inns shall have a common entrance through which guests enter the establishment into a common area such as a lobby or atrium from the parking area. Primary access to individual guest bedrooms is through common areas connected by an interior network of hallways, stairwells, and elevators within the building. 
5.13.5.3. 	Meals and other light fare may be provided only to registered guests in designated dining or common areas within the establishment.  This service does not constitute a restaurant and the non-guest general public may not visit the establishment for meals. 
5.13.5.4. 	Common areas where guests can congregate may be provided.  These areas may also include common facilities such as a refrigerator, microwave, toaster, coffee maker, sink, ice machine, or similar amenities. 
5.13.5.5. 	Inns may include additional accommodations to serve as a residence for the proprietor. 
5.13.6.0. Bed and Breakfast (B&B) Overnight transient lodging accommodations within a residential building that is offered to the general public for compensation. Bed and Breakfast establishments may also provide limited ancillary facilities and services to its guests, but not to the non-guest general public. The following regulations pertain specifically to B&Bs. 
5.13.6.1. 	A B&B is a private, owner-occupied residence with up to four (4) bedrooms available for guest accommodation within the residence. 
5.13.6.2. 	The B&B shall be subordinate and incidental to the main residential use of the building. The guest rooms may not comprise more than fifty (50%) percent of the gross floor area of the principal residence.  Common B&B areas are not included in this calculation. 
5.13.6.3. 	Guest room units shall be located within the primary residential structure. 
5.13.6.4. 	No exterior alterations shall be made to the residential building other than those required by law to ensure the safety and adequacy of ingress and egress to the structure or for aesthetic improvements and maintenance. 
5.13.6.5. 	Food service within a B&B shall be limited to breakfast and shall only be available to registered guests.  This food service shall not constitute a restaurant and the non-guest general public may not visit the establishment for breakfast. 
5.13.6.6. 	Common areas where guests can congregate may be provided.  These areas may also include common facilities such as a refrigerator, microwave, toaster, coffee maker, sink, ice machine, or other similar amenities. 
[The remainder of this page is intentionally blank.] 
ARTICLE VI. DEFINITIONS. 
In this By-Law, the following terms and constructions shall apply unless a contrary meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed in the text of the By-Law.  Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The words "shall" or “will” are mandatory and "may" is permissive or discretionary. The word "and" includes "or" unless the contrary is evident from the text.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances, circumstances, or items of like character or kind.  The word "lot" includes "plot"; the word "used" or "occupied" shall be considered as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied".  The words "building," "structure," "lot," or "parcel," shall be construed as being followed by the words "or any portion thereof." The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. Terms and words not defined herein, but defined in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Building Code, shall have the meaning given therein unless a contrary intention is clearly evident in this By-Law. 
Accessory apartment: See Section 5.11.0.0. 
Accessory building: A subordinate building located on the same lot as the main or principal building or principal use, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal building or use of the land, such as a garage, playhouse or private greenhouse. 
Accessory use: A use customarily incidental to the main or principal building or use of the land. An accessory use must be subordinate to the main or principal use and it must be customarily related to the main or principal use. 
Adult day care facility: A building or structure where care, protection, and supervision are provided, on a regular schedule, to adults over the age of eighteen (18). 
Adult uses: See Section 5.10.0.0. 
Agricultural use, nonexempt: Agricultural use of property not exempted by G.L. c. 40A, § 3. 
Alterations: As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing facilities, or an enlargement whether by extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one (1) location or position to another. 
Assisted Living Facility (ALF): See definition in Section 3.6.2.0. 
Automatic Automobile / Vehicle Washing Facility: An establishment providing washing, waxing and/or detailing of vehicles provided in whole or in part by automated facilities. 
Automatic teller machine (ATM): A facility for the distribution of cash, whether attached to a principal structure or free-standing and remote therefrom, drive-through or walk-up. 
Bank or financial institution: Any institution licensed by the federal government or licensed or chartered by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as a bank, savings bank, trust company, credit union or any other bank charter form established under the Massachusetts General Laws. 
Bed and breakfast establishment: Overnight transient lodging accommodations within a residential building that is offered to the general public for compensation, subject to the provisions set forth in By-law Section 5.13.0.0.  Bed and Breakfast establishments may also provide limited ancillary facilities and services to its guests, but not to the non-guest general public. 
Billboard: A means of conveying information, or a device designed to attract attention, that is displayed for public view, and which indicates a use, activity, product, message, or advertisement not related to, or available on, the property where the sign is located.  Municipal signs are exempt. 
Building: A structure enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls, built, erected, and framed of a combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter of persons, animals, or property.  For the purposes of this definition, "roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering, whether or not permanent in nature. 
Building coverage: That percentage of the lot or plot area covered by the gross floor area of a building or buildings. 
Building height: In the case of flat roofs, the vertical distance from the highest point of the roof (or top of parapet if parapet is higher than plane of roof; but this would not apply to parapets two 
(2) feet in height or less) to the lowest finished grade of the ground adjourning any side of the building. In the case of sloped roofs, the vertical distance from the midpoint of the slope between the highest ridge and the main plate to the average finished grade of the ground adjourning the building. In neither case shall the height of a building be measured from the top of a basement, cellar, garage, storage area, etc., which is counted as a story.  If the existing grades on the site prior to construction are raised one (1) foot or more (on average) for the new construction, then the height of the building shall be calculated from the grades that existed prior to new construction. 
Building line: A line even with the front of the principal building which runs across the entire width of the lot and parallel with the street. 
Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
Business, medical or professional office - large: A building or part thereof having more than ten (10) workers on-site concurrently (regardless of whether they be principals, partners, employees or of other classification), which exists for the transaction of business or the provision of medical or professional services exclusive of the receipt, sale, storage, or processing of merchandise. 
Business, medical or professional office - medium: A building or part thereof having at least five (5), but not more than ten (10), workers on-site concurrently (regardless of whether they be principals, partners, employees or of other classification), which exists for the transaction of business or the provision of medical or professional services exclusive of the receipt, sale, storage, or processing of merchandise. 
Business, medical or professional office - small: A building or part thereof having four (4) or fewer workers on-site concurrently (regardless of whether they be principals, partners, employees or of other classification), which exists for the transaction of business or the provision of medical or professional services exclusive of the receipt, sale, storage, or processing of merchandise. 
Child care facility: A day care center or a school age child care program as defined in G.L. c. 28A, § 9. 
Club, lodge or fraternal organization: Buildings, structures and premises used by a for profit or not for profit social or civic organization catering exclusively to members and their guests for social, civic, recreational, or athletic purposes provided there are no vending stands, merchandising, or commercial activities except as may be required generally for the membership and purposes of such organization. 
Commercial recreation: A structure for recreational, social or amusement purposes, which may include as an accessory use, the consumption of food and drink, including all connected rooms or space with a common means of egress and entrance.  Such facilities shall include movie theaters, dance halls, skating rinks, bowling alleys, health clubs, dance studios, or other commercial recreational centers conducted for or not for profit.  A drive-in theater, golf course/driving range, bathing beach, sports club, horseback riding stable, boathouse, game preserve, marina or other commercial recreation carried on in whole or in part outdoors, except those activities more specifically designated in this By-Law, conducted for or not for profit. 
Commercial development: One (1) or more buildings (whether detached or attached or in common or separate ownership) used for commercial or mixed-use purposes that functions as a single development (for example, without limitation, has a shared parking facility and/or shared access from a street or way) as determined by the Board of Appeals.  
Commercial vehicle: Any vehicle used for purposes other than the transportation of fewer than nine (9) persons, or any vehicle or piece of equipment which is not considered a private passenger car by either insurers, the Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles or the United States Department of Transportation.  Included is equipment, whether registered or unregistered, which would require registration for travel on a public way.  
Contractor's yard: Premises used by a contractor or subcontractor for storage of equipment and supplies, fabrication of subassemblies, and parking of wheeled equipment.  
Distribution facility: See “Warehouse.” 
Drive-Through:  A facility that encourages or permits customers to obtain goods, receive services, transact business, or be entertained, while remaining in their motor vehicles.   
Dwelling: A building designed and occupied as the living quarters of one (1) or more families. Single- and two-family dwellings shall be designed for or occupied by not more than one (1) or two (2) families, respectively.  A multi-family dwelling shall be one designed for and occupied by three (3) or more families. 
Dwelling unit: A residence. Each residence shall contain a living area, bathroom and, except in studio units, one (1) or more bedrooms, and may contain a kitchen area or combination kitchen/living area. 
Educational use (nonexempt): Educational facilities not exempted from regulation by G.L. 
c. 40A, § 3, including dance studios, martial arts facilities, and the like. 
Erect: To build, construct, reconstruct, move upon, or conduct any physical development of the premises required for a building; to excavate, fill, drain, and the like preparation for building shall also be considered to erect. 
Family: Two (2) or more individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption living and cooking together on the premises as a single housekeeping unit, but not including more than four (4) persons living together unrelated by blood, marriage or adoption. 
Family day care: Any private residence which on a regular basis receives for temporary custody and care during part or all of the day, children under seven (7) years of age or children under sixteen (16) years of age if such children have special needs.  Provided, however, in either case, that the total number of children shall not exceed more than six (6), excluding participating children living in the residence.  Family day care shall not mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without compensation therefore. 
Financial institution: See “Bank.” 
Flood plains: Low areas adjoining a body of water or a watercourse which have been in the past or can reasonably be expected in the future to be covered by flooding. 
Funeral home: Facility for the conducting of funerals and related activities such as embalming. 
Group residence: A premise licensed by or operated by an agency of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as set forth in the State Building Code housing not more than twenty-five (25) unrelated persons, sixteen (16) years of age or over. 
Gross floor area (g.f.a.): The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets, thickness of walls, columns, or other features, including floor area of attic containing 7’3”or greater in height as measured perpendicular from the floor to the underside of the rafters, but excluding basement/cellar if more than fifty (50%) percent of height of basement/cellar is below the finished grade of the ground adjoining the basement/cellar.  
Home occupation: An occupation, business, trade, service or profession which is subordinate to and conducted in a dwelling unit or in a building or other structure accessory thereto, by the owner thereof. 
Hotel: A building or buildings intended and designed primarily for providing overnight transient lodging to the general public for compensation, subject to the provisions set forth in By-law Section 5.13.0.0. Hotels may provide ancillary facilities and services for added comfort and enjoyment of its guests and incidentally to the non-guest general public. 
Independent Living Facilities (ILF): See definition in Section 3.6.2.0. 
Inn: A building intended and designed for providing overnight transient lodging to the general public for compensation, subject to the provisions set forth in By-law Section 5.13.0.0.  Inns may provide limited ancillary facilities and services for added comfort and enjoyment of its guests, but not to the non-guest general public. 
Junk: Any article or material or collection thereof, which is worn out, cast off or discarded and which is ready for destruction or has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion.  Any article or material which, unaltered or unchanged and without further reconditioning can be used for its original purpose as readily as when new shall be considered junk. 
Junkyard or automobile graveyard: The use of any area or any lot, whether inside or outside of a building, for the storage, keeping, or abandonment of junk, scrap or discarded materials, or the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, machinery, or parts thereof. 
Kennel: One (1) pack or collection of dogs on a single premises, whether maintained for breeding, boarding, sale, training, hunting or other purposes and including any shop where dogs are on sale, and also including every pack or collection or more than three (3) dogs three (3) months old or over, owned or kept by a person on a single premises irrespective of the purpose for which they are maintained. 
Light manufacturing: Fabrication, assembly, processing, or packaging operations, employing only electric or other substantially noiseless and inoffensive motor power.  Light manufacturing may include production of clothing, but not of cloth; production of packages, but not of paperboard, production of small machinery, but not steel.  All power and processes shall be free of disturbing agents such as odors, gas, fumes, smoke, cinders, heat, vibration, excessively bright lights and electromagnetic radiation.   
Lot A: A continuous parcel of land with legally defined boundaries.  See Figure 2 in Appendix B. 
Lot area: The horizontal area within the exterior lines of the lot, exclusive of any area in a street, and exclusive of any horizontal area subject to oceanic tidal action but below mean high water or under any water body, bog, swamp, wet meadow, marsh, or other wetland as defined in G.L. c. 131, § 40, as may be amended. See Figure 8 in Appendix B. (ATM 5/5/2014) 
Lot - corner: A lot abutting two intersecting streets.  A corner lot shall be considered as having two (2) front property lines and two (2) side property lines.  The rear property line shall consist of the intersection point of the two side property lines.  See Figure 2 in Appendix B. 
Lot - depth of: The mean distance from the street line of the lot to its opposite rear line measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot. See Figure 2 in Appendix B. 
Lot - frontage of: A lot line coinciding with the sideline of a street which provides both legal rights of vehicular access and physical vehicular access to the lot, said line to be measured continuously along a single street or along two (2) intersecting streets if their angle of intersection is greater than one hundred and twenty (120) degrees.  See Figure 2 in Appendix B. 
Lot line, front:  The lines separating a lot from the right-of-way of a street. 
Lot line, rear:  Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a side lot line. 
Lot line, side:  Any line which separates a lot from another lot and which intersects a front lot line. 
Lot - width of: The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured parallel to the lot frontage at the front yard setback line.  See Figure 2 in Appendix B. 
Major recreational equipment: Campers, trailers or other recreational vehicles. All other recreational equipment, including boats, shall be considered lawfully nonconforming. 
Motel: A building or buildings intended and designed for providing overnight transient lodging to the general public for compensation, subject to the provisions set forth in By-law Section 
5.13.0.0. Motels shall provide a basic, functional lodging option for accommodation only and shall not provide ancillary facilities or services to its guests or to the non-guest general public. 
Motor Vehicle Filling / Fueling Station / Gasoline Station: An establishment providing for the retail sale of gasoline or other petroleum products or fuels, including the accessory sales of motor vehicle accessories in conjunction with the services provided and the accessory sale of convenience items, such as lottery, pre-packaged food and beverage, and similar items shall be permitted in connection with the motor vehicle filling/fueling station provided that the area in which such items are sold in no event exceeds five hundred (500) g.s.f.  Repair services, with the limited exception of a tire air machine, are excluded from this use classification.  
Motor vehicle general and body repair: An establishment, garage or work area enclosed within a building for the servicing and repair of autos, including fenders, bumpers and similar components of motor vehicle bodies, but not including the storage vehicles for the cannibalization of parts or fuel sales. 
Motor vehicle light service: Premises for the supplying of fuel, oil, lubrication, washing, or minor repair services, but not to include body work, painting, or major repairs. 
Motor vehicle sales and rental: The indoor or outdoor sales or rental of motor vehicles. 
Municipal service facilities: Facilities owned or operated by the Town of Swampscott. 
Multi-family dwelling: See “Dwelling.” 
Nursery / Greenhouse: A commercial activity primarily concerned with the sale (at retail or at wholesale) of plants (whether or not grown on the premises) used in gardening or farming, including related goods used in gardening or farming.  Related goods are defined as only those used on the plant or in its soil to preserve or promote the life and health of the plants sold, including for example, fungicides, peat moss and mulches).  
Nursing or convalescent home: A licensed facility where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals and nursing care for hire. 
Office: A place in which functions such as directing, consulting, record keeping, clerical work and sales (without the presence of merchandise) of a firm are carried on; also, a place in which a professional person conducts his or her professional business. 
Open Space: The area of a lot expressed as a percentage of lot not occupied by the footprint of buildings, structures, and/or material that is not pervious.  No vehicles may be parked within the minimum required Open Space. 
Lot Area = X 
Square Footage of all buildings, structures, and material that is not pervious = Y 
Open Space = Y / X 
Outdoor storage: Enclosed or open-lot storage of material, contractor’s equipment, machinery and metals, other than scrap or junk, and similar materials. 
Outpatient medical center or clinic: A building designed and used for the diagnosis and treatment of human patients that does not include overnight care facilities. 
Personal service establishment: A facility providing personal services such as hair salon, barber shop, tanning beds, dry cleaning, print shop, photography studio, travel agency and the like. 
Pervious material:  Surface material intended to allow water to permeate through into the ground.  The surface material may include, but not limited to, vegetation, rocks, pebbles, woodchips and/or similar landscaping materials; or unit paver with an open joint pattern.  Concrete, asphalt, and/or other hard surface material that does not have open, porous joints is not considered pervious.  Undisturbed natural occurring bedrock outcroppings are considered pervious material. 
Renewable and Alternative Research and Development Facilities:  This use shall only include activities associated with research and development of services or products related to renewable and alternative energy. 
Restaurant: A building, or portion thereof, containing tables, chairs and/or booths, which is designed, intended and used for the sale and consumption of food prepared on and/or off the premises.  A restaurant may contain a bar area or lounge provided that such area(s) does not include in the aggregate more than sixty (60%) percent of the total seats available in the restaurant and that food is offered for sale at such bar area / lounge area during all times the restaurant is open. 
Retail: A facility selling goods but not specifically listed in the Table of Use Regulations. 
Retail selling of animals or pets: A facility selling live animals (not including live animals of the type typically sold in grocery stores for cooking and eating by people). 
Single-family dwelling: See “Dwelling.” 
Self-Service Automobile / Vehicle Washing Facility: An establishment providing self-service washing, waxing and/or detailing of vehicles. 
Self-storage mini-warehouse: See “Warehouse, Distribution, Self-storage mini-warehouse.” 
Sign: Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the device is located.  Any building surfaces other than windows which are internally illuminated or decorated with gaseous tube or other lights are considered "signs."  The following, however, shall not be considered signs within the context of this By-Law: 
(a)
 Flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with commercial promotion. 

(b) 
Legal notices, or informational devices erected or required by public agencies. 

(c) 
Temporary devices erected for a charitable or religious cause, provided they are removed within seven (7) days of erection. 

(d) 
Temporary displays inside windows, covering not more than twenty-five (25%) percent of window area, illuminated by building illumination only.  

(e) 
Standard gasoline pumps bearing thereon in usual size and form the name, type, and price of gasoline. 

(f) 
Integral decorative or architectural features of a building, except letters, trademarks, moving parts, or parts internally illuminated or decorated with gaseous tube or other lights. 

(g) 
Devices identifying a building as distinct from one (1) or more of its occupants, such device being carved into or attached in such a way as to be an integral part of the building, not illuminated separate from building illumination, without color contrasting with sign background, and not exceeding four (4) square feet in area.  

(h) 
Address identification through numerals or letters not exceeding three (3) inches in height. 


See Figure 4 in Appendix B for types of signs. 
Sign area: The area of the smallest horizontally or vertically oriented rectangle which could enclose all the display area of the sign, together with any backing different in color or material from the finish material of the building face, without deduction for open space or other irregularities. Structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included unless internally or decoratively lighted.  Only one side of flat, back-to-back signs need be included in calculating sign area. See Figure 4 in Appendix B for samples of different types of signs.  
Storage container: A fully enclosed, detached, self supporting structure, of any type of construction or material, not having a foundation, electricity, plumbing, or other mechanical systems and utilized for temporary storage of any kind.  Storage containers shall include, but not limited to the following: any truck, the trailer portion of a tractor trailer vehicle, storage container box, portable warehouse, box trailer, whether registered or not in accordance with 
M.G.L Chapter 90 or in accordance with the laws of any other state. 
Story: That portion of a building (including basements, cellars, garages, storage areas, etc.) contained between any floor and the floor or roof next above it. The lowest level of a building, including basements, cellars, garages, storage areas, etc., shall not be counted as a story if more than one-half (1/2) of the height of this level is below the average finished grade of the ground adjoining this level.  A half-story is a story which is comprised of fifty (50%) percent or less of the square footage of the floor below. (05/03) 
Street: (1) A public way or a way which the Swampscott Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way; or (2) a way shown on an endorsed definitive subdivision plan, either built to specification or for which adequate security exists to complete construction; or (3) a way having in the opinion of the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed uses of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected thereon. 
Structure: A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support or shelter, such as a building, framework, retaining wall, tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole, recreational tramway, mast for radio antenna or the like. 
Tattoo and Body Piercing Shop: An establishment whose principle business activity, either in terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of one or more of the following: (1) placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin, by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin; (2) creation of an opening in the body of a person for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. 
Two-family dwelling: See “Dwelling.” 
Veterinary establishment: A facility used by one or more licensed veterinarians to provide health care for animals.  Overnight care is not provided except as part of necessary medical treatment of an animal.   
Warehouse / Distribution Facility / Self-Storage Mini-Warehouse: A building (a) used primarily for the storage of goods and materials, for distribution, but not for retail sale on the premises, and/or (b) consisting of individual, self-contained units that are leased or owned for the storage or business and/or personal property.  No materials may be stored outside of the Warehouse/Self-Storage Mini-Warehouse.   
Wetlands: Areas such as marshes, swamps, and lowland where groundwater is at or near the surface for at least six (6) months of the year.  Vegetation characteristic of wetland is listed in 
G.L. c. 131, § 40 and on a simplified list, both on file at the Town Clerk's office. These areas are subject to periodic inundation. 
Window: The framework, glass, and/or other transparent or translucent panels that enclose an opening constructed in a wall or roof that functions to admit light or air into the building structure.  The window may be subdivided by multiple frames and panes; however, opaque frames or panels that exceed eight (8") in width are not part of the calculated dimensions in determining window area.  Opaque frames or panels that exceed eight (8") in width which divide the window in any manner will then be considered wall of the building structure.  See Figure 6 in Appendix B. 
Wireless communications facility: A wireless communication monopole which facilitates the provision of wireless communications services. 
Wireless communications services: The provision of the following types of services: cellular telephone service, personal communications and enhanced specialized mobile radio service. 
Yard - front: A space across the full width of the lot and extending from the most forward point of the building located on such a lot to the front line of such a lot.  See Figure 3 in Appendix B. 
Yard - rear: A space across the full width of the lot and extending from the most rearward point of the building located on such a lot to the rear line of such a lot.  See Figure 3 in Appendix B. 
Yard - side: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line and extending from that point on a building located in such a lot which is closest to that side lot line. See Figure 3 in Appendix B. 
APPENDIX A -TABLE OF DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS: SECTION 2.3.2.0 
DISTRICT  Minimum lot area (sq. ft.)  Minimum lot frontage (ft.)  Maximum height  Minimum OpenSpace  
A1  30,000  125  2.5 stories but not in excess of 35 feet  25%  
A2  20,000  100  2.5 stories but not in excess of 35 feet  25%  
A3  10,000  80  2.5 stories but not in excess of 35 feet  25%  
A4  10,000  80  2.5 stories but not in excess of 35 feet  25%  
B1  10,000 for dwellings  80 for dwellings  2.5 stories but not in excess of 35 feet2  15%  
B2  10,000 for dwellings  80 for dwellings  40 feet2  15%  
B3 and I  15,000 for dwellings; 40,000 all others  100 for dwellings;200 all others  35 feet for dwellings; 40 feet all others2  15%  
B4  40,000  200  5 stories (not to exceed 65 feet); if building has front setback of a minimum of 175 feet, 7 stories (not to exceed 85 feet)  10%  

2  Parapets may extend no more than 2 feet above the maximum building height. 3 Provided, however, that the rear yard need not be more than 25% of lot depth. 
DISTRICT  Minimum front yard (ft.)  Minimum side yard (ft.)  Minimum rear yard (ft.)  Maximum building coverage (% of lot)  
A1  If lot has an area of 30,000 s.f. or more  30 25 20  15 10 7.5  353 25 20  25 25 30  
If lot has an area of at least 20,000 s.f. but less than 30,000 s.f.  
If lot has an area of under 20,000 s.f.  
A2  If lot has an area of at least 20,000 s.f.  25 20  10 7.5  25 20  25 30 
If lot has an area of under 20,000 s.f.  
A3  All lots  20  7.5  20  30  
A4  All lots  20  7.5  20  30  
B1  All lots  none required  none required  20  30 for dwellings 70 all others  
B2  All lots  none required  none required  10  30 for dwellings 80 all others  
B3 and I  All lots  25 for dwellings;100 all others  10 for dwellings;40 all others  25 for dwellings; 40 all others  25 for dwellings; 20 all others  
B4  All lots  20  20  20  90  

Page 155 
APPENDIX B -ILLUSTRATIONS 
(The remainder of this page intentionally left blank) 
Page 156 Page 157 Page 158 



Figure 4 Page 159 

Figure 5 Page 160 

Figure 6 
Page 161 

Figure 7 Page 162 

Figure 8 Page 163 

Figure 9 Detailed Design Features Page 164 Page 165 Page 166 



SWAMPSCOTT	SUBDIVISION	REGULATIONS 


Adopted	as	required	by	Section	81-Lof	Chapter	41of	the	General	Laws	as	amended.	 
For	matters	not	covered	by	these	regulations,	reference	is	made	to	Sections	81-K	to	81-GG,	inclusive	ofthe	above	chapter.	 
Adopted: October,	1952	 The Planning Board (1986) 
Revised: December,	1961	Eugene	Barden,	Chairman	January,	1986	 Brian	Watson,	Secretary	VincentDiLisio	Veeder	Nellis	Peter	Beatrice 
SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
FEE	SCHEDULE 
Subdivision	Plan	Approval	Not	Required	 $100	+	$50/lot	 
PreliminaryPlan 				$250+$100/lot(maximumfeeof$2,500) 
DefinitivePlan WithaPreliminaryPlan 	$250	+	$100/lot 
WithoutaPreliminaryPlan 							$500+$250/lot 
PURPOSEANDINTENTOFTHESUBDIVISIONCONTROLLAW	 
“The	subdivision	control	law	has	been	enacted	for	the	purposeof	protecting	the	safety,	convenience	and	welfareof	the	inhabitants	of	the	cities	and	towns	in	whichit	is,	or	may	hereafter	be,	put	in	effect	by	regulating	the	laying	outand	construction	of	ways	in	subdivisions	providing	access	to	the	several	lots	therein,	but	which	have	not	become	public	ways,	and	ensuring	sanitary	conditions	in	subdivisions	and	in	proper	cases	parks	and	openareas.		 	The	powers	of	aplanningboard	and	aboard	of	appeal	under	the	subdivision	control	law	shall	be	exercised	with	due	regard	for	the	provision	of	adequate	access	to	all	of	the	lots	in	a	subdivision	by	ways	that	will	be	safe	and	convenient	for	travel;	for	lessening	congestion	in	such	ways	and	in	the	adjacent	public	ways;	for	reducing	dangerto	life	and	limb	in	the	operationof	motor	vehicles;	for	securing	safety	in	case	of	fire,	flood,	panic	and	other	emergencies,	for	insuring	compliance	with	the	applicable	zoning	ordinances	or	by-laws;	for	securingadequateprovisionfor	water,	sewerage,	draining,	underground	utility	services,	fire,	police	and	other	similar	municipal	equipment	and	street	lighting,	and	other	requirements	where	necessary	in	a	subdivision;	and	for	coordinating	the	ways	in	a	subdivisions	with	eachother	and	with	the	public	ways	inthecity	or	town	inwhich	it	is	located	and	with	thewaysin	neighboring	subdivisions.			 It	is	theintent	of	thesubdivision	control	law	that	any	subdivision	plan	filed	with	the	Planning	Board	shall	receive	the	approval	of	such	board	if	said	plan	conforms	to	therecommendation	of	the	board	of	health,	the	municipal	zoning	regulations	and	to	the	reasonable	rules	and	regulations	of	the	planningboard	pertaining	to	the	subdivisions	of	land;	provided,	however,	that	such	board	may,	when	appropriate,	waive,	as	provided	for	in	Section	81-R,	such	portions	of	the	rules	and	regulations	as	is	deemed	available.”	 (Section	81-M	of	Chapter	41,	General	 Laws).	 
The Planning Board requires for its use five copies of any plan submitted for action. 
pg.	2	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
SECTIONI: AUTHORITY 
Under	the	authority	vested	in	the	Planning	Board	of	the	Town	of	Swampscott	by	Section81-Q	ofChapter	41	of	theGeneralLaws,	said	Board	herebyadopts	theseannotated	Rules	and	Regulations	governing	the	subdivision	of	landin	the	Townof	Swampscott. 
pg.	3	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
SECTIONII: GENERAL 
DEFINITIONS“Subdivision”	shall	meanthe	divisionof	a	tract	of	land	intotwo	or	more	lotsand	shall	include	re­subdivision,	and	when	appropriate	to	the	context,	shall	relate	to	the	process	of	subdivision	of	theland	or	territory	subdivided;	provided,	however,	that	the	division	of	a	tract	of	land	into	two	or	more	lots	shall	not	bedeemed	to	constitutea	subdivision	within	the	meaning	of	the	subdivision	control	law,	if	at	thetime	when	it	is	made,	every	lot	withinthe	tract	so	divided	has	frontageon	(a) 			A	public	way	or	a	way	which	the	clerk	of	thetown	certifies	is	maintained	and	used	in	a	public	way,or	(b)	a	way	shown	on	a	plantheretofore	approved	in	accordance	with	the	subdivision	control	law,	or	(c)	a	way	in	existence	when	the	subdivision	control	law	became	effective	in	the	town	of	Swampscott,	having,	in	the	opinion	of	the	Planning	Board,	sufficient	width,	suitablegrades	and	adequateconstruction	to	provide	for	the	needs	of	vehicular	trafficin	relation	to	the	proposed	useof	the	landabutting	thereon	or	served	thereby,	and	for	the	installation	ofmunicipal	services	to	serve	suchland	and	the	buildings	erected	or	to	be	erected	thereon.				Such	frontage	shall	be	of	at	least	such	distance	as	is	currently	required	by	zoning	of	the	Townof	Swampscott	for	erection	of	abuilding	on	such	lot. 
“Preliminary	Plan”	shall	mean	a	plan	of	a	proposed	subdivision	or	resubdivision	of	land	drawn	on tracing	paper,	or	a	print	thereof,	showing	(a)	the	subdivision	name,	boundaries,	north	point,	date,	 scale,legend	and	title	“PreliminaryPlan”;(b)thenamesofthe	record	owner	and	the	applicant	and	the	name	of	the	designer,	registered	engineer	orsurveyor;	(c)	the	names	of	all	abutters,	as	determined	from	the	most	recentlocaltax	list	(list	to	be	certified	by	theassessors);	(d)	the	existing	and	proposed	lines	of	streets,	ways,	easements	and	any	public	areas	within	the	subdivision	in	a	general	manner;	and	the	profiles	of	proposed	streets	when	required	by	the	board;	(e)the	proposed	system	of	draining,	including	adjacent	existingnatural	waterways,	in	ageneral	manner;	(f)	theboundary	lines	of	proposed	lots,	with	approximateareas	and	dimensions;	(g)	the	names,	approximatelocation	and	widths	of	adjacent	streets;	(h)	the	topography	of	the	land	in	two	foot	orother,	contour	intervals	when	required	by	the	board.	 
“Applicant”	shall	include	the	owner	orhis	agent,	orrepresentative	orhis	assigns.			 If	the	applicant	is	other	than	the	owner,	the	applicant's	name,	address,	and	relationship	to	the	owner	shall	be	clearly	 stated	and	written	on	the	plan	and	application.	 
PLAN	BELIEVED	NOT	TO	REQUIRE	APPROVALAny	person	who	wishes	to	cause	to	be	recorded	in	the	Registry	of	Deeds	or	to	be	filed	with	the	Land	Court	aplanof	land	and	who	believes	that	his	plandoes	not	require	approval	under	the	Subdivision	 Control	Law	maysubmit	his	plan	with	Abutter's	names	on	said	plan	and	application	Form	A	(see	Appendix)	to	the	Planning	Board	accompanied	bythe	necessary	evidence	to	show	that	the	plan	does	not	require	approval.				Plan	submittal	to	thePlanning	Board	shall	occur	at	least	ten	days	priorto	the	meeting	at	which	the	plan	will	be	considered.				Said	person	shall	file,	by	delivery	or	registered	mail,	a	notice	with	the	Town	Clerk	stating	the	dateof	submission	for	such	determinationand	accompanied	by	two	copies	of	said	application. If	the	notice	is	given	by	delivery,	the	Town	Clerk	shall,	if	requested,	sign	a	written	receipt	therefor	prepared	by	the	applicant.	 
pg.	4	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

If	the	Planning	Board	determinesthat	the	plan	does	not	require	approval,	it	shall,	without	a	public	hearing,	endorse	forthwith	ontheplan	the	words	“Approval	under	the	Subdivision	Control	Lawnot	required”.			 Said	endorsementshall	be	made	by	the	signaturesof	at	least	three	(3)	members	oftheBoard.			Suchendorsement	shall	not	necessarily	indicate	that	the	plan	is	in	compliance	with	the	Swampscott	Zoning	By-law.			 Endorsement by the Planning Board is not a determination as to conformance with zoning regulations. 
ThePlanning	Board	mayadd	to	such	endorsement	a	statementof	the	reason	approval	isnot	required.			 	The	plan	will	be	returned	to	the	applicant,	and	the	Planning	Board	shall	notify	the	TownClerk	of	its	action.	 
If	the	Planning	Board	determinesthat	the	plan	does	require	approval	underthe	Subdivision	Control	Law,	it	will	so	inform	the	applicant	and	return	theplan.			 	The	Planning	Board	will	also	notifythe Town	Clerk	of	its	action. 
If	the	Planning	Board	fails	to	actupon	a	plan	submitted	under	this	section	within	fourteen	days	afterits	submission,	it	shall	be	deemed	to	havedetermined	thatapproval	under	the	Subdivision	Control	Law	is	not	required.	 
Theplan	filed	under	this	Section	II-B	shall	have	all	the	information	that	is	called	for,	for	Definitive	Plans	under	Section	III-B,	except	that	the	drawing	size	maybesmaller,	if	the	overall	lot	area	does	not	warrant	a	full	size	sheet.	 
In	the	case	of	the	creation	of	a	new	lot,	the	remaining	land	area	and	frontage	of	the	land	in	the ownership	of	the	applicant	shall	be	shown.			 If	the	remaining	land	area	is	not	under	the	ownership	of	theapplicant,	this	shall	be	indicated	on	the	plan,	and	thename	and	address	of	the	owner(s)	shall	be	written	on	the	remaining	land	area(s).	 
SUBDIVISIONNo	person	shall	make	a	subdivision	within	the	meaning	of	the	Subdivision	Control	Law	of	any	land	within	the	Town,	or	proceed	with	theimprovement	or	sale	oflots	in	a	subdivision,	or	theconstruction	of	ways,	or	the	installation	of	municipal	services	therein,	unless	and	until	a	Definitive	Plan	of	such	subdivision	has	been	submitted	and	approved	by	the	Planning	Board	as	hereinafter	provided.	 
No	building	designed	or	available	foruse	for	dwelling	purposes	shall	be	erected	or	placed	or	converted	to	use	as	such	on	(a)	any	lot	in	a	subdivision,	or	(b)elsewhere	in	the	Townwithout	the	consent	of	the	Planning	Board	and	such	consent	will	be	conditional	upon	the	providing	of	adequate	ways	furnishing	access	to	each	building	site	in	the	samemanner	as	otherwise	required	for	lots	in	asubdivision.	 
pg.	5	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
SECTIONIII:	 PROCEDURE	FOR	THE	SUBMISSION	AND	APPROVAL	 OF	PLANS 
Unless	specifically	stated	otherwise	in	these	Rules	and	Regulations,	fourteen-day	notice	to	the	 Planning	Board	Chairman	at	his	residence	or	place	of	businessis	required	for	any	plan,	issue,	or	 other	item	tobe	included	on	the	agenda	of	a	given	meeting. 
PRELIMINARY	PLAN 
General
A	preliminary	plan	of	a	subdivision	may	be	submitted	bythesubdivider	to	the	Planning	Board	and	to	the	Board	of	Health	for	discussion	and	tentative	approval,	modification	or	disapproval	by	each	 Board.			A	copy	of	such	plans	shall	also	befiledbythe	applicantwith	the	Board	of	Health,	Conservation	Commission,	Town	Engineer,	Fire	Department,	Police	Department,	School	Committee,	Selectmen,	Board	of	Public	Works,	Traffic	StudyCommittee,	andTown	Clerk,	at	their	respective	offices. 
Thesubmission	of	such	a	Preliminary	Plan	will	enable	the	subdivider,	the	Planning	Board,	the	 Board	of	Health,	other	Town	agencies,	and	owners	of	property	abutting	the	subdivision	to	discuss	and	clarify	the	problems	of	such	subdivision	before	a	Definitive	Plan	is	prepared.			 Therefore,	itis	strongly	recommended	that	a	Preliminary	Plan	befiled	in	eachcase.			A	properly	executed	application	Form	B	(see	Appendix)	shall	be	filed	with	the	Preliminary	Plan	submitted	to	thePlanning	Board.			The	Preliminary	Plan	shall	be	submitted	to	the	Planning	Board	atleast	ten	days	prior	to	themeeting	at	which	the	Preliminary	Plan	will	be	considered.	 
Contents of Preliminary Plan
The	Preliminary	Plan	shall	be	drawn	on	tracing	paper	with	pencil	at	a	suitable	scale(preferablyone	inch	equals	forty	feet)	and	two	prints	shall	be	filed	at	the	office	of	the	Planning	Board	and	one	printat	the	officeof	the	Board	of	Health,	Conservation	Commission,	Town	Engineer,	Fire	Department,	Police	Department,	School	Committee,	and	Town	Clerk.			Proof	of	such	delivery	by	the	applicant	to	the	above	boards	must	be	submitted	to	the	Planning	Board	before	the	Preliminary	Plan	hearing.			The	subdivider	(applicant)	is	required	to	send	notice	to	abutters	concerning	the	Preliminary	Plan	meeting.	 Said	plan	shall	be	identifiedas	a	Preliminary	Plan	and	show	all	the	information	described	under	the	definition	of	the	Preliminary	Plan	so	as	to	forma	clear	basis	for	discussion	of	its	problems	and	for	preparationof	the	Definitive	Plan.			 During	discussion	of	the	Preliminary	Plan,	the	complete	information	required	for	the	Definitive	Plan	(Section	II-	B-2	Contents)	and	the	financial	arrangements	(Section	III-B-3	Performance	Guarantee)	will	bedeveloped.		 The	prints	ofthe	Preliminary	Plan	shall	show: 
a) Subdivision	name,	if	any,	north	point	(Swampscott	meridian)date	and	scale.
b) Name	and	address	of	record	owner,	subdivider	anddesigner	or	surveyor.
c) Names	of	all	abutters,	as	determined	from	the	most	recent	tax	assessor's	list. 
pg.	6	 
SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

d) Existing	and	proposed	lines	of	streets,	ways,	easements	and	public	areas	within	the	plan.
e) Proposed	system	of	drainage.
f) Lot	lines	with	approximate	dimensions.
g) Location	names	and	present	widths	of	adjacent	streets.
h) Topography	with	two-foot	contours.
i) Profiles	of	proposed	streets,	when	required	by	theBoard. 
In	addition,	submittal	of	the	following	is	strongly	recommended	to	help	understanding:	 
. Location	of	existing	buildings	(if	any)	on	the	site	and	on	abutting	property	 
. Major	site	features,	such	as	existing	stone	walls,	fences,	trees	over	eight	inches	in	diameter,	
general	wooded	areas,	rock	ridges	and	outcroppings,	swamps	and	water 		bodies,	and	areas	 
likely	to	be	subject	totheWetlands	ProtectionAct.	 
. A	locus	map	showing	the	boundary	and	street	configuration	of	the	subdivision	in	relation	to	
surrounding	streets	 
Action by Board
Within	sixtydays,	the	Planning	Board	may	give	such	Preliminary	Planits	approval	withor	withoutmodification	suggested	by	theBoard	or	agreed	upon	by	the	person	submitting	the	plan.	 Such	approval	does	not	constitute	endorsement	of	a	subdivision.			The	Board	may	also	disapprove	the	plan.			 In	the	case	of	disapproval,	theBoard	shall	state	in	detail	its	reasons	therefore. 
DEFINITIVE	PLANRefer	toExhibit	Plans	1,	2,	3,	and	4	of	Appendix	for	the	typical	formatand	layout	ofthe	required	 drawings.	 
General
Any	applicant	who	submits	a	Definitive	Plan	of	a	subdivision	to	the	Planning	Board	for	approval	 shall	file	with	the	Board	the	following:	 
1. 
An	original	drawing	of	the	Definitive	Plan	and	five	contactprints	thereof,	dark	line	on	white	background.			The	original	drawing	will	be	returned	after	approval	or	disapproval.	

2. 
A	properly	executed	application	Form	C	(see	Appendix)

3. 
The	applicant	shall	pay	the	cost	of	all	advertisements,	notices	and	signs	prior	to	the	public	hearing.	 


The	applicant	shall	file	by	delivery	or	registered	mail	a	notice	with	the	Town	Clerk	stating	the	date	of	submission	for	such	approval	and	accompanied	by	two	copies	of	the	completed	application	(Form	C)	with	a	non-refundable	filing	fee	offifty	dollars	in	cash,	money	order,	or	bank	registered	check	payable	to	the	“Town	of	Swampscott”.			A	copy	of	suchplans	shall	also	befiled	with	the	Boardof	Health,	Conservation	Commission,	TownEngineer,	Fire	Department,	PoliceDepartment,	School	Committee,	Selectmen,	Board	of	Public	Works,	Traffic	Study	Committee,	and	TownClerk	at	least	two	weeks	before	the	public	hearing.	 		The	Planning	Board	is	required	to	send	notice	to	abutters	 concerning	the	public	hearing. 
pg.	7	 
SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Contents of Definitive Plan
The	Definitive	Plan	shall	be	prepared,	signed	and	stampedby	a	land	surveyor	and/or	professional	engineer	registered	in	Massachusetts,	and	the	plan	shall	be	clearly	and	legibly	drawn	on	mylar	or	linen.			 The	plan	shall	be	at	a	scale	of	one	inchequals	forty	feet	or	such	other	scale	asthe	Planning	Board	mayaccept	to	show	details	clearly	and	adequately.			Sheet	sizes	shall	preferably	not	exceed	24"	x36".			 If	multiple	sheets	are	used,	they	shall	be	accompanied	by	an	index	sheet	showing	the entire	subdivision	and	a	locus	diagram.			 	TheDefinitive	Plan	shall	contain	the	following	 information: 
a) Subdivision	name,	boundaries,	north	point,	date	and	scale,	benchmarks,	zoning	districts	in	which	the	subdivision	is	located.	 
b) Name	and	address	of	record	owner,	subdivider	andengineers	of	sewerageand	water	systems.			(In	cases	where	the	surveying	is	done	by	someone	other	than	the	Registered	Engineer,	the	surveyor’s	stamp	and	signature	should	be	included)	 
c) A	certifiedstatementas	to	encumbrances	existing	upon	the	land	at	the	time	of	filing.			Immediatelyprior	to	thefinal	approval	of	any	plan	and	its	submission	to	the	Registry	ofDeeds,	the	applicant	shall	furthercertify	that	no	change	in	encumbrances	has	occurred	during	the	period	of	consideration	of	the	plan.	 
d) A	certifiedstatement	identifying	a	sufficient	legal	interest	of	the	subdivider	in	the	land	if	the	subdivider	is	not	the	owner.	 
e) Names	of	all	abutters	as	they	appear	in	themost	recent	tax	list	and	location	of	abutting	land.	 
f) Lines	of	existing	and	proposed	streets,	rights-of-way,	and	curb	lines,	way,	lots,	easements,	and	public	or	common	areas	with	thesubdivision.	 		“(The	proposed	names	of	the	proposed	new	streets	shall	be	shown	in	pencil	until	they	have	been	recommended	by	the	PlanningBoard	to	the	Townandapproved	by	the	Town	ofSwampscott)”. 
g) Sufficient	data	to	determine	the	location,	direction,	and	lengthof	every	street	and	way	line,	lot	line	and	boundary	line,	and	establish	theselines	on	the	ground.	 
h) Location	of	all	permanent	monuments	properly	identified	as	towhether	existing	or	proposed,	and	of	all	fences,	walls,	buildings,	waterways,	large	boulders	or	outcroppings	of	rocks,	trees	over	eightinches	in	diameter	and	other	natural	objects	of	like	importance.			 
i) On	a	separate	sheet,	a	topographic	plan	of	the	subdivision	plus	all	land	within	100	feet	of	the	subdivision,	showing	existing	and	proposed	street	and	lotlines,	existing	topography	at	two	foot	contour	intervals	at	all	points	within	150feet	of	all	proposed	roads	at	five	foot	contour	intervals	forthe	balance	of	the	subdivision,	and	at	ten	foot	contour	intervals	 outside	of	the	subdivision,	and	showing	the	following:	existing	structures;	major	site	features	such	as	existing	stone	walls,	fences,	large	trees,	general	outline	of	wooded	areas,	 
pg.	8	 
SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

rock	ridges	and	outcroppings;	elevations,	location	and	direction	of	flow	of	all	naturalwater	courses,	brooks,	streams,and	drainage	ditches;	all	ponds,	wetlands,	and	areas	subject	to	flooding,	with	elevations;	all	existing	drainage	structures,	with	elevations;	and	locations	of	all	areas	judged	tobe	subject	to	the	Wetland	Protection	Act(Ch	131,	Sec.	40	and	40A,	G.L.)	.				The	developer/owner	shall	physically	show	the	general	roadway	layout	on	the	land	by	the	use	of	stakes,	sufficientin	number,	toallow	aplanning	board	delegate	to	orient	himself	while	making	an	onsite	inspection;	also,	these	stakes	shall	beclearly	indicated	on	the	plan.	 
j) Location,	names	and	present	widths	of	streets	bounding,	approaching	orwithin	reasonable	proximity	of	the	subdivision.	 
k) An	inset	onthe	plan,	at	the	same	scale	as	the	townstreet	plan,	showing	the	relation	of	the	subdivision	streets	to	the	existing	street	system. 
l) Indication	of	purpose	of	easements.	 
m) Suitable	space	to	record	the	action	of	the	Planning	Board	and	signatures	of	the	members	of	the	Planning	Board. 
Itemsn,	o,	and	p	maybesubmitted	on	the	same	sheet	as	the	Definitive	Plan	or	on	separate	sheets.	 
n) Existing	and	proposed	topography	at	two	feet	contour	interval. 
o) Existing	profiles	on	the	exterior	lines	and	proposedprofile	on	the	center	line	of	proposed	streets	at	a	horizontal	scale	of	one	inch	equals	forty	feet	and	vertical	scale	of	oneinch	equals	four	feet,	or	other	scales	acceptable	to	the	Planning	Board.		(All	elevations	shall	refer	to	the	Town	ofdatum.)	 
p) Existing	and	proposed	layout	and	design	calculations	for	storm	drainage,	water	supply	and	sewage	disposal	systems	and	its	effects	on	adjacent	lands	certified	bya	registered	professional	engineer. 
q) Profiles	of	proposed	ways	on	a	horizontal	scale	of	forty	feet	to	an	inch	and	a	vertical	scale	of	four	feet	to	an	inch.			Such	profiles	shall	be	stationed	on	the	center	line	and	shall	show	the	existing	surface	of	the	ground	on	the	center	line	and	both	exterior	lines,	and	the	plan	shall	show	the	footprints	of	all	houses	abutting	upon	the	way.		 	Theproposed	center	line	profileshall	show	the	elevation	of	intersections	and	tangents,	stations,	rates	of	slope,	vertical	curves	and	data	pertaining	thereto,	infigures.			Elevations	shall	be	shown	at	all	station	 points	on	vertical	curves.	 
r) Size	and	location	of	existing	and	proposed	sanitary	sewers	andtheir	appurtenances.	 
s) Size	and	location	of	existing	and	proposed	water	mains	and	their	appurtenances.	 
pg.	9	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
t) Size	and	location	of	existing	and	proposed	surface	water	drains	and	their	appurtenances.	 
u) Cross	sections	of	proposed	ways. 
v) A	space	for	the	attestation	signatures	of	the	members	of	the	Board	with	any	disqualifyingnotes	which	they	may	desire	to	add.	 
w) Beforeany	buildingpermitsareissued	by	the	Building	Inspector	under	the	provisions	of	Town	by-laws,	all	existing	and	proposed	grades	in	the	entire	subdivision	must	be	shown	ona	Plot	Plan. 
x) A	statement	describing	conformance	with	the	Master	Plan,	the	Zoning	By-law,	the	
Subdivision	Rules	and	Regulations,	and	a	statement	describing	any	nonconformity. 

y) In	connection	with	any	definitive	plan	except	that	for	a	subdivision	forthe	purposes	of	the	erection	of	one	single	family	house,	the	applicant	shall	also	submit	an	Environmental	Impact	Statementwhich	shall	provide	the	information	shown	in	Appendix	A	to	these	Rules	and	Regulations	and	clearly	show	the	relation	of	the	proposed	project	to	the	total	environment	 of	theTownand	its	inhabitants.			 	Said	Appendix	Ashall	be	considered	a	partof	these	Rules	and	Regulations.				 The	Board,	at	its	discretion,	may	also	require	an	Environmental	Impact	Statementfor	a	subdivision	of	one	single	family	house.	 
In	preparing	the	Statement,	the	applicant	should	refer	to	the	Conservation,	Open	Space	and	RecreationPlan	for	Swampscott,	Massachusetts.		 		The	Environmental	Impact	Statement	shall	address	the	impact	and	effect	the	subdivision	will	have	on	the	neighboring	lands	regarding	traffic,	drainage,	sewer,	water	and	the	public	welfare	and	safety.	 
In	reviewing	the	Statement,	the	Town	boards	will	consider	the	degree	to	which	water	isrecycled	back	into	the	ground,	the	maintenance	and	improvement	of	the	flow	and	quality	of	surface	waters;	 the	preservation	or	promotion	of	wildlife	refuges,	the	preservation	of	the	natural	environment,	 historic	sites,	unique	geological,	botanical	and	archaeologicalfeatures,	existing	or	potential	trails	 and	accessesto	open	space	areas,	and	the	health	and	safety	of	the	inhabitantsof	the	area.	 
The	Board	maywaive	any	section,	or	sections,	of	the	Statement	which	it	deems	inapplicable	to	the	proposed	project	or	may	require	additional	information	on	any	aspect	ofthe	statement.				 The Board	mayalso	require	that	the	Statementor	appropriate	sections	thereof	be	prepared	by	a	Registered	Professional	Engineer,	Architect,	or	other	professional	acceptable	to	the	Board.				Thedevelopermay	discuss	the	requirements	with	the	Board	prior	topreparation	of	the	Statement. 
Review by Board of Health and Others as to Suitability of the Land 
At	the	time	of	filing	of	the	Definitive	Plan,	the	subdivider	shall	also	file	with	the	Board	of	Health	twocontact	prints	of	the	Definitive	Plan	dark	lineon	white	background.		For	subdivisions	serviced	by	the	Town	sewerage	systems,	the	Board	of	Health	shall	within	forty-five	days	after	filing	of	the	plan,	 
pg.	10	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
report	to	the	Planning	Board	in	writing,	approval	or	disapproval	of	said	plan.			If	the	Board	of	Health	disapproves	said	plan,	it	shall	state	reason	or	reasons	thereof.	 
General Requirements for Approval 
Suitability	of	Land	 
No	plan	of	a	subdivision	of	land	in	any	of	the	districts	designated	as	residential	under	the	Zoning	By-Law	will	be	approved	unless,	after	adequateinvestigation	and	consultation	with	the	Board	ofHealth,	the	Board	determines	that	theland	canbeused	for	residential	purposes	without	danger	to	the	public	health	and	safety	and	receives	notice	to	thateffect	in	writing	from	the	Board	of	Health. 
Suitability	of	System	of	Ways 
No	plan	of	a	subdivision	will	be	approved	unless	the	way	shown	on	the	plan	comply	with	the	following	requirements:	 
. 	All	ways	shown	onaplan	shall	conform	to	the	Master	Plan	as	adopted	by	the	Board	 where	it	applies.	 
. 	Ways	shall	be	continuous,	and	in	alignment	with	existing	ways,	as	far	aspracticable,	and	shall	compose	a	convenient	system	with	connections	adequate	toinsure	free	circulation	of	vehicular	travel. 
. 	If	adjoining	property	is	not	subdivided,	consideration	shall	begiven	to	the	possibility	of	projection	of	proposed	ways.			Proposed	ways	shall	continue	tothe	 exterior	boundary	of	the	subdivision	unless	the	Board	approves	otherwise.	 
. 	Everycul-de-sac	or	dead-end	way	shall	be	provided	with	a	circular	turn-around	at	its	end	and	havingan	exterior	line	radius	of	not	less	than	fifty	feet,	and	shall	not	be	more	than500	feet	intotal	length,	unless	a	greaterlength	is,	in	the	opinion	of	theBoard,	necessitated	by	topography.	 
. The	system	of	ways	shall,	when	practicable,	be	designed	soas	to	provide	space	for	 two	tiers	of	lots	between	the	longitudinal	ways.	 . No	street	curve	shall	have	a	radius	of	less	than	100	feet	at	the	center	line	unless	the	Board	approves	otherwise.	 
Width	and	Grade	of	Ways	 
No	way	of	awidth	of	less	than	44	feetwill	be	approved	exceptin	cases	where	it	would	bedetrimental	to	the	public	health,	safety	and	welfare.	 
Theminimum	gutter	grade	for	any	way	shall	be	1.0	per	cent.		 Themaximum	longitudinalgrade	shall	be	6	per	cent.	 
Thetransitions	in	longitudinal	grade	of	every	way	shall	be	effected	by	meansof	vertical	curves	of	sufficient	length	to	afford,	in	the	opinion	of	the	Board,	adequate	sight	distances. 
pg.	11	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Intersection	Ways 
All	intersections	of	ways	shall	be	at	anangle	of	90	degreesif	possible;	otherwise,	at	suchan angle	as	theBoard	may	approve.		 	The	number	of	ways	converging	upon	any	one	point	shall	be	kept	to	a	minimum.			All	intersections	of	ways	shall	be	rounded	with	a	cure	at	each	corner	having	aradius	of	at	least	thirty	feet	unless	the	Board	shall	approve	otherwise.	 
Compliance	with	Zoning	By-Law 
	No	plan	of	asubdivision	will	be	approved	unless	all	of	the	lots	shown	on	the	plan	comply	with	the	requirements	and	intent	of	the	Zoning	By-Law.	 
The	Building	Inspector	shall	review	with	theBoard	of	Public	Works,	all	subdivisions	applications,	and	they	and	the	Planning	Board	shall	make	findings	orfacts	and	determine	if:	 
1. 
All	such	proposed	developments	are	consistent	with	the	need	to	minimize	flood	damage.

2. 
Adequate	drainageis	provided	so	asto	reduce	exposure	toflood	hazards.	

3. 
Adequate	drainageis	provided	so	asnot	to	increase	theexposure	to	flood	hazards	of	adjacent	lands.	 


When	inthe	opinion	of	the	Planning	Board,	the	subdivision	may	cause	an	increase	or	change	of	water	surface	draining,	eitherthrough	natural	water	courses	or	through	culverts,	a	developermay	be	required	as	a	condition	for	approval	to	secure	such	drainage	easements	as	are	deemed	necessaryoff	the	site	of	thesubdivision.			In	appropriate	cases,	the	developer	shall	comply	with	the	requirements	of	the	Town	of	Swampscott’s	Plan	and/or	system	for	storm	drainage	as	amended	from	timeto	time. 
Easements 
Any	easement	which	inthe	opinion	of	the	Town	Engineer	may	be	required	for	the	futuredevelopment	of	the	water	or	sewer	systems,	bothsanitary	and	storm,	shall	be	shown	onthe	plan	and	shall	becomea	permanent	part	of	any	deeds	granted.	 
Parks,	Playgrounds	and	Preservation	of	Attractive	Features 
TheBoard	may	decline	toapprove	a	plan	of	a	subdivision	if	the	plan	fails	to	show	suitably	located	park	or	parks	of	adequatesize	for	playground	or	recreation	purposes	or	for	providing	light	and	air.	 
Proposed	Development	of	Applicant’s	Other	Contiguous	Land 
TheBoard	may	decline	toapprove	a	plan	of	a	subdivision	ofa	portion	of	a	lot	or	tractwhich	the	applicantowns	if	he	fails	to	furnish	sufficient	data	to	enable	the	Board	to	relate	the	proposed	subdivision	to	the	applicant’s	remaining	land.	 
pg.	12	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Boundary	Marks	and	Monuments 
The	Board	will	notapproveof	aplan	of	a	subdivision	until	suitable	boundary	or	location	marks	havebeen	installed.			Such	marks	shall	be	installed	at	such	points	at	the	intersection	of	proposed	ways	with	each	other	or	with	public	ways,	or	where	there	is	a	changein	thedirection	of	curvature,	or	on	the	exterior	boundaries	of	the	subdivision,	as	the	Board	shall	designate	and	at	such	other	points	as	the	Board	may	require.			 At	least	fifteen	days	before	the	date	of	the	public	hearing,	the	applicant	shall	have	his	engineer	place	on	the	ground,	points	marking	theintersections	of	the	center	linetangents	of	the	proposedway	or	ways,	 and	the	intersection	of	the	center	line	of	a	proposed	way	withthat	of	another	proposed	or	existing	way,	and	he	shall	submit	to	the	Board	a	sketch	showing	ties	to	thepoints.			 These	points	may	be	establishedby	means	of	wood	stakes	or	such	other	means	as	the	Board	shall	approve. 
Permanent	marks	shall	be	monuments	of	granite,	and	shall	be	placed	after	all	roadway	and	sidewalk	construction	is	complete	at	such	location	as	directed	by	the	Town	Engineer.	 
Public Hearing on the Definitive Plan 
Before	approval,	modification	and	approval,	or	disapproval	ofthe	Definitive	Plan	is	given,	a	public	hearing	shall	be	held	by	the	PlanningBoard	noticeof	the	timeand	place	of	which	and	the	subjectmatter	sufficient	for	identification	shall	be	given	by	the	Planning	Board	at	the	expense	of	the	applicant	by	advertisement	in	a	newspaper	of	general	circulation	in	Swampscott,	once	in	eachof	two	successive	weeks,	the	first	publication	being	not	less	than	fourteen	days	before	the	day	of	suchhearing,	and	by	mailing	a	copy	of	such	advertisement	to	the	applicant	and	to	all	owners	of	land	abuttingupon	theland	included	in	such	plan	as	appearing	on	the	most	recent	tax	list.	 
Required Sign 
The	applicant	shall	also	erect	a	sign	on	the	property	proposed	for	subdivision	that	conforms	to	the	following	criteria:	 
1. 
Thesign	shall	be	placed	in	themost	conspicuous	location	with	respect	to	pedestrian	and	vehicular	traffic.			The	location	of	the	sign	shall	be	approved	by	the	Planning	Board.	

2. 
Thesign	shall	be	four	feethigh	byeight	feet	wideand	shall	contain	the	following	information	in	letters	large	and	distinct	enough	to	be	read	fromthe	nearest	public	way(black	letters	on	a	white	background	are	required,	all	lines	shall	be	separated	by	a	1"	space	with	a	one	inch	margin	on	the	top	and	bottom):	 


1st	line	(10”	high): PROPOSED	SUBDIVISION 
2nd	line	(4”	high):	 (insert	subdivision	name)
3rd	line	(10”	high): PUBLIC	HEARING	 
4th	line	(4”	high):	 will	be	held	on 
5th	line	(4”	high):	 (insert	date)
6th	line	(4”	high):	 (insert	time) 
7th	line	(4”	high):	 (insert	location) 

pg.	13	 
SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

3. 
Thesign	shall	be	in	placeat	least	fourteen	days	before	the	date	ofthepublic	hearing,	shall	remain	in	place	untilthe	public	hearing,	and	must	be	removed	within	one	weekafterhearing.	

4. 
The	applicant	shall	pay	for	all	costs	in	connection	with	the	sign.	 


Performance Guarantee 
Before	endorsement	of	approval	of	a	Definitive	Plan	of	a	subdivision,	the	subdivider	shall	agree	to	complete	the	required	improvements	specified	in	Section	IV	andV	for	any	lots	in	a	subdivision,	such	construction	and	installation	to	be	secured	by	one	and	in	part	the	other,	of	thefollowing	methods	which	may	from	timeto	timebe	varied	by	theapplicant	with	the	approval	of	the	Planning Board.	 
Endorsement of Approval with Bonds or Surety 
Thesubdivider	shall	either	file	a	performancebond	issued	by	a	company	licensed	and	registered	to do	business	in	the	Commonwealth	ofMassachusetts	or	adeposit	of	money	in	an	amount	determined	by	the	Planning	Board	tobe	sufficient	to	cover	thecost	of	all	or	any	part	of	the	improvements	specified	in	SectionIVand	V	not	covered	by	a	covenantunder	“b”	hereof.			Such	bond	 or	surety,	if	filed	or	deposited,	shall	be	approved	as	to	form,	manner,	execution,	and	as	tosureties	by	the	Town	Treasurer	and	shall	be	contingent	on	the	completion	of	such	improvements	within	two	years	of	the	date	of	thebond.			 TheTown	Treasurer	will	take	custody	of	thebond	orsurety	and	will	have	sole	authority	for	the	investment	ofsame	with	any	and	all	interest	earned	accruing	to	the	Town	of	Swampscott.			 The	amount	of	the	bond	shall	be	determined	by	applying	theactual	surveyed	quantities	multiplied	by	unit	prices	as	determined	by	the	TownEngineer.		 Such	unit prices including,	but	not	limited	to,	the	following:	 
. Water	mains,	connections,	and	related	equipment	(per	linear	foot	and	per	hydrant) 
. Sanitary	sewer	construction	(per	linear	foot,	per	manhole) 
. Storm	sewer	construction	(per	linear	foot,	permanhole,	per	catch	basin) 
. Roadway	(per	linear	foot) 
. Sidewalks	(per	linear	foot) 
. Monuments	(per	bound) 
. Trees	(per	tree) 
. Granite	curbing;	bituminous	berm	(per	linear	foot) 
. Retaining	walls	(per	cubic	yard) 
. Guard	rails	(per	linear	foot) 
. Earth	excavation	(machine)	excavated	and	removed	from	site	(per	cubic	yard) 
. Earth	excavation	(hand)	excavated	and	removed	from	site	(per	cubic	yard) 
. Backfill	-	Due	to	extra	excavation	(per	cubic	yard) 
. Rock	excavation	-	In	openexcavation	removed	from	site.		 Earthrock	must	be	in	excess	 
of	2	cubic	yard	(per	cubic	yard) 
. Rock	excavation	in	Trenches	-	3feetwide	or	less	(removed	from	site).	 	Earth	rock	must	 
be	inexcess	of	2	cu.	yd..	(Per	cubic	yard). 
pg.	14	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Endorsement of Approval with Covenant 
Thesubdivider	shall	file	a	covenant,	executed	and	duly	recorded	by	the	owner	ofrecord	,	runningwith	the	land,	whereby	such	ways	and	services	as	specified	inSection	IV	and	V	not	covered	by	bond	or	deposit	under	Aa@	hereof,	shall	be	provided	to	serve	any	lot	before	such	lot	may	be	built	upon	or	conveyed,	other	than	by	mortgage	deed.		Covenant	must	be	reviewed	and	approved	as	to	formby	 Town	Counsel	prior	to	Planning	Board	endorsement	of	approval.		 If	such	ways	and	services	are	not completed	within	two	years	of	the	date	of	filingofthe	covenant,	approval	of	the	plan	shallbe	automatically	rescinded,	and	the	subdivider	must	resubmitanew	plan	for	the	approval	and	 endorsement	of	the	Planning	Board. 
Reduction of Bond or Surety 
The	penal	sum	of	any	such	bond,	or	the	amount	ofany	deposit	held	under	clause	Aa@	above,	may,	from	timetotime,	be	reduced	by	thePlanning	Board	and	theobligations	of	the	parties	thereto	released	by	said	Board	in	whole	or	in	part.			If	release	is	by	reason	of	covenant,	a	new	plan	of	the	portion	to	besubject	to	the	covenant	maybe	required.			If	the	release	is	by	covenant,	thecovenant	shall	be	reduced	to	a	degree	of	Seventy-five(75)	percent	of	the	value	of	the	work	forwhich	the	covenant	ismade	and	completed.		 Thereafter,	a	bond	or	suretyin	the	full	amount	of	the	remaining	twenty	five	(25)	percentof	the	valueof	the	total	work	shall	be	filed	as	called	for	in	subparagraph	5	above.		 	Thebond	orsurety	will	be	held	until	theentire	project	is	completedand	approved.	 
Release of Performance Guarantee 
Upon	the	completion	of	improvements	required	under	Section	IV	and	V,	and	submission	of	an	as­built	plan	showing	the	precise	location	of	water	valves,	shut-offs,	manholes,	sewer	elevations,	etc.	a	constructed,	security	for	the	performance	of	whichwas	given	by	bond,	deposit	or	covenant,	or	upon the	performance	of	any	covenantwith	respect	toanylot,	the	subdivider	may	orally	request	and	agree	on	terms	of	release	with	said	Planning	Board,	or	he	may	send	by	registered	mail	to	the	Town	Clerk	a	written	statementin	duplicate	that	the	said	construction	or	installation	in	connection	with	which	such	bond,	deposit,	or	covenant	has	been	given,	hasbeen	completed	in	accordance	to	the	requirements	contained	under	Section	IV	and	V	statement	to	containtheaddress	of	the	applicant,	and	the	Town	Clerk	shall	forthwith	furnish	a	copy	of	said	statement	tothe	Planning	Board.	 
If	the	Planning	Board	determinesthat	said	construction	or	installation	has	not	been	completed,	it	shall	specifyto	the	applicant	in	writing	the	details	wherein	said	construction	and	installation	fails	tocomply	with	the	requirements	contained	underSection	IV	and	V.	 Failureof	the	Planning	Board	toact	on	such	application	within	forty-five	days	after	the	receiptof	the	application	by	the	Town	Clerk,	all	obligations	under	the	bond	shall	cease	and	terminate	by	operation	of	law,	any	deposit	shall	be	returned	and	any	such	covenant	shall	become	void.			Intheevent	that	said	forty-five	day	period	expires	without	such	specifications,	or	without	the	release	and	return	of	the	bond,	or	return	of	the	deposit	or	release	of	the	covenant	and	aforesaid,	the	Town	Clerk	shall	issue	a	certificate	to	such	effect,	duly	acknowledged,	which	may	be	recorded. 
pg.	15	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Certificate of Approval 
The	action	of	the	Planning	Board	in	respect	to	suchplan	shall	be	by	vote,	copies	of	which	shall	be	certified	and	filed	with	the	Town	Clerk	and	sent	by	delivery	or	registered	mail	totheapplicant.			If	the	Planning	Board	modifies	or	disapproves	of	such	plan,	it	shall	state	in	its	vote	the	reason	for	its	action.		 	Approval,	if	granted,	shall	beendorsed	onthe	original	drawing	oftheDefinitive	Plan	by	the	 signature	of	a	majority	of	the	members	of	the	Planning	Board	but	not	until	the	statutory	twenty	day	appeal	period	has	elapsed	following	the	filing	of	the	certificate	of	the	action	of	the	Planning	Board	with	the	Town	Clerk	and	said	Clerk	has	notified	the	Planning	Board	that	no	appeal	has	been	filed.			After	the	Definitive	Plan	has	been	approved	and	endorsed,	the	applicant	shall	furnishthe	Planning	Board	with	three	prints	thereof.	 
The	contents	of	any	such	endorsement	of	the	Planning	Board	or	certificate	by	the	Town	Clerk	of	Swampscott	shall	be	final	and	conclusive	on	all	parties,	subject	to	the	provisions	of	Section	81-W,	Chapter	41,	General	Laws.	 
Endorsement	of	approval	of	the	Definitive	Plan	does	not	constitute	the	laying	out	or	acceptance	by	the	Town	of	streets	within	a	subdivision.	 
pg.	16	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
SECTIONIV:	 DESIGN	STANDARDS 
STREETS 
Location and Alignment 
1. 
All	streets	in	the	subdivision	shall	be	designed	so	that,	in	the	opinion	of	the	Planning	Board,	they	will	provide	safe	vehicular	travel.			Due	considerationshall	also	be	given	by	the	subdivider	to	the	attractiveness	of	the	street	layout	in	order	to	obtain	the	maximum	 livability	and	amenity	of	the	subdivision.	 

2. 
The	proposed	subdivision	shall	conform,	so	far	as	practicable,	to	the	current	Master	Planas	adopted	aswhole	or	inpart	by	the	Planning	Board.	 

3. 
Provision	satisfactory	to	the	Planning	Board	shall	be	made	forthe	proper	projection	ofstreets,	or	for	access	to	adjoining	property	which	is	not	yet	subdivided.	 

4. 
Reserve	strips	prohibiting	access	to	streets	or	adjoining	property	shall	not	be	permitted,	 except	where,	in	the	opinion	of	the	Planning	Board,	such	strips	shall	be	in	thepublic	 interest.	 

5. 
Street	jogs	with	minimal	centerline	offsets	shall	be	reviewed	for	approval	by	theTown	 Engineer. 

6. 
Theminimum	centerline	radii	of	curved	streets	shall	be	one	hundred	feet.		Greater	radii	may	be	required	for	principal	streets.	 

7. 
All	intersections	of	ways	shall	be	at	anangle	of	90	degrees,	if	possible,	otherwise	at	such	an	angle	as	thePlanning	Board	mayapprove.		 The	number	of	ways	converging	upon	any	one	point	shall	be	keptto	aminimum.	 		All	intersections	of	ways	shall	be	roundedwith	a	curve	at	each	corner	having	a	radius	of	at	least	thirty	feet	unless	the	Board	shall	approve	otherwise.	 

8. 
Property	lines	at	street	intersections	shall	be	rounded	or	cut	back	to	provide	for	a	curb	radius	of	not	less	than	thirty	feet. 


Width 
1. 
The	minimum	width	of	street	rights-of-way	shall	be	forty-four(44)feet.		This	forty-four	feet	shall	include	the	street	(twenty-eight	feet)bounded	on	each	side	by	granite	curbs	(6"),	grass	strips	(18")	and	sidewalks	(6').	 ThePlanning	Board	may,	atits	discretion,	allow	the	substitution	of	landscaping	(grass,	trees,	etc.)	for	the	sidewalk	on	one	side	of	the	right-of­way.		 		Greater	width	shall	be	required	by	the	Planning	Board	when	deemed	necessary	for present	and	future	vehicular	travel.	

2. 
Curb	faces	shall	be	located	notcloser	than	twenty-eight	feet	face	to	face	or	at	greater	widths	 required	by	the	Planning	Board.	 


pg.	17	 
SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Dead End Streets 
1. 
Dead	end	streets	shall	not	be	longer	than	five	hundred	(500)	feet.	

2. 
Dead	end	streets	shall	be	provided	at	the	closed	end	with	a	turnaround	having	an	outside	roadwaydiameter	of	at	least	one	hundred	(100)	feet.	 


Easements 
Easementsfor	utilities	across	lots	or	centered	on	rear	orside	lot	lines	shall	be	provided	where	necessary	and	shall	be	at	least	twenty	(20)	feet	wide.	 
Where	a	subdivision	is	traversedby	a	water	source,	drainage	way,	channelor	stream,	the	Planning	Board	shall	require	that	there	be	provided	a	stormwater	easement	ordrainage	right-of-way	of	adequate	width	to	conform	substantially	to	the	lines	of	suchwater	course,	drainage	way,	channel	or	stream,	and	to	provide	for	construction	or	other	necessary	purposes.	 
Open Space 
Before	approval	of	a	plan,	the	Planning	Board	may	also	in	proper	cases	require	the	plan	to	show	a	park	or	parks	suitably	located	for	playground	or	recreation	purposes	or	for	providing	light	and	air.			The	park	or	parks	shall	not	be	unreasonable	in	area	in	relation	to	the	land	being	subdivided	and	to	the	prospective	uses	of	such	land.		 	The	PlanningBoard	shall	by	appropriate	endorsement	on	theplan	require	that	no	building	be	erected	upon	such	park	or	parks	without	its	approval. 
Protection of Natural Features 
Due	regard	shall	be	shown	for	all	natural	features,	such	as	large	trees,	water	courses,	scenic	points,	historic	spots	and	similar	community	assets.			Trees	remaining	within	the	subdivision	shall	beprotected	from	mechanical	injury	during	construction	and	from	adverse	changes	orexcavations	asrecommended	in	U.S.	Department	of	Agriculture	Bulletin	104	(April,	1965).	 
pg.	18	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
SECTIONV:	 REQUIRED	IMPROVEMENTS	FOR	AN	APPROVED	 SUBDIVISION 
STREET	AND	ROADWAYAll	referrals	hereunder	refer	to	Commonwealth	of	Massachusetts	Department	of	Public	Works	Standard	Specifications	for	highway	and	Bridges	1953Edition	and	all	amendments	to	date.			The	words	“to	date”	shall	beinterpreted	to	mean,	“At	the	timeof	filing	of	a	subdivision	plan	for	 approval”. 
Theentire	area	of	eachstreet	orway	shall	be	cleared	of	all	stumps,	brush,	roots,	boulders,	like	material	and	all	trees	not	intended	for	preservation.	 
All	loam	and	other	yielding	material	shall	be	removed	from	the	roadwayarea	of	each	street	in	a	wayand	replaced	with	suitable	material.			 Section	VII-Fof	the	Zoning	Ordinance	of	the	Townof	 Swampscott	shall	be	referred	to.	 
Granite	curbs	and	gutters	shall	be	installed	not	closer	than	twenty-eight	feet	face	toface. 			Curb	and	guttershall	be	installed	in	conformity	to	standards	of	the	Massachusetts	Department	of	Public	Works,	Section	F-1,	Commonwealth	of	Massachusetts	Departmentof	Public	Works	Specifications	1953,	TypeVA-1. 
All	roadways	shall	be	brought	to	a	finished	grade	as	shown	on	the	profiles	of	the	Definitive	Plan	with	at	least	12"	of	suitable	gravel	after	compaction	with	a	12-ton,	3-wheel	roller	and	treated	with	a	prime	coat	of	asphalt	MC-1	and	surfaced	with	twocourses	of	type	I-1	bituminous	concrete	2	1/2"	binder,	1	1/2"	top,	in	accordance	with	Section	B-18,	Commonwealth	of	Massachusetts	Departmentof	Public	Work	Specifications	1953.		 	The	type	of	surfacing	of	every	way	shall	be	in	such	a	way	thatit	will	carry	the	expected	trafficfor	a	period	of	15	years	without	excessive	maintenance	cost.	 
SIDEWALKSSidewalks	of	not	less	than	six	feet	in	width	shall	be	constructed	on	both	sides	ofthestreet.	 Sidewalks	shall	have	a	base	of	8"of	suitable	gravel	and	a	surface	of	type	I-2	bituminous	concrete,	3"	in	depth	laid	in	two	courses,	2"	binder	and	1"	top.		 The	face	of	the	sidewalkagainst	the	sodded	edges	shall	be	built	against	a	wooden	form.	 		The	formshall	be	made	of	1"by	3"continuous	wood	strapping	securely	fastened	to	2"	by	3"	wood	posts	18"	long,	2'	on	center.			The	form	shall	be	left	in	 place	afterthe	sidewalk	is	laid.			The	Planning	Board	may	require	cement	concrete	sidewalks	to	conform	with	the	sidewalks	of	adjacent	areas.			 The	Board	may	allow	the	substitution	of	landscaping	(grass,	trees,etc.)	For	the	sidewalk	on	one	side	of	the	street. 
GRASS	STRIPSGrass	strips	shall	be	provided	between	the	curbing	and	sidewalkedge	to	a	minimum	of	five	feet.	 The	finished	grade	of	such	grass	strips	shall	be	a	slope	of	1/2"/ft.	toward	the	roadway.		Where	unusual	physical	land	characteristics	or	topographic	conditions	exist,	the	Board	may	approve	the	construction	of	a	grass	strip	of	a	greaterslopewith	thefinished	slope	not	projecting	above	a	plan	 
pg.	19	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
sloped	fourhorizontal	toone	vertical	upward	from	the	back	of	the	curb	or	below	a	plane	sloped	four	horizontal	to	one	vertical	downward	from	the	back	of	the	curb. 
Shade	trees	of	minimum	four	inch	caliper	(tree	diameterto	be	measured	at	point	five	feet	abovegrade)	and	of	a	species	to	beapproved	by	the	board	of	Public	Works,	shall	be	planted	along	the	side	lines	of	the	streets,	at	the	locations	and	intervals	to	be	determined	by	the	Board.			 Treesshall	be	protected	by	suitable	boxes,	bollards,	fenders	or	wells	as	appropriate.			 The	applicant	shall	be	responsible	for	the	healthand	erectness	of	these	trees	for	eighteen	(18)	months	after	acceptanceofthe	road	bythe	Board,	or	he	shall	be	responsible	for	replacingthe	tree	with	one	atleastequalin	size	and	comparablein	type	to	the	tree	being	replaced	and	again	guaranteed	for	at	least	eighteen	months	from	date	of	replanting.	 
The	top	six	inches	of	grass	strips	shall	consist	of	good	quality	loam	extendingto	the	rightof	way,	screened,	raked	androlled	with	at	least	a	100-pound	roller	to	grade. 	The	loamshall	beseeded	with	lawn	grass	seed	appliedin	sufficientquantity	to	assure	adequate	permanent	coverage,	satisfactory	to	the	Planning	Board,	rolled	when	the	loamis	moist.			Loaming	and	seeding	shall	be	in	accordance	with	Section751	and	765	of	theStandard	Specifications.	 
MONUMENTSMonuments	shall	be	installed	at	all	street	intersections,	at	all	points	of	change	in	direction	or	curvature	of	streets	andother	points	where,	in	the	opinion	of	the	Town	Engineer,	permanent	monuments	are	necessary.			Suchmonuments	shallconform	to	the	standard	specification	of	the	Town	Engineer	and	shall	beset	according	to	such	specifications.			No	permanent	monuments	shall	be	installed	until	all	construction	which	would	destroy	or	disturb	 
UTILITIESConnections	for	sewer,	drain,	water	and	electrical	service	from	the	mainstructure	in	the	way	to	the	exterior	lineof	the	way	shall	be	constructed	for	each	lot	whether	or	not	there	is	abuilding	thereon,	except	thatthe	Board	may	waive	such	requirements,	in	whole	or	in	part,	in	the	case	of	a	lot	to	be	used	for	a	park,	playground,	or	for	any	other	purpose	for	which,	in	the	opinion	of	the	Board,	such	 connection	shall	not	be	required.	 
All	sewer,	surface	water	drains,	water	pipes	and	any	other	underground	facilities,	together	with	their	appurtenances,	shall	be	installed	onlyafter	thesub-grade	has	been	established;	such	sub­grade	and	the	installation	ofall	utilities	and	the	backfilling	of	all	the	trenches	shall	be	inspected	by	the	Town	Engineer	at	the	expense	of	the	contractor	before	any	installationis	made.	 Theservices	of	a	consultant	shall	serve	as	a	full-time	inspector	in	lieu	of	a	Town	employee	inspector,	and	in	bothinstances,	the	Town	shall	be	reimbursed	by	the	contractor	for	the	full	cost	of	the	inspection	including	the	cost	ofinsurance	for	liability	and	accidents.			 This	reimbursement	shall	be	made	in full,	prior	to	issuance	of	aCertificate	of	Occupancy.				 The	contractor	shall	notify	the	Town	Engineer	at	least	forty	eight	(48)	hours	in	advance	before	any	underground	work	is	started	so	that	the	TownEngineer	can	notify	his	inspector	of	the	particularwork.			If	anywork	is	done	in	the	absence	of	the Inspector,	the	Town	Engineer	may	order	the	workuncovered	and	redone. 
pg.	20	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

Adequate	disposal	of	surface	water	shall	be	provided.			Catch	basins	and	curb	inlets,	etc.,	shall	be	built	on	bothsides	of	the	roadway	oncontinuous	grades	at	intervals	of	not	more	than	four	hundred	
(400)	feet	placed	at	low	points	and	sags	intheroadway	and	near	the	corners	of	the	roadway	at	intersecting	streets.	 
All	pipe,	fittings,	grates,	frames	and	covers	in	relation	to	service	installations	of	all	kinds	must	be	of	the	same	grade	and	standard	as	usedby	theTownof	Swampscott,	in	accordance	with	the	specifications	of	Swampscott's	Engineering	Department. 
WATERMAIN	ANDSERVICESAll	water	mains	and	services	shall	be	in	accordance	with	the	Town	of	Swampscott	Board	of	Public	Works	specifications	on	an	approved	level. 
Anchor	orThrust	Blocks.			Ateach	and	every	change	of	direction	provide	anchor	clamp	and	rods	or	3,000	poundconcrete	thrust	blocks	tohold	pipes	in	place. 
Theuse	of	trade	names	isintended	as	a	guide,	and	equal	materials	and	products	will	be	accepted	if	approved	bythe	Town	Engineer.	 
STORM	ANDSUB-SURFACE	DRAINS,WATER	PIPE	AND	SEWERLINEEXTENSIONSAny	storm	and	sub-surface	drainage,	water	and	sewer	system	required	in	a	subdivision	shall	be	interconnected	with	existing	drainage,waterand	sewer	facilities,	respectively,	and	if	such	interconnection	requires	extension	of	said	systembeyond	the	subdivision,	the	subdivider	shall	install	the	same	at	his	own	expense	and	subject	at	all	times	to	the	inspection	and	approval	of	the	various	superintendents	of	the	applicable	Town	departments.	 
FIRE	ALARM,POLICE,AND	CIVIL	DEFENSE	OVERHEAD	AND	UNDERGROUND	CABLE	WORK 
General Requirements 
Fire	alarm,	Police	alarm	and	Civil	Defense	systems	of	design	and	construction	approved	by	the	Town	Electrician	and	by	the	Chief	of	the	Fire	Department. 
All	work	including	trenching	and	backfill	to	be	done	by	developer	employing	an	Electrical	 Contractor. 
All	equipment,	work	and	box	locations	to	be	approved	by	the	Town	Electrician	and	FireDepartment. 			Contractormust	securepermission	to	makeattachments	to	poles	from	owner	of	 same. 
All	work	to	conform	to	the	requirements	of	publication	#73,	of	the	National	Fire	Protection	Association,	exceptthatOverheadLinework,	Underground	Cable	Work,	as	defined	in	this	publication,	must	be	substituted	for	the	following	specifications: 
TheCable	Work	for	the	Fire	Alarm,	Police	Signal	System	and	the	Civil	Defense	System	within	theSubdivision	shall	all	be	of	“Direct	Burial”	type.		Cable	work	outside	of	the	Subdivision	shall	also	be	 
pg.	21	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
buried	direct. 			Cable	connections	beyond	the	first	pole	outsideof	the	Subdivision	shall	berun	to	the	 Town	connections	as	directed	by	the	Town	Electrician.	 
Linework Overhead, Outside of Subdivision 
A	minimum	of	ten-conductor	cable,	conforming	to	I.M.S.A.,	specification	#20-3,	the	wirestherein	to	be	#14	A.W.G.,	minimum6	straight	and	2	twisted	pair,	600	volt	insulation,	color	coded	and	figure	#8.	 Cableto	be	attached	to	poles,	22feet	above	grade,	or	2feet	above	telephone	cable	where	present.			 Attachments	topoles	to	be	by	5/8"	through	bolt,	nutand	washer,	using	Universal	typemessenger	hanger	or	3-bolt	thru	clamps.			Termination	of	line	to	be	by	Thimble-eye	bolt.			Messenger	sections	tobe	spliced	with	strand-links	or	equal	and	termination	at	thimble-vise	by	strand-vise	or	equal.			Atbox	locations,	cable	or	cables	to	be	dressed	down	pole	and	termination	onstrip	in	Weatherproof	Aerial	Terminal	Box	w/hinged	or	drop	bottom	through	bushedinsulated	holes,	leaving	a	drip	loop	below. A.T.B.’	s	to	bemountedon	pole	10	feet	above	grade	on	centers.			Sufficient	terminal	strips	for	number	of	wires	in	cable	to	be	mounted	in	box.			Finalconnection	to	Town	FireAlarm	Systemto	be	made	by	Town	Fire	Alarm	Electricians	only.			Final	connections	to	the	Town	systems	shall	be	made	by	the	Town	Electrical	Departmentonly. 
Cable Work -	Underground in All Areas Within and Outside the Subdivision 
A	minimum	of	ten-conductor	direct	burial	cable	conforming	to	I.M.S.A.	specification	19-6,	the	wirestherein	to	be	#14,	A.W.G.	minimum,	6	straight	and	2	twisted	pair,	600volts	and	color	coded,	all	as	required	by	Article	2136of	Chapter	210	of	Pamphlet	#73	oftheNational	Fire	Prevention	Association.		 	The	cable	shall	be	looped	from	box	location	to	box	location,	entering	the	pedestals	throughopenings	in	the	sub	base	of	the	pedestal,	and	terminating	conductors	on	terminals	5	feet	 above	grade. 			Cables	laid	in	direct	burial	withoutenclosure	in	ducts,	shall	be	in	grass	plots,	under	sidewalks	and	in	other	places	where	the	ground	is	not	apt	tobe	opened	for	other	underground	construction.			If	splices	are	made,	such	splices	shall	be	accessible	forinspection	and	tests. Such	cables	shall	be	buried	at	least	18	inches	deep	and,	where	crossing	streets	or	other	areas	likely	to	beopened	for	other	underground	construction,	shall	be	in	duct	or	conduit	or	be	covered	by	creosoted	planking	atleast	twoinches	thick	and	eight	inches	wide	or	consisting	of	two	creosoted	2	inchx	4	inch	planks	with	half	round	grooves,	spiked	or	banded	togetherafter	the	cable	is	installed.			Theunderground	system	shall	be	continued	underground	or	overhead	(refer	to	specifications	hereinbefore)	to	the	Town	connections	as	directed	by	the	Town	Electrician.			Final	connections	to	Town	Systems	shall	bemadeby	theTownElectrical	Department	Only. 
UNDERGROUND	ELECTRICAL	SYSTEMSInstallation	of	Underground	Distribution	Equipment	for	Residential	Developments	 
1. 
The	entire	electric	distribution	system	within	the	development,including	the	street	lighting	 system,	shallbe	of	the	underground	type.				

2. 
The	electric	distribution	system	shall	be	installed	in	accordance	with	the	MassachusettsElectric	Company’s	policy	relative	tothe	“Installation	of	Underground	Distribution	 Equipmentfor	Residential	Developments”	which	is	in	effect	onthe	date	that	construction	is	 scheduled	to	start.	 


pg.	22	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

3. 
The	street	lighting	system	may	be	of	atypeand	designfurnished	by	Massachusetts	Electric	Co.		relative	to	underground	supplied	street	light	systems	and	approved	by	the	Town.	 The	Board	mayrequire	or	approve	alternative	street	lighting	systems.	

4. 
On	propertywhich	is	to	remain	privately	owned,	the	street	lightingfixtures	may	beofatype preferred	by	the	owners	of	the	sameprovided	said	fixtures	areU.L.	listed.	 


pg.	23	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
SECTIONVI:	 TIME	FOR	COMPLETION 
For	each	subdivision	or	each	stage	of	a	staged	subdivision,	the	construction	of	all	ways	and	the	installation	of	all	required	municipal	services	shall	be	completed	within	18	months	from	the	date	or	receipt	of	bond	or	surety	by	the	Board	or	within	two	years	of	the	dateofapproval	of	the	DefinitivePlan,	whichever	is	earlier.			Failure	todo	so	shall	automatically	rescind	approval	under	covenantconditions	or	rescind	approval	subject	to	Section	81-W	of	the	Subdivision	Control	Laws.	 
pg.	24	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
APPENDIX	A	REQUIREMENTS	FOR	ENVIRONMENTAL	IMPACT	STATEMENT 
In	accordance	with	Section	4.3.2.i,	the	applicant	shall	submit	an	Environmental	Impact	Statement.	The	statement	shall	discuss	the	following:	 
AIR
1. 
Describe	possible	sourcesand	duration	of	significant	amounts	of	odors,	smoke	and	dust. 

2. 
Describe	precautions	to	be	taken	to	eliminate	or	minimizetheadverse	environmentaleffects	of	the	smoke,	dust	or	odors	generated	by	construction	and	completed	development.	 

3. 
Describe	the	relationship	of	the	location	of	the	subdivision	and	prevailing	wind	patternstonearby	residences,	businesses	recreation	area,	andother	public	areas.	 

4. 
If	incineration	or	refuse	is	proposed	for	the	subdivision,	describe	the	effects	resultant	emissions	will	have	onairquality	in	the	area.		 Include	proofthat	the	incinerator	complies	with	the	latest	local	and	state	standards.	 


LAND
1. 
Describe	the	existing	general	physical	conditions	of	the	site,	including	existing	use,	general	topography,	vegetation,	unusual	geologic	formations	and	soils,	and	howthe	project	will	effect	these	features. 

2. 
Describe	any	limitations	on	proposed	project	caused	by	subsurface	soil	and	water	 
conditions,	and	methods	to	be	used	toovercome	them. 


3. 
Describe	procedures	and	findings	of	percolation	tests	conducted	on	the	site. 

4. 
Describe	thetypes	and	amounts	of	land	which	will	be	permanently	affected	by	construction	of	the	subdivision.	 

5. 
Describe	proposed	rough	grading	plans	and	extent	of	proposed	cut	and	fill.	 

6. 
Describe	location	and	extent	of	existing	marshes,	wetlands,	or	seasonal	wetareas	and	any proposed	alterations. 


WATER	ANDWETLANDS
1. Evaluate	how	and	to	what	extent	the	project	will	affect	the	quality	and	quantity	of	anyexisting	or	potential	public	or	private	water	supply,	includingwatersheds,	reservoirs	and	groundwater.		 
pg.	25	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 

2. 
Describe	themethods	to	be	used	during	construction	to	control	erosion	and	sedimentation	and	siltation	including	use	of	sediment	basins	and	type	of	mulching,	matting,	or	temporary	 vegetation;	approximate	size	and	location	of	land	to	becleared	to	any	given	time	and	length	 of	time	to	exposure;	covering	of	soil	stockpiles;	and	other	control	methods	used.			Evaluate	effectivenessof	proposed	methods	on	the	site	and	on	the	surrounding	areas. 

3. 
Describe	the	permanent	methods	to	be	used	to	control	erosion	and	sedimentation.			Include	description	of:	

a. 
Any	areas	subject	to	flooding	or	ponding;	

b. 
Proposed	surface	drainage	system;

c. 
Proposed	land	grading	and	permanent	vegetation	cover;	

d. 
Methods	to	be	used	to	protect	existing	vegetation;

e. 
The	relationship	of	the	development	to	the	topography;	

f. 
Any	proposed	alterations	of	shorelines,	marshes	or	seasonal	wet	areas;

g. 
Any	existing	or	proposed	flood	control	or	wetland	easements;	

h. 
Estimated	increase	of	peak	runoff	caused	by	altered	surface	conditions,	and	methods	to	be	used	to	return	water	tothe	soils.	 



4. 
Discuss	probability	that	project	will	increase	pollution	or	turbidity	levels	within	receiving	waterwayand	the	precautions	to	be	taken	to	minimize	the	effects.	 

5. 
Discuss	the	project’s	effect	on	the	waterway’s	aquatic	biotaand	use	as	habitats.	 

6. 
Discuss	the	project’s	effects	on	groundwater	quality	and	supply	and	efforts	to	rechargegroundwater	supplies.	 

7. 
Discuss	what	effect	the	project	will	have	on	increasing	the	incidence	of	flooding,	including	 areas	outside	the	subdivision.	 

8. 
Discuss	the	effect	of	theproposed	sewage	disposal	methods	on	surface	and	groundwater	supplies	andquality.	 


ENERGY
1. 
Describe	thetypes	and	increased	quantity	of	energy	required	to	serve	the	needs	of	the project	residents.	 

2. 
Indicate	what	the	sourcesof	this	energy	will	be. 


NOISE
1. Describe	thetime,	duration	and	typesof	noises	generated	by	the	project,	both	during	andafterconstruction.	 
pg.	26	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
2. 
Discuss	what	effect	these	noises	will	have	on	both	humans	and	wildlife.	 

3. 
Describe	the	controls	which	will	be	used	to	eliminate	or	minimize	theeffects	of	thesenoises.	 


LOCAL	FLORA	AND	FAUNA
1. 
Discuss	the	project’s	effects	on	land-based	ecosystems,	such	as	the	indigenous	wildlife,	stream	bank	cover,	and	vegetal	orwooded	growth. 

2. 
Describe	existing	and	proposed	types	and	amounts	of	vegetal	cover.	 

3. 
Discuss	the	existenceof	rare	endangered	plant,	wildlife	or	fish	species	in	the	project	area.	 


MAN-MADEENVIRONMENT 
Land Use 
1. 
Describe	how	the	proposed	project	conforms	with	thegrowth	plans	for	the	area	and	theTown	in	general.	 

2. 
Describe	land	uses	adjacent	to	the	project.	 

3. 
Describe	any	existing	or	proposed	public	or	common	recreational	or	open	areas	withinthe	subdivision.	 

4. 
Discuss	the	site’s	proximity	to	transportation,	shopping,	educational	facilities,	recreational	 facilities,	etc. 


Density 
1. Provide	a	tabulation	of	proposed	buildings	bytype,	size	(number	of	bedrooms,	floor	area),	ground	coverage,	and	a	summary	showing	the	percentageof	the	tract	to	be	occupied	bybuildings,	parking	and	other	paved	vehicular	areas	and	usableopen	space.	 
Zoning 
1. Indicate	the	zoning	designationsfor	the	site	and	adjacent	areas.	 
Architecture 
1. 
Describe	the	architecturaland	landscaping	techniques	which	will	be	usedto	blend	the	structures	with	the	surrounding	area.		Describe	the	landscaping	techniques	which	will	be	used	to	replace,	remove	or	cut	down	trees	and	vegetation. 

2. 
Discuss	the	scale	and	heights	of	the	structures	in	relation	tothe	surrounding	area. 

3. 
Discuss	the	project’s	visual	impact	and	possible	interferencewith	natural	views.	 


pg.	27	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
4. Describe	type	of	construction	building	materials	used,	location	of	common	areas,	location	and	type	of	service	facilities	(laundry,	trash,	garbage	disposal).	 
Historic Buildings, Historical Sites and Archeological Sites 
1. Indicate	location	and	significance	of	any	historic	buildings	or	sites	onor	adjacent	to	theproject.	 
PUBLIC	FACILITIES 
Water supply, flow, pressure and distribution 
1. 
Describe	the	groundwater	and/or	surface	water	supplyto	be	used.	 

2. 
Discuss	the	demands	of	the	project	for	consumption	and	fire	protection. 


Sanitary sewerage connection, distribution and facilities 
1. 
Discuss	the	quantity	of	type	and	sewage	which	will	be	generated	by	the	project.	 

2. 
Describe	themethodof	sewagewhich	will	be	generated	by	the	project.	 


Storm drainage facilities 
1. Describe	where	connection	to	the	Town	system	isproposed.	 
Disposition of storm water 
1. 	
Indicate	the	locationof	all	proposed	outfalls.	 

2. 	
Describe	theeffect	of	theoutfalls	and	their	discharge	on	the	receiving	waters,	i.e.	increased	 flows,	pollution,	etc.	 


3. Discuss	the	quantity	of	storm	water	to	bedischarged. Refuse Disposal 
1. 
Estimate	the	quantity	and	types	ofrefuse	that	will	be	generated	by	the	subdivision.	 

2. 
Describe	the	proposed	methods	of	refuse	disposal	and	location	and	sizeof	dumpsters,	used.	 


Traffic Facilities 
1. 
Discuss	future	vehicular	circulation	patterns	including	numberand	types	of	vehicles. 

2. 
Describe	the	proposed	pedestrian	circulation	pattern.	 

3. 
Discuss	the	location	and	number	of	parking	spaces	proposed,	and	landscape	screening	 proposed.	 


pg.	28	 
SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
Electric Power 
1. 
Discuss	the	power	demand	of	the	subdivision.	 

2. 
Discuss	the	source	of	the	electric	power	and	the	method	of	supplying	the	area. 


Gas 
1. 
Discuss	the	demands	of	the	subdivision.	 

2. 
Describe	what	the	gas	will	be	usedforin	the	area. 


3. Describe	the	source	of	gassupply	and	the	proposed	methodof	supplying	the	area.	 COMMUNITY	SERVICES 
Schools 
1. 
Discuss	the	effect	of	the	subdivision	on	existing	schools,	including	number	and	agesof	children	generated	by	the	subdivision.	 

2. 
Describe	the	location	of	the	nearest	existing	schools.	 


Recreation 
1. 
Describe	existing	and	proposed	recreational	facilities,	including	active	and	passive	types,	and	agegroups	participating	and	state	whether	recreational	facilities	and	open	space	areavailableto	all	Swampscott	residents. 

2. 
Indicate	location	and	width	of	existing	and	proposed	pedestrian	ways,	bikeways	or	bridle	paths.	 


Police 
1. 
Estimate	the	total	population	projected	for	the	subdivision.	 

2. 
Estimate	the	total	number	of	automobiles	for	thearea.	 


Fire 
1. 
Discuss	the	total	number	of	buildings	to	be	constructed	and	their	types	and	construction.	 

2. 
Describe	thesource	and	quantityof	water	available	for	fireprotection	for	the	area. 


Public Works 
1. Calculate	the	total	linearfeet	of	roadway	to	be	publicly	maintained	and	plowed.	 
pg.	29	 

SWAMPSCOTT SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
2. Calculate	the	linearfeet	of	street	drains,	culverts,	sanitary	sewers	and	waterlines	to	be	publicly	maintained.	 
HUMAN	CONSIDERATIONS 
Aesthetics and Visual Impact 
1. 
Discuss	the	change	in	the	present	character	of	the	areadue	tothe	project,	i.e.	land	use,	 density	ofdevelopment,	etc.	 

2. 
Discuss	the	measures	tobe	taken	tominimize	the	adverse	effects	of	the	project,	i.e.	
architecture,buffers,	etc. 



Parks, Forests and Recreational Areas 
1. 
Discuss	how	the	siting	and	construction	of	the	project	will	affect	existing	and	potential	park	and	recreation	areas,	open	spaces,	natural	areas	and	scenic	values.	 

2. 
Discuss	how	the	project	will	affect	recreational	opportunities	in	the	area	due	to	removal	of	parks,	forests,	or	openareas	from	public	use.	 


Public Health 
1. Discuss	the	project’s	effects	on	resident’s	public	health	due	tochanges	in	water	quality,	air	quality,	noise	levels,	etc.	 
pg.	30	 






