Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
General Penalty
[Adopted as Art. XIII of the 1983 Code]
§ 1-1. Penalty enumerated.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Code, unless otherwise herein
specifically provided, shall be punished with a fine of not more than $20.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions and authorities — See
Ch. 6.
Committees — See Ch. 9.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 27.
§ 3-1. Information to be given Town Clerk.
All officers, boards and committees shall notify the Town Clerk of their
organizations, of their office hours and of the time and place of their
meetings.
§ 3-2. Town contracts over certain amounts.
No contract, involving an obligation of the Town, exceeding the sum of $300
shall be binding upon the Town unless it is in writing and is signed by at
least a majority of the board or committee duly authorized or having control
of the appropriation against which such obligation is incurred; and such
board or committee shall make a record of every such contract in a book
which shall be the property of the Town.
§ 3-3. Contract signing time limits.
No board or officer shall make any contract on behalf of the Town, the
execution of which shall necessarily extend beyond one-year from the date
thereof, unless specific authority so to do has been given by vote of the
Town.
§ 3-4. Orders, contracts and votes to be kept on file.
Every officer, board or committee of the Town charged with the
expenditure of money shall furnish the Town Accountant with a copy
of all orders for the purchase of equipment, supplies or materials and
all requisitions for personal services, except for services, payment for
which is to be made on the regular payroll of the department, board
or committee contracting for the same at the time such purchases or
requisitions are made.
A.
Every officer, board or committee making or entering into any written
contract shall file such contract with the Town Accountant before any
payment is made thereon.
B.
Every board or committee shall at once furnish the Town Accountant
with a copy of any vote adopted by it which involves the expenditure of
money.
C.
§ 1-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 3-5
1:4
§ 3-5. Statements to be kept on file.
Every officer or board of the Town, at the time of rendering or transmitting
any bill or demand for any money due or payable to the Town, shall, at the
same time, file a statement thereof with the Town Accountant; provided,
however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to bills or
demands for taxes or other municipal assessments.
§ 3-6. Sale of property. [Amended 4-13-2010 ATM by Art. 19]
Any officer or board in charge of a department may, with the approval of
the Board of Selectmen, sell any personal property or material lawfully in
custody of and belonging to such department and no longer needed and
which does not exceed $2,000 in value. No property of the Town of value in
excess of $1,000 shall be sold except at public auction, after not less than
seven days' notice in one or more newspapers published in the Counties of
Worcester and Middlesex.
§ 3-7. Submittal of financial reports.
Every officer in charge of a department shall annually, on or before the 15th
day of January, transmit to the Selectmen, in writing, a report, containing
a statement of the acts and doings of his department for the past financial
year, to be printed in the Annual Report as the Selectmen may deem
expedient.
§ 3-8. Compensation and outside contracts.
No Town, officer, department or committee member shall receive any
compensation or commission for work done by him in his official capacity
for the Town, except his official salary and fees allowed by law, or enter
into any contract with any department of the Town without the permission
of the Selectmen, expressed by a vote which shall appear on their records,
together with the reason therefor.
§ 3-9. Donations and acquisitions. [Amended 4-12-2004 ATM by Art.
3]
All Town departments, except those under the supervision of the various
elected school committees, prior to the acquisition by grant, gift, lease
or other means of capital equipment, real property or capital assets by
any Town department, employee, board or official except as specifically
budgeted and approved by Town Meeting, the parties making such
acquisition shall:
Provide the Board of Selectmen with a written description of the
equipment, real property or capital asset to be acquired. The Board of
Selectmen shall approve the acquisition by majority vote; and
A.
Also provide the Board of Selectmen with a written estimate of annual
maintenance costs; annual operating costs, and a description and cost
B.
§ 3-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-9
1:5
§ 3-10. (Reserved)
§ 3-11. Superintendent of Public Works employment contract.
[Added 4-15-2004 ATM by Art. 55]
Chapter 6
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 3. Committees — See Ch. 9.
of ancillary support systems and equipment that are required for the
effective utilization of the equipment, real property or asset. These
estimates shall be for a period equal to the life of the equipment, real
property or capital asset or five years, whichever is less. The Board of
Selectmen shall approve these estimates by majority vote.
Shall the Board of Selectmen fail to approve either option as noted
above, the equipment, capital asset or real property shall not be
acquired.
C.
The Town, acting by and through its Selectmen, may provide an
employment contract, for a period of up to three years, to provide
for the salary, fringe benefits and other conditions of employment,
including, but not limited to, severance pay, relocation expenses,
reimbursement of expenses incurred in the performance of duties or
office, liability and disability insurance, and leave, for the
Superintendent of Public Works.
A.
Such an employment contract shall prevail over and preempt any
provision of any local personnel bylaw, Code section, rule or regulation
covering the subject matter of the employment contract.
B.
If the Town Meeting votes to appropriate the funds necessary for the
first year of any contract described herein, the Town shall be bound to
fund the remaining term of the contract.
C.
Nothing contained in this section shall affect the appointment or
removal powers of the Board of Selectmen over the above-referenced
department head, nor shall it grant tenure to such department head.
D.
The Board of Selectmen may promulgate rules and regulations to carry
out this bylaw.
E.
§ 3-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 3-11
1:6
ARTICLE I
Recreation Commission
[Adopted 6-11-1951 STM by Art. 3; amended in its entirety
4-14-1981 ATM by Art. 31]
§ 6-1. Membership; appointment.
A Recreation Commission composed of five members shall be appointed by
the Board of Selectmen, under the provisions of MGL c. 45, § 14.
§ 6-2. Powers and duties.
Said Commission shall have and exercise the powers and duties conferred
by Chapter 45 of the General Laws of Massachusetts.
§ 6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-2
1:7

ARTICLE II
Consumer Advisory Commission
[Adopted as Art. XV of the 1983 Code]
§ 6-3. Establishment; membership; purpose.
There is hereby established a Consumer Advisory Commission consisting
of five members to be appointed by the Selectmen for the purpose of
conducting investigations and research into matters affecting consumer
interests and education.
§ 6-4. Periodic reports to be made.
The Commission shall make periodic (at least quarterly) reports of the
results of all investigations and research to the Board of Selectmen, who
shall see that said reports are circulated for information to the general
public.
§ 6-5. Annual report.
An annual report of its activities shall be made to the Town of Southborough
in the Annual Report thereof. A copy of said report shall be sent to the
Consumers Council of the commonwealth.
§ 6-6. Correlation with other programs.
The Commission shall correlate its activities with these opinions, matters
and programs which are being undertaken by state and federal consumer
agencies.
§ 6-7. Appointments; terms.
The appointments to this Commission shall be for three years, and the initial
appointments shall be one member for one-year, two members for two years
and two members for three years.
§ 6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-7
1:9

ARTICLE III
Open Space Preservation Commission
[Adopted 4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 44]
§ 6-8. Appointment; membership; terms.
The Selectmen shall appoint a citizen's committee to be called the "Open
Space Preservation Commission," to be comprised of five members, serving
staggered terms of five years each.
§ 6-9. Conflict of interest.
Said members shall not concurrently serve as members of the Board of
Selectmen. Advisory Committee, Recreation Commission, Conservation
Commission, Planning Board or Board of Appeals.
§ 6-10. Purpose.
Said Commission shall serve as facilitators for protecting and preserving
open space in the Town.
§ 6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-10
1:11

ARTICLE IV
Southborough Housing Opportunity Partnership Committee
[Adopted 4-15-2004 ATM by Art. 44; amended in its entirety
4-14-2009 ATM by Art. 26]
§ 6-11. Establishment.
The Selectmen shall appoint a committee to be called the "Southborough
Housing Opportunity Partnership Committee," to be comprised of four
members, serving staggered terms of three years each. Said Committee
shall also include one member each from the following: Planning Board,
Board of Selectmen, and Southborough Housing Authority for a total
committee membership of seven.
§ 6-12. Purpose.
Said Committee's purpose shall be to study, promote, and act as facilitators
to create affordable housing in the Town of Southborough, and any other
action related thereto.
§ 6-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-12
1:13
Chapter 9
COMMITTEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administration — See Ch. 3. Boards, commissions and authorities — See
Ch. 6.
§ 6-12 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 6-12
1:14
ARTICLE I
Solid Waste Disposal Committee
[Adopted 3-11-1968 ATM by Art. 29; amended 3-10-1971 ATM by
Art. 45]
§ 9-1. Committee created; membership; purpose.
A Solid Waste Disposal Committee is hereby created, which Committee shall
consist of three members appointed by the Moderator, to make a continuing
study of the refuse problems in and for the Town of Southborough.
§ 9-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-1
1:15

ARTICLE II
(Reserved)1
§ 9-2. through § 9-7. (Reserved)
1. Editor's Note: Former Art. II, Capital Budget Planning Committee, adopted as Art. VIIIB of
the 1983 Code, as amended, was repealed 4-8-2013 ATM by Art. 21.
§ 9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-2
1:17

ARTICLE III
Advisory Committee
[Adopted as Art. VIII of the 1983 Code]
§ 9-8. Establishment; membership; residence requirements.
[Amended 4-12-1999 STM by Art. 1; 10-21-2002 STM by Art. 7;
4-15-2008 ATM by Art. 34]
There shall be an Advisory Committee, which shall consist of nine voters of
the Town. No member shall be appointed who is a Town officer, employee
or member of another Town committee, appointed or elected; provided,
however, that an Advisory Committee member may belong to one ad hoc
committee that is appointed by an elected board or official or one other
committee appointed by the Moderator under the following restrictions:
§ 9-9. Filling of vacancies.
After March 1948, the Moderator shall, within 60 days after the date of
his election or within 60 days after any vacancy occurs in the Advisory
Committee, fill, for the unexpired balance of the term of any member of
said Committee, any vacancy which may occur in the membership of said
Committee and shall annually thereafter, as the terms of members of the
present Advisory Committee expire, appoint three members for terms of
three years each.
§ 9-10. Initial appointments.
Initial appointments shall be one member for one-year, one member for two
years and one member for three years.
§ 9-11. Removal from office. [Amended 4-8-1985 ATM by Art. 47;
10-21-2002 STM by Art. 7]
Any member of said Committee who shall be absent from the Town for
four consecutive months or who shall remove from the Town shall, upon
his/her qualifying for the office to which he was elected or upon absence
or removal, cease to be a member of said Committee. The Moderator may
rescind an appointment to the Committee if notified by the Chair of the
Advisory Committee that the appointee has failed to attend four consecutive
meetings and may fill any vacancy for the unexpired term.
The Advisory member’s participation is approved by majority vote of
the Advisory Committee excluding the member desiring to participate
in the above committees.
A.
The Advisory member may not vote or be counted for purposes of
a quorum during Advisory meetings when matters subject to the
jurisdiction of the above other committees are presented to the
Advisory Committee.
B.
§ 9-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-12
1:19
§ 9-12. Appointment of Chairman and Secretary.
Said Committee shall choose from its membership a Chairman and a
Secretary.
§ 9-13. Duties and authority of Committee.
§ 9-14. Annual estimates to be submitted to Committee.
The various Town officers, boards and committees charged with the
expenditure of the Town's money shall annually prepare detailed estimates
of the amounts necessary to carry on the Town's business entrusted to
them for the ensuing year, with explanatory statements as to any changes
from the amount appropriated for the same purpose in the preceding year.
They shall also prepare estimates of any income which may be received by
the Town during the ensuing year in connection with the Town's business
or property in their care. The Selectmen shall include in their estimates
the salaries of all elected Town officers and all other items not otherwise
provided for, and the salaries of all other persons shall be included in
the estimates of the officers, boards or committees appointing them. The
Treasurer shall include in his estimates the amounts required for the
payment of interest on the obligations of the Town and the amount of
maturing indebtedness during the succeeding year. Said estimates and
explanations shall be filed with the Secretary of the Advisory Committee on
It shall be the duty of the Committee to consider all matters included
within the articles of any warrant for a Town Meeting hereafter issued,
and the Committee shall, after due consideration of the subject matter
in said articles, report thereon, in print or otherwise, such information
and recommendations as it shall deem best.
A.
The Committee shall insert in the Annual Town Report a description
of all transfers made from the reserve fund during the preceding year.
Such report shall contain the names of all Town officers, boards,
departments and committees requesting such transfer, the original
amount appropriated to the account, article or budget to which such
transfer was made, the amount of each such transfer and the reason
such transfer was requested.
B.
All recommendations of the Committee made to the Town shall be
recommendations of a majority of the entire Committee, but this shall
not be construed to prevent recommendations by a minority.
C.
The Advisory Committee shall have authority at any time to investigate
the books, accounts and management of any department of the Town,
and the books and accounts of all departments and officers of the
Town shall be open to inspection of the Committee and of any person
employed by it.
D.
It may appoint from its own membership subcommittees and delegate
to them such of its powers as it deems expedient.
E.
§ 9-12 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 9-14
1:20
or before the 30th day of January, and said Secretary shall forthwith compile
said estimates in tabulated form and add thereto two columns, one giving
the amounts appropriated and the other giving the amounts expended in
the current year, and shall furnish a copy to each member of the Advisory
Committee.
§ 9-15. Committee action on estimates.
Said Committee shall at once consider the estimates and add another
column to said compilation showing the amounts which, in its opinion,
should be appropriated for the ensuing year and may add thereto such
explanations, suggestions and recommendations in relation to the proposed
appropriations as they deem expedient and report the same to the
Selectmen. Said compilation shall be printed and distributed with the Town
Report prior to the Annual Town Meeting.2
2. Editor's Note: Former Sec. 4 of Art. VIII of the 1983 Code, which originally followed this
section, was repealed 4-9-1984 ATM by Art. 19.
§ 9-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-15
1:21

ARTICLE IV
Community Preservation Committee
[Adopted 4-15-2004 ATM by Art. 56]
§ 9-16. Establishment; terms.
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee
consisting of nine voting members pursuant to Massachusetts General
Laws, Chapter 44B. The Committee shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen and shall consist of the following members:
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by the
Commission for an initial term of three years and thereafter for a
term of three years.
(1)
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by the
Authority for an initial term of one-year and thereafter for a term
of three years.
(2)
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the
Commission for an initial term of two years and thereafter for a
term of three years.
(3)
One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board for
an initial term of two years and thereafter for a term of three years.
(4)
One member of the Recreation Commission as designated by the
Commission for an initial term of one-year and thereafter for a term
of three years.
(5)
One member of the Open Space Preservation Commission as
designated by the Commission for an initial term of three years and
thereafter for a term of three years.
(6)
One member of the Southborough Housing Opportunity
Partnership Committee (SHOPC) as designated by the Commission
for a term of three years.
(7)
Two members at large to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen,
for an initial term of one-year and thereafter for a term of three
years.
(8)
A.
B. After the initial appointments, terms will begin on July 1 of each year.
Members at large may not also be members of the Historical
Commission, Housing Authority, Conservation Commission, Planning
Board, Open Space Preservation Commission, Southborough Housing
Opportunity Partnership Committee, Recreation Commission or the
Board of Selectmen.
C.
Should any commission, authority or board designating a member for
the Community Preservation Committee cease to exist for whatever
reason, the Board of Selectmen will determine the appropriate
D.
§ 9-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-16
1:23
§ 9-17. Duties.
§ 9-18. Requirements for quorum and cost estimates.
The Community Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct business
without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the
Community Preservation Committee shall constitute a quorum. The
Community Preservation Committee shall approve its actions by majority
vote. Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include their anticipated
costs.
alternative designating commission, authority or board, subject to any
applicable state statute.
The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs,
possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community
preservation. The committee shall consult with existing Town boards,
including the Historical Commission, Housing Authority, Conservation
Commission, Planning Board, Recreation Commission, Open Space
Preservation Commission and the Board of Selectmen, in conducting
such studies. As part of its study the Committee shall hold one or more
public informational hearings on the needs, possibilities and resources
of the Town regarding community preservation possibilities and
resources, notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for
each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town.
A.
The Community Preservation Committee shall make recommendations
to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation and preservation
of open space; for the acquisition, rehabilitation, restoration and
preservations of historic resources; for the acquisition, creation and
preservation of land for recreational use; for the creation, preservation
support of community housing; and for the rehabilitation or restoration
of such open space, land for recreational use and community housing
that is acquired or created as provided in this section. With respect
to community housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall
recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings, or
construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
B.
The Community Preservation Committee may include in its
recommendations to the Town Meeting a recommendation to set aside
for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with
community preservation, but for which sufficient funds are not then
available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that
specific purpose, or to set aside for later spending funds for general
purposes that are consistent with community preservation.
C.
§ 9-16 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 9-19
1:24
§ 9-19. Amendments.
This Bylaw may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the
Town Meeting, provided that the amendments would not be in conflict with
Chapter 44B of the Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 9-20. Severability.
In case any section, paragraph or part of this bylaw be for any reason
declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction,
it is intended that every other section, paragraph or part shall continue in
full force and effect.
§ 9-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-20
1:25

ARTICLE V
Commissioners of Trust Funds3
[Adopted 4-10-2006 ATM by Art. 53]
§ 9-21. Appointment; membership; terms.
At the time of creating said Board there shall be elected one member for one
year, one member for two years, and one member for three years; and there
shall be elected annually thereafter one member for three years. Vacancies
shall be filled by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 9-22. Powers and duties.
Said Commissioners shall have and exercise the powers and duties
conferred by Chapter 41, Section 45, of the General Laws of Massachusetts.
3. Editor's Note: This article was adopted as Art. IV, but was redesignated as Art. V
4-10-2007 ATM by Art. 35.
§ 9-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-22
1:27

ARTICLE VI
Boards, Committees and Commissions: Residency Requirement;
Qualification; Meeting Minutes; Social Media
[Adopted 4-14-2015 ATM by Art. 23]
§ 9-23. Residency requirement for voting members of appointed
governmental bodies.
No person shall serve as a voting member of any appointed board,
committee, or commission or other appointed governmental body of the
Town of Southborough who is not a resident thereof. Nonvoting members, if
any, shall not be considered in determining the presence of a quorum.
§ 9-24. Qualification of elected and appointed officials.
All elected and appointed officials shall be qualified by the Town Clerk
within 15 days of their election except where a different period is specified
in the General Laws. If an appointed official is not qualified in this period,
his/her appointment shall terminate, and the appointing authority shall be
so notified by the Town Clerk.
§ 9-25. Meeting minutes. [Added 4-12-2016 ATM by Art. 35]
Each board, committee, or commission shall provide minutes for each
of its meetings to the Town Clerk within 45 days of the meeting.
The minutes shall indicate whether they have or have not been
approved by the board, committee or commission when submitted
to the Town Clerk.
(1)
Minutes shall be submitted in a manner consistent with the Open
Meeting Law (MGL c. 30A, § 22), including a record of the date,
time and place of the meeting, the members present or absent, a
summary of the discussions on each subject. Minutes should also
include copies of all documents and other exhibits used at the
meeting, as reasonably possible. If copies of documents or other
exhibits used at the meeting cannot be provided, the specific filing
location of the documents or exhibit should be identified, and the
decisions made and the actions taken at the meeting, including the
record of all votes.
(2)
If after 45 days from the date of a posted public meeting of a board,
committee, or commission, the Town Clerk has not received a copy
of the minutes, then the Town Clerk shall notify the chairperson
of the board, committee, or commission that the minutes have not
been received and that the board, committee or commission is not
in compliance with the provisions of this bylaw.
(3)
A.
The Town Clerk shall log the receipt of all minutes and the Town
Clerk will post minutes on the Town website. Minutes shall be kept
by the Town Clerk for a period as required by applicable state law.
B.
§ 9-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-25
1:29
§ 9-26. Social media retention policy. [Added 4-12-2016 ATM by Art.
35]
Any minutes received that have not been approved at the time of their
receipt shall be labeled "Draft."
The Town Clerk will maintain archive copies of each website and social
media site that is maintained by or on behalf of any Town department,
board, committee, or elected or appointed official. These archives will
be maintained and be made available to the public to comply with the
Massachusetts Public Records Law.4
A.
The committee chairperson or department head who controls or
maintains any website or social media site that is maintained by or
on behalf of any Town department, board, committee, or elected or
appointed official must notify the Town Clerk of the creation of the
website or social media site before that site is made available to the
public.
B.
4. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 66, Public Records.
§ 9-25 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 9-26
1:30
ARTICLE VII
Economic Development Committee
[Adopted 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 25]
§ 9-27. Establishment; purpose.
The mission of the Southborough Economic Development Committee (EDC)
is to stabilize residential taxes through the growth of the Town's commercial
and industrial tax base while preserving the character and charm of
Southborough. The EDC is established to expand and strengthen the local
economy, promote job creation, and enhance the Town's quality of life
through prosperous, balanced and sustainable economic development. The
role of the EDC is to investigate current economic conditions, assist the
Town with the creation and execution of appropriate economic development
initiatives and marketing opportunities, coordinate activities to enhance
or expand economic development, and engage in related activities as
necessary to further EDC's mission and purpose.
§ 9-28. Membership of the Committee.
The EDC is a volunteer committee consisting of members of the community
who want to assist the Town in maintaining and enhancing a prosperous
and sustainable economy. The EDC shall be comprised of no more than
nine such persons who shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen
for staggered terms of three years, so that the term of office of at least
one member expires each year. Efforts shall be made to include a broad
representation of the community at large and all appointments shall be
made on the basis of the individual's ability to assist in the purpose of the
EDC and their willingness to serve.
§ 9-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-28
1:31

ARTICLE VIII
Municipal Technology Committee
[Adopted 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 23]
§ 9-29. Purpose.
Because a wide range of technologies play an increasing role in the lives
of the Town's citizens and the work of its employees, the Town needs a
coordinated approach to their adoption and use. As more fully described
in the remainder of this Article VIII, this article establishes a committee
that will be responsible for creating a rolling five-year Strategic Plan for
the Town's technologies across all government entities, and will ensure
consistent interpretation and execution of that plan. The Committee will
work in collaboration with the various government entities that use/propose
technologies. It will report on the plan to the Town Meeting and advise Town
Meeting on proposed expenditures for technology.
§ 9-29.1. Establishment; membership; qualifications.
§ 9-29.2. Appointments; terms; vacancies; removal.
There shall be a Municipal Technology Committee ("MTC"), which shall
consist of five voting members and the nonvoting ex-officio members
identified below.
A.
Each voting member shall be a resident of the Town and shall not be
a Town officer or employee. Each voting member shall have significant
relevant professional experience and knowledge of one or more of the
technologies used, or proposed to be used, by the Town.
B.
The voting members shall be appointed as follows: two by the Board of
Selectmen, two by the School Committee, and one by the Library Board
of Trustees.
C.
Voting members shall be appointed for three-year terms. The initial
appointments shall be two members for three years, two members for
two years, and one member for one year, so as to establish overlapping
terms. For subsequent appointments, the appointing authority shall
request that the MTC review the qualifications of prospective
appointees, but the final determination of who is selected shall rest with
the appointing authority.
A.
Any voting member who shall remove from the Town, resign, or die
shall cease to be a member. When notified that any voting member has
failed to faithfully discharge his duties, or has failed without good cause
to attend at least three-quarters of the full MTC meetings held in any
six-month interval, the respective appointing authority shall promptly
give notice, hold a hearing and determine whether such member shall
be removed from the MTC. In any case of a vacancy in the voting
membership, the respective appointing authority shall, within 30 days,
appoint a replacement for the balance of the unexpired term.
B.
§ 9-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-29.2
1:33
§ 9-29.3. Organization; meetings.
§ 9-29.4. Staffing.
Regular ex-officio (nonvoting) members may be appointed as follows:
one each by the Board of Selectmen, the School Committee, the Library
Board of Trustees and the Board of Health ("boards"). Regular ex-officio
members serve at the pleasure of their appointing authorities, and may
be nonresident Town officers or employees. They shall be the persons
most responsible for technology used by their respective board.
C.
Additional ad-hoc ex-officio (nonvoting) members may be added by the
boards, but only with the consent or by the request of a majority vote of
the MTC. Such ad-hoc members serve at the pleasure of the appointing
authority and of the MTC on a temporary basis for so long as needed
by the business of the MTC. They may be nonresident Town officers or
employees.
D.
The members shall select, from among themselves, a Chairman and a
Secretary. The MTC shall promulgate such rules of procedure as may be
reasonable and useful for its efficient operation, and may from time to
time amend these rules by a majority vote of the members. These rules
shall specify that nonvoting members have the right to full participation
in all deliberations, except as may be restricted by applicable law. No
amendment to the rules shall be considered without prior notice to all
members.
A.
The MTC shall ordinarily and preferentially meet in the Town, but may
conduct meetings, investigations or inspections within the scope of its
duties and authority anywhere, subject to standard Town travel budgets
and policies.
B.
The MTC may appoint from its own membership subcommittees and
delegate to them such of its powers as it deems expedient.
C.
All reports and recommendations of the MTC made to the Town shall
be voted by a majority of the voting members of the MTC, but this
shall not be construed to prevent recommendations by a minority nor
to discourage full participation by the nonvoting members.
D.
Subject to available funding, the MTC shall have the authority to
engage consultants (paid or volunteer) ("consultants") when its
membership does not include the expertise necessary to evaluate
specific projects. The MTC may direct consultants to act to investigate
and/or to report to the MTC on technology and/or its use, proposed
use, or discontinuance in the Town. When the MTC determines that a
consultant reasonably requires the assistance of a technology manager
to complete a task assigned to him by the MTC, the MTC shall deliver
a request for assistance to either the technology manager or to the
technology manager's supervisor. All reasonable requests for assistance
shall be approved by the technology manager's supervisor. The MTC
A.
§ 9-29.2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 9-29.4
1:34
§ 9-29.5. Funding.
The MTC shall have a budget for consultants and other expenses. It shall
submit its projected expenses to the Town's regular budget process. Any
expenditures from its budget shall require a majority vote of the MTC, and
be subject to the Town's policies for such expenditures. Unless otherwise
agreed or budgeted, expenses attributable to ex-officio members shall be
paid by their respective appointing authorities. Expenses attributable to
voting members shall be paid from the MTC budget.
§ 9-30. Functions and definitions.
§ 9-31. Mission and authority.
may accept a reasonable alternative approach suggested by the
technology manager or the technology manager's supervisor. The MTC
may not delegate its powers to consultants.
The MTC shall have no permanent staff, but the Town Administrator
shall provide reasonable administrative support.
B.
The Town Administrator and ex-officio members shall provide
reasonable access to other employees as may be requested by the MTC.
Such access shall be subject to the approval of the affected employees'
direct supervisor(s).
C.
The duty of the MTC shall be to recommend and document an overall
technology strategy for the Town and to proactively lead the Town's
development and implementation of this strategy.
A.
Further, the MTC shall proactively advise the boards, other Town
entities, the Town Administrator, and their designated employees
("technology managers") responsible for purchasing and utilizing
technologies used to provide Town services.
B.
In this Article VIII, "technologies" include, but are not limited to:
information technology/data processing equipment and software,
computer networks, voice/FAX systems, intelligent building control
systems, SCADA, mobile computing technologies (e.g., cellular
telephones, tablets and laptops), radio communications, audio-visual
technologies, emergency communications and future technologies as
they arise.
C.
In this Article VIII, the phrase "Town entities" includes any Town board,
committee, or agency of Town government, or subsidiary organization
of any of these, whether statutory, elected or appointed, that uses or
proposes to use technologies; and/or which expends or proposes to
expend funds for technologies and/or related services.
D.
The MTC shall, as more fully described in the entirety of this Article
VIII, address matters of technology in the Town, including but not
limited to: information delivery; ensuring access to communications
A.
§ 9-29.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-31
1:35
§ 9-31.1. Plans and reviews.
§ 9-31.2. Strategic Plan.
technology; increasing the efficiency of transactions involving the
Town; and ensuring the effective deployment of infrastructure for the
Town's operations and the Town's citizens.
The MTC shall work to ensure that all Town entities utilize technology
in a common, effective and cost-effective manner for the benefit of the
Town, its operations and its residents.
B.
Technology managers shall notify the MTC when any plan for adopting,
discontinuing, expanding or reducing technologies is being formulated
and shall provide the MTC with the opportunity to participate in the
development of such plans and to obtain and budget for any necessary
consultants. All such plans shall be timely submitted to the MTC for
final review and comment prior to committing to their implementation.
These reviews shall consider and identify: consistency with the
Strategic Plan, opportunities for efficiencies and improved service, and
impact on other Town entities and the Town's citizens. The MTC may
consider and identify other relevant issues and related matters during
these reviews. These reviews shall be documented and considered by
the technology managers and their respective boards or Town entities,
which shall provide the MTC with their final plans and any subsequent
changes thereto.
A.
Notwithstanding the preceding subsection, the MTC's rules of
procedure may specify an exception process for emergencies
significantly affecting service delivery and/or criteria that set a
threshold for reviewing such plans. The MTC shall use reasonable
judgment in establishing such process and/or criteria so as to balance
operational efficiency with execution of the Strategic Plan.
B.
The MTC shall have the authority to inspect and review, in conjunction
with the technology managers, any of the Town's technology-based
processes, systems and operations to identify progress and issues with
implementing the Strategic Plan. The MTC shall provide reasonable
notice prior to such inspections and reviews.
C.
The goal of all MTC inspections and reviews shall be to provide
significant insight and advice that will improve consistency with and
implementation of the Strategic Plan and which may provide for the
successful implementation of projects.
D.
The MTC shall provide strategic planning and advice to the technology
managers, the boards, other Town entities and the Town Administrator.
In conjunction with the technology managers, the MTC shall maintain
a rolling five-year Strategic Plan ("Strategic Plan") for the Town's
technologies, which shall be accessible to the public. The MTC may
report on the Strategic Plan to Town Meeting.
A.
§ 9-31 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 9-31.2
1:36
§ 9-31.3. Limitations; other agencies.
The Strategic Plan shall consider, but is not limited to:
Capital requests for technologies, taking into consideration the
goals of maximizing efficiency and cost effectiveness, removing
unnecessary redundancy, and ensuring, to the extent reasonably
possible, the compatibility of each request with other existing or
proposed systems;
(1)
The specifications to be considered for information and
communications systems and other technologies when
constructing or renovating Town facilities;
(2)
Matters relating to information technology policy, specifically with
reference to issues of security, privacy, risk, future technology,
legal or regulatory requirements and the provision of government
services to the public through information technology; and
(3)
How to stimulate and support the development of appropriate
technology initiatives and activities that may increase
communication and information exchange within Town entities,
between Town entities and its residents, and among Town
residents.
(4)
B.
In developing and maintaining the Strategic Plan, the MTC shall, to
the maximum extent feasible, integrate its processes with those of any
Town entities that have or develop a strategic planning process, for
technology or otherwise. As may be agreed between such Town entities
and the MTC, the MTC may participate in the Town entities' planning
processes in order to maximize efficiency of all planning processes and
to realize consistency with the Strategic Plan.
C.
The MTC does not have the authority to direct or require that a
technology manager, board or other Town entity make (or not make) a
specific technology-related decision.
A.
The MTC shall not interfere with the School Committee's development
or choice of instructional methods and curriculum nor with its selection
of instructional materials, but the MTC shall have the same duties with
respect to infrastructure planning and noninstructional systems as it
does for the other boards and Town entities. The MTC may report
to the School Committee on technology issues and trends that may
affect education, but such reports shall be informative, and shall not be
binding on the School Committee.
B.
The MTC may meet with other governmental agencies to discuss
opportunities for interoperation, efficiencies or other synergies.
However, the MTC does not have the authority to commit the Town to
pursue such opportunities, which authority rests with the boards, other
Town entities, and/or their designees.
C.
§ 9-31.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-32
1:37
§ 9-32. Reporting.
§ 9-33. Conflict of law; interpretation.
From time to time, as may be necessary, the MTC shall report to the
boards on major technology issues affecting the Town and its citizens,
including its progress toward completing the Strategic Plan.
A.
From time to time, as may be necessary, the MTC shall report to
the Town Meeting on its activities, the Town's technology needs, and
progress toward completing the Strategic Plan.
B.
The MTC shall review and consider all matters included within the
articles of any warrant for a Town Meeting hereafter issued that involve
a material expenditure of funds for technology and/or involve
significant changes in technology that affect Town services. The MTC
shall, after due consideration of the subject matter in said articles,
report thereon, in print or otherwise, such information and
recommendations as it shall deem best regarding such matters. The
Moderator shall solicit the recommendation of the MTC for each such
article prior to general discussion of and vote on the article at Town
Meeting. The MTC shall use reasonable judgment in establishing the
threshold for issuing these recommendations.
C.
In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction determines that any
clause or provision of this Article VIII is unenforceable, this Article VIII
shall be deemed modified to the minimum extent necessary to correct
such defect, while maximally maintaining the intent of this Article VIII.
A.
The section headings and numbering of this Article VIII are for
convenience and shall not be construed to modify the interpretation of
the article.
B.
In this Article VIII, the masculine forms (including "his," "he," and
"him") are used inclusively to refer to any person regardless of gender
or sexual orientation.
C.
In this Article VIII, terms are defined in quotation marks within
parenthesis, and their uses are indicated by capitalization. The
definition of each such term applies to its use in the entirety of this
Article VIII, whether or not the definition appears before such use.
D.
In this Article VIII: The word "will" is to be interpreted as descriptive
of an outcome or process and not as an imperative; the word "shall" is
to be interpreted in the imperative sense of "must" or "is required to";
while the word "may" is to be interpreted in the permissive sense of
"optionally," or "has discretion whether or not to."
E.
§ 9-32 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 9-33
1:38
Chapter 16
FINANCE
§ 9-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-33
1:39

ARTICLE I
Road Machinery Account
[Adopted 10-6-1931 STM by Art. 2]
§ 16-1. Account established; purpose.
The Town shall set up a Road Machinery Account, to which shall be credited
all receipts for rentals and use of such machinery or equipment, to be
expended for the maintenance of present equipment and the purchase of
new equipment when so voted by the Town at any Annual or Special Town
Meeting.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-1
1:41

ARTICLE II
Community Development Funds
[Adopted 5-15-1975 ATM by Art. 25]
§ 16-2. Authorization to file applications.
Town departments acting through duly elected chief executive officers are
hereby authorized to file applications for Community Development Act
funds to be used for certain Town projects and further to authorize that
said funds be appropriated and expended for said projects as are hereby
authorized when said money is received by the Town.
§ 16-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-2
1:43

ARTICLE III
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted as Art. III of the 1983 Code]
§ 16-3. Disposition of unexpended appropriations.
At the end of each fiscal year, all unexpired appropriations or unexpended
balances of appropriations shall be transferred to the account of excess and
deficiency.
§ 16-4. (Reserved)5
5. Editor's Note: Former § 16-4, Annual debtors list, adopted as part of Art. III of the 1983
Code, was repealed 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 37.
§ 16-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-4
1:45

ARTICLE IV
Department Revolving Funds
[Adopted 4-9-2018 ATM by Art. 19]
§ 16-5. Purpose.
This by-law establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by town,
departments, boards, committees, agencies and officers in connection with
the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other
receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or
activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by
General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E1/2.
§ 16-6. Expenditure limitations.
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur
liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and
authorized by this by-law without appropriation subject to the following
limitations:
§ 16-7. Interest.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
by-law shall be credited to the general fund.
§ 16-8. Procedures and reports.
Except as provided in General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E1/2 and this bylaw,
the laws, charter provisions, by-laws, rules, regulations, policies or
procedures that govern the receipt and custody of town monies and the
expenditure and payment of town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving
fund established and authorized by this by-law. The Town Accountant shall
include a statement on the collections credited to the fund, the
encumbrances and expenditures charged to each fund and the balance
available for expenditure in the regular report the Town Accountant
provides the department, board, committee, agency or officer on
appropriations made for its use.
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid
from the fund shall also be paid from the fund;
A.
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the
fund;
B.
The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by Annual Town Meeting on or before July 1 of that fiscal
year, or any increased amount of that authorization that is later
approved during that fiscal year by the Select board and Finance
Committee.
C.
§ 16-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-9
1:47
§ 16-9. Authorized revolving funds.6
The Table establishes:
Each revolving fund authorized for use by a town department, board,
committee, agency or officer;
A.
The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized
to spend from each fund;
B.
The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the
department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with
the program or activity for which the fund is established that shall be
credited to each fund by the Town Accountant;
C.
The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be
used;
D.
E. Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
F. Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund; and
G. The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this by-law.
6. Editor's Note: Said table is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 16-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 16-9
1:48
Chapter 19
FLOOD INSURANCE
§ 19-1. Compliance with National Flood Insurance Program.
The Town assures the Federal Emergency Management Agency that it will
enact as necessary, and maintain in force for those areas having flood
hazards, adequate land use and control measures with effective
enforcement provisions consistent with the criteria set forth in Section 60
of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations found in 44 CFR.
§ 19-2. Responsibility and authority of Selectmen.
The Town vests the Board of Selectmen with the responsibility, authority
and means to:
§ 19-3. Record of elevations to be kept.
The Town appoints the Board of Selectmen to maintain for public inspection
and to furnish upon request a record of elevations, in relation to mean sea
level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially
improved structures located in the special flood hazard areas. If the lowest
floor is below grade on one or more sides, the elevation of the floor
immediately above must also be recorded.
§ 19-4. Other action to be taken.
The Town agrees to take such other official action as may be reasonably
necessary to carry out the objectives of the program.
Chapter 27
Delineate or assist the Administrator, at his request, in delineating the
limits of the areas having special flood hazards on available local maps
of sufficient scale to identify the location of building sites.
A.
Provide such information as the Administrator may request concerning
present uses and occupancy of the floodplain.
B.
Cooperate with federal, state and local agencies and private firms
which undertake to study, survey, map and identify floodplain areas and
cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to management
of adjoining floodplain areas in order to prevent aggravation of existing
hazards.
C.
Submit on the anniversary date of the community's initial eligibility an
annual report to the Administrator on the progress made during the
past year within the community in the development and implementation
of floodplain management measures.
D.
§ 16-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 19-4
1:49
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
§ 19-4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 19-4
1:50
ARTICLE I
Tree Warden
[Adopted 10-23-1950 STM by Art. 9]
§ 27-1. Change of term.
The term of office of the Tree Warden is changed from one to three years,
to become effective at the Annual Town Meeting in March 1951.
§ 27-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-1
1:51

ARTICLE II
Miscellaneous Positions
[Adopted as Art. IV, Sec. 10, of the 1983 Code]
§ 27-2. Appointment of Fire Chief, Police Chief, Superintendent of
Streets and Town Administrator. [Amended 4-10-1995 ATM by Art.
7]
The Selectmen shall appoint a Fire Chief, a Police Chief, a Superintendent of
Streets and a Town Administrator to the Board of Selectmen, each of whom
shall serve in his office for a term of three years, unless removed from office
by the Selectmen for cause.
§ 27-3. When effective.
This provision shall be effective for the appointment to any of said offices on
April 1 of the year following final approval of this article.7
7. Editor's Note: This provision was finally approved in 1975.
§ 27-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-3
1:53

ARTICLE III
Town Counsel
[Adopted as Art. IV, Secs. 4 through 7, of the 1983 Code]
§ 27-4. Appointment; compensation; additional counsel.
The Board of Selectmen may, annually, upon its organization, appoint an
attorney at law as Town Counsel for the term of one-year. He shall receive,
as his salary, such compensation as is provided in Article VIIIA hereof,8
together with such additional sums as may be appropriated for such
services as may be performed in addition to those rendered as legal adviser
to the Town. It may, in any case, employ additional or special counsel.
§ 27-5. Duties and responsibilities.
Such Town Counsel shall act as the legal adviser of the Town. It shall be
his duty to examine or cause to be examined all titles to property in which
the Town may acquire an interest, to draft all deeds, obligations, contracts,
bonds, leases, conveyances, agreements and other legal instruments, of
whatever nature, which may be required by any bylaw, vote or action of the
Town or any board of officers to which the Town or its agents may be a party,
and which, by law, usage or agreement, the Town is to be at the expense of
drawing.
§ 27-6. Appropriations in warrants to be submitted for review.
All Articles in warrants for Town Meeting which contemplate the
appropriation of money or the negotiation of Town bonds or notes shall be
submitted to the Town Counsel for his examination and approval.
§ 27-7. Consent for opinions required.
No Town officer, board or committee shall request an opinion of the Town
Counsel, except in cases not admitting of delay, without first obtaining the
consent of the Board of Selectmen: nor shall any such officer, board or
commission employ any other counsel without like consent.
8. Editor's Note: "Article VIIIA" refers to the Salary Administration Plan, on file in the office
of the Town Clerk.
§ 27-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-7
1:55

ARTICLE IV
Treasurer and Collector of Taxes
[Adopted as Art. IV, Sec. 11, and Art. VIA of the 1983 Code]
§ 27-8. Appointment.
The Selectmen shall appoint a Town Treasurer and Collector of Taxes, who
shall serve in office for a term of three years, unless removed from office by
the Selectmen for cause.
§ 27-9. Advertising for applicants.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint the Town Treasurer and Collector
after publicly advertising for applicants and after complying with all the
requirements of state and federal statutes.
§ 27-10. Powers and duties of Collector.
The Town Collector, in addition to the powers granted and the duties
imposed by the provisions of MGL c. 41, § 38A, shall have the following
additional powers and duties:
All accounts due the Town on the effective date hereof and all accounts
coming due thereafter shall be committed forthwith to the Town
Collector by the several boards, officers, committees and employees
of the Town in whose department or under whose jurisdiction such
account arose. Said commitments shall be made on forms to be
furnished by the Town Accountant to all such boards, officers,
committees and employees and shall contain all information in relation
to each such account due.
A.
Upon receipt of any such due account, the Town Collector shall collect
the same by any means authorized by the provisions of the General
Laws.
B.
If, in the opinion of the Town Collector, suit should be brought to
establish or collect any such account, the collection of which by him
is not specifically authorized by the provisions of the General Laws, he
shall notify the Selectmen in writing.
C.
The Town Collector shall semiannually, on the 15th days of January
and June, and at such other times as the Selectmen require or direct,
report to the Selectmen upon all uncollected accounts in his hands. In
addition, his January report shall contain a description of the action
taken on all such accounts during the preceding year and shall be
entered in the Annual Town Report as a part of the report of the Town
Collector.
D.
The Town Collector shall be required to pay over to the Town Treasurer
at the end of each week all fees and charges collected during the week,
the same to then become Town funds.
E.
§ 27-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-10
1:57

ARTICLE V
Town Clerk
[Adopted as Art. V of the 1983 Code]
§ 27-11. Recording of deeds and land conveyance.
The Town Clerk shall cause all deeds or other instruments conveying land or
any interest in land to the Town to be immediately recorded in the Registry
of Deeds, and he shall have custody of all recorded instruments after the
same have been returned by said Registry.
§ 27-12. Notice of elected officials.
The Town Clerk shall, as soon as may be after every election, give written
notice to every person elected to a Town office or board of his election;
he shall also notify all appointive officers and members of committees of
their appointment by the Selectmen or the Moderator, as the case may be.
In giving notice to members of committees, he shall furnish each member
thereof with a copy of the vote prescribing the duties to be performed.
He shall furnish all officers and boards with copies of all votes of Town
Meetings affecting them or their duties.
§ 27-13. Book of reports to be kept.
Whenever any report of any officer, board or committee is made to the Town
Meeting and the recommendations therein are adopted, the Town Clerk
shall enter in the records of the Town Meeting only such portions of the
report as may be necessary for a full understanding of the action taken by
the Town thereon, and he shall make a marginal or other reference of the
number of such report as herein provided. He shall cause such report to be
entered in full in a book provided for that purpose, which shall be known
as the "book of reports," but if the report is printed, it need not be entered
in the book of reports, and it shall be filed in his office. The book of reports
and all printed reports shall be duly indexed by the Town Clerk, and such
reports shall be numbered for each municipal year in the order in which
they are presented, and there shall be noted on such reports, or in the book
of reports, the date of the Meeting at which they were submitted.
§ 27-14. Keeping of Town reports on file.
The Town Clerk shall keep in his office, permanently bound, one or more
files of the Town reports.
§ 27-15. Protection of original papers and documents.
He shall not allow original papers or documents to be taken from his office,
except as they remain in his custody or by authority of law.
§ 27-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-16
1:59
§ 27-16. Furnishing of Town Meeting records to Selectmen.
The Town Clerk shall annually furnish the Board of Selectmen with a true
copy of the record of the proceedings of the Town Meetings held during the
preceding year so that such record may be published in the Annual Town
Report.
§ 27-17. Index of votes and resolutions.
Beginning with the year 1936, the Town Clerk shall make a complete index
of all votes and resolutions adopted by the Town. Said index shall be in
duplicate and may be made on cards or otherwise as the Selectmen direct,
and it shall be arranged by topics, with references to the book and page
in which such votes or resolutions are recorded. A copy of said index shall
be furnished to the Selectmen, who shall keep the same in the vault in the
Selectmen's office when not in use.
§ 27-16 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 27-17
1:60
ARTICLE VI
Assessors
[Adopted as Art. VI of the 1983 Code]
§ 27-18. Duty to prepare and publish tax list.
The Board of Assessors shall, in the year 1936 and every third year
thereafter, prepare, publish and cause to be printed an official list of the real
and personal estates in the Town liable to taxation. Said list shall contain
the names of the owners, arranged alphabetically, the location and brief
description of the property and its value as determined by the Assessors and
the total tax assessed in the year in which said list is published. The Town
Clerk shall distribute printed copies of said list to those who request the
same.
§ 27-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-18
1:61

ARTICLE VII
Town Accountant
[Adopted as Art. VII of the 1983 Code]
§ 27-19. Appointment; powers and duties.
The Selectmen shall appoint a competent accountant who shall perform all
the duties and possess all the powers prescribed by MGL c. 41, §§ 55 to 61,
inclusive.
§ 27-20. Preparation of financial statements.
The Town Accountant shall, immediately after the first day of each month,
make to the Selectmen a detailed report of the amounts of the several
appropriations and all drafts made on account of each appropriation and
of all receipts during the preceding month and a summarized report of the
same since the beginning of the fiscal year and of the unexpended balances
of the several appropriations. He shall file a summarized statement of the
fiscal affairs of the Town for the preceding fiscal year with the Secretary
of the Advisory Committee not later than February 1 each year. He shall
also prepare such other financial statements as may, from time to time, be
required by the Selectmen.
§ 27-21. Contents of annual report.
The annual report of the Accountant shall include:
A list of all notes issued during the year and the purposes for which the
money was borrowed, giving the dates, the term, the amount, the rate
of interest, the time of maturity, the premium, if any, received thereon
and the names of the parties of whom the funds were borrowed.
A.
A list of all notes paid during the year and a list of all outstanding notes,
with the dates on which they will mature.
B.
A statement of the amount of money received by the Town from other
sources than taxation during the preceding year.
C.
A list of all insurance policies held by the Town, which list shall include
a statement of the property covered, the names of the companies and
the amount of each policy.
D.
§ 27-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-21
1:63

ARTICLE VIII
Gas Inspector
[Adopted as Art. 9C of the 1983 Code]
§ 27-22. Establishment.
There shall be a Gas Inspector who shall annually, on the first day of April,
be appointed by the Board of Selectmen to serve for one-year from April 1,
or until his successor is appointed.
§ 27-23. Requirements; salary.
§ 27-24. Performance of duties.
The Gas Inspector shall perform such duties and shall have such powers as
may be imposed or authorized by law.
The person so appointed shall, if possible, be a citizen and resident of
the Town not regularly employed out of Town nor regularly absent from
Town. Such person shall hold a license as prescribed in Chapter 25 of
the General Laws.
A.
B. His salary shall be established by the Personnel Board.
§ 27-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-24
1:65

ARTICLE IX
Town Administrator
[Adopted 4-8-2013 ATM by Art. 7]
§ 27-25. General overview.
§ 27-26. Powers and duties.
The Town Administrator shall act as the chief administrative officer
of the Town of Southborough and shall be responsible to the Board
of Selectmen, as its agent, for the effective management of all Town
affairs placed in the Town Administrator's charge by the Town of
Southborough Code, Town Meeting vote, or by vote and direction of the
Board of Selectmen.
A.
The Town Administrator shall be responsible for the implementation
of Town policies established by the Board of Selectmen, as well as
ensuring that the decisions of the Board of Selectmen are fully
executed. The specific functions and duties of the Town Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to, the functions and duties described
in this bylaw.
B.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this bylaw, the essential chief
executive functions of the Town remain vested at all times in the
Board of Selectmen who may assert, either preemptively or reactively
by applicable statutory authority, that full executive power as elected
officials of the Town in substitution for the powers delegated under
bylaw to the Town Administrator. The Board of Selectmen may exercise
its executive authority by majority vote.
C.
Personnel:
The Town Administrator, acting as an agent of the Board of
Selectmen and as consistent with the Code of the Town of
Southborough, shall supervise, direct and be responsible for the
efficient administration of all departments and personnel under the
jurisdiction of the Board of Selectmen and all functions for which
the Town Administrator is given responsibility or control by the
Town of Southborough Code, Town Meeting vote, or by vote of the
Board of Selectmen.
(1)
The Town Administrator shall act as Personnel Director and shall
be the administrative representative of the Personnel Board. With
the guidance and oversight of the Personnel Board, the Town
Administrator shall:
Develop, maintain, and administer the Personnel Bylaw which
shall be approved annually at Town Meeting, and which
includes but is not limited to: classification system,
compensation system, personnel rules and regulations which
indicate the rights and obligations of employees, disciplinary
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 27-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-26
1:67
procedures, personnel appraisal system, development and
implementation of an ongoing training program, and any other
personnel and hiring policies, practices, and regulations for
Town employees not covered by collective bargaining
agreements.
Administer and enforce the rules and regulations of the
Personnel Bylaw with authority to interpret same but not to
rescind or otherwise amend. The Director shall report to the
Personnel Board, in writing, any interpretation made in any
area where this bylaw is not reasonably clear.
(b)
Furnish the Personnel Board with all information essential for
the actions of that Board.
(c)
The Town Administrator shall direct contract negotiations, subject
to the approval of the Board of Selectmen, and ensure ongoing
compliance with their provisions.
(3)
Regarding departments within the jurisdiction of the Board of
Selectmen:
The Town Administrator shall, based upon merit and suitability,
recommend the appointment or removal of department heads
to the Board of Selectmen. The Town Administrator shall also
provide annual evaluations of department heads to the Board
of Selectmen.
(a)
Department heads shall consult with the Town Administrator
throughout the process of making any appointments or
removals within their departments. The Town Administrator
shall report to the Board of Selectmen on those appointments
or removals.
(b)
The Town Administrator may transfer personnel between
departments, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen
and consistent with the Code of the Town of Southborough and
state law.
(c)
(4)
Regarding departments outside the jurisdiction of the Board of
Selectmen, with the exception of the schools:
All elected boards, officials and committees shall consult with
the Town Administrator throughout the process of appointing
or removing a department head, and shall provide written
notice of intent to appoint or remove to the Town Administrator
for the purpose of maintaining compliance with personnel
policies, practices, or procedures of the Town.
(a)
All elected boards, officials and committees shall consult with
the Town Administrator throughout the process of contracting
(b)
(5)
§ 27-26 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 27-26
1:68
personnel services to ensure compliance with personnel
policies, practices, or procedures of the Town.
Department heads shall consult with the Town Administrator
throughout the process of making any appointments or
removals within their departments for the purpose of
maintaining compliance with personnel policies, practices, or
procedures of the Town.
(c)
Elected boards and committees and also department heads
shall consult with the Town Administrator to ensure that their
management of employees and contracted personnel is
consistent with personnel policies, employment contracts, and
practices in use in all Town departments.
(d)
Administrative:
The Town Administrator shall act as the Chief Procurement Officer
under the provisions of Chapter 30B of the General Laws, and,
subject to the authority of the Board of Selectmen, shall be
responsible for the purchasing of all supplies, materials,
equipment, and services for the Town, including the bidding and
awarding of all contracts, except as follows:
For supplies, materials, equipment, and services for the School
Department, unless specifically requested by the School
Committee.
(a)
For library materials, supplies, equipment, and services
specific to the function of the library, unless specifically
requested by the Library Trustees.
(b)
(c) For personnel services as described within § 27-26A(5)(b).
(1)
The Town Administrator shall coordinate the activities of all Town
departments serving under the Board of Selectmen with those
under the control of other officers and multiple-member bodies
elected directly by the voters.
(2)
The Town Administrator, subject to the authority of the Board of
Selectmen, shall have full jurisdiction over the rental and use of
all Town facilities, except schools and the library, and shall oversee
all Town capital maintenance, construction, repairs and rental/
use of Town facilities, consistent with the Code of the Town of
Southborough and state statutes.
(3)
Subject to policies established by the Board of Selectmen, the Town
Administrator shall present for approval to the Board of Selectmen
all warrants or vouchers, including payroll warrants, for payment
of Town funds submitted by the Town Accountant.
(4)
The Town Administrator shall be responsible for working with Town
officers and departments on Town loan and grant applications and,
(5)
B.
§ 27-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-26
1:69
in consultation with the office or department receiving the loan
or grant, overseeing adherence to the conditions of such loans or
grants.
The Town Administrator shall negotiate collective bargaining
contracts on behalf of the Board of Selectmen, and subject to
approval of the Board of Selectmen. The Town Administrator shall
administer and enforce collective bargaining agreements and
personnel rules and regulations within the purview of the Board of
Selectmen.
(6)
The Town Administrator shall recommend to the Board of
Selectmen on the prosecution, defense, and compromise of all
litigation to which the Town is a party.
(7)
Financial management:
The Town Administrator shall, after consultations with the Board
of Selectmen and the Advisory Committee, issue guidelines for
requested appropriations to all departments and elected officials
and boards whose budgets are appropriated by Town Meeting. Said
guidelines shall be issued on or before October 30. Nothing herein
shall conflict with the Advisory Committee's duties and obligations
under state statute, nor shall it limit the Advisory Committee's right
to issue independent guidelines for requested appropriations.
(1)
The Town Administrator shall be responsible for preparing the
annual requested appropriations from departments under the
jurisdiction of the Board of Selectmen.
(2)
The Town Administrator shall provide support, tools, and
coordination for departments, elected officials and boards not
under the Board of Selectmen in the development of their
appropriation requests.
(3)
The Town Administrator shall provide to the Board of Selectmen
and the Advisory Committee by January 30 budget proposal(s)
consistent with guidelines described in § 27-26C(1).
(4)
The Town Administrator shall maintain a current estimate of
expected revenues and expenditure trends for the next fiscal year.
(5)
The Town Administrator shall develop and maintain a capital
facilities plan and budget for all municipal structures.
(6)
The Town Administrator shall maintain a capital equipment plan
and budget for all other municipal capital equipment.
(7)
The Town Administrator shall be responsible for the application of
modern accounting and financial reporting practices and further
shall maintain accurate and centralized records, including but not
limited to:
(8)
C.
§ 27-26 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 27-26
1:70
Financial documentation, including therein such information
as the Board of Selectmen deems desirable.
(a)
Personnel documentation for all employees, including therein
evaluations and such information as the Personnel Board
deems desirable.
(b)
All documentation required to be maintained as per the Code
of the Town of Southborough.
(c)
The Town Administrator shall prepare, annually, a five-year
financial forecast of revenue, expenditures, including capital
expenditures, and the general financial condition of the Town. Said
plan shall be submitted to the Board of Selectmen, the Advisory
Committee, the Board of Assessors and the School Committee, and
shall be made available to the public.
(9)
The Town Administrator shall oversee the coordination,
compilation, and distribution of the annual Town Report.
(10)
The Town Administrator shall develop and oversee performance
measurement systems for municipal services.
(11)
General:
The Town Administrator shall serve as the Town's Chief
Information Officer for any time period that this role remains
unfilled. The Chief Information Officer shall be responsible for
activities such as maintaining and enhancing the capabilities and
integration of the information systems used in the various Town
departments, improving citizen access to user-friendly Town
information, and developing, maintaining, and enhancing
necessary tools, including but not limited to: budgetary tools
(operating and capital), a centralized recordkeeping system, and
performance measurement systems.
(1)
The Town Administrator shall prepare the agenda for and attend
all meetings of the Board of Selectmen, and shall cause full and
complete records of such meetings to be taken and maintained.
(2)
The Town Administrator shall assist in the preparation of the
warrants and motions for and attend all sessions of Town Meeting.
(3)
The Town Administrator shall present reports to the Board of
Selectmen identifying priorities, concerns, issues and outcomes of
the Town Administrator's office.
(4)
The Town Administrator shall act as the Board of Selectmen's
liaison with federal, regional, and state authorities, as well as with
all Town boards, committees, and officials outside the purview of
the Board of Selectmen.
(5)
D.
§ 27-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-26
1:71
§ 27-27. Severability provisions; amendments.
The Town Administrator shall provide leadership and direction
in the development of short- and long-range plans, including but
not limited to the gathering, analysis and preparation of data for
studies, reports and recommendations to the Board of Selectmen.
(6)
The Town Administrator shall perform any other duties consistent
with the office of the Town Administrator as may be required by
bylaw, vote of Town Meeting, or vote of the Board of Selectmen.
(7)
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, word, or any
other part of this bylaw shall be adjudicated by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional, unenforceable, or otherwise invalid,
such adjudication shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder
of the bylaw, and it shall be construed to have been the legislative
intent to enact this bylaw without such unconstitutional, unenforceable
or invalid parts therein.
A.
The Board of Selectmen are hereby authorized to approve amendments
which shall be within the scope of the general public objectives of this
petition.
B.
§ 27-26 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 27-27
1:72
Chapter 31
PERSONNEL
Chapter 36
SELECTMEN
§ 27-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 27-27
1:73

ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted as Art. IV, Secs. 1 through 3 and 9, of the 1983 Code]
§ 36-1. Authorization to settle legal claims.
The Board of Selectmen shall have full authority as agent of the Town to
prosecute and defend all suits in which the Town is a party. It may settle,
at its discretion, any legal and valid claim or suit against the Town which
does not require the payment of more than $300. Any settlement requiring
a payment greater than $300, except when authorized by law, shall be made
only when authorized by vote of a Town Meeting.
§ 36-2. Protection of Town's interests.
The Selectmen may appear, either personally or by the Town Counsel,
before any committee of the Legislature, any state or County official or
any board or commission to protect the interests of the Town, but are not
authorized by this article to commit the Town to any course of action.
§ 36-3. Actions on conveyances.
All conveyances under seal which may hereafter be executed by the Town,
pursuant to a vote of the Town or otherwise, shall be sealed with the Town
Seal and subscribed by a majority of the Board of Selectmen for the time
being, unless otherwise directed by the Town or by statute.
§ 36-4. Deriving of benefits from contracts or agreements.
No member of the Board of Selectmen shall enter into any contract or
agreement from which he will derive any direct or indirect benefit with
any department of the Town without the majority approval of the Advisory
Committee. Said approval shall be recorded by the Secretary of the
Advisory Committee, and a copy thereof duly attested by said Secretary
shall be attached to such contract or agreement.
§ 36-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-4
1:75

ARTICLE II
Issuance of Licenses
[Adopted as Art. XI, Sec. 3, of the 1983 Code]
§ 36-5. Authorization.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to issue licenses as provided
by Chapter 148 of the General Laws, as amended, and may impose a
reasonable license fee.
§ 36-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-5
1:77

ARTICLE III
Transfer Station; Violations and Fines
[Adopted 4-11-2005 ATM by Art. 54]
§ 36-6. Stickers required.
Pursuant to the duly promulgated rules and regulations of the Board of
Selectmen, valid transfer station stickers will be required for all residents
utilizing the transfer station and its related facilities.
§ 36-7. Rules and regulations violations.
Failure to adhere to the provisions of the Selectmen's rules and regulations,
as duly posted at the transfer station, will result in the issuance of a warning
letter from the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works.
§ 36-8. Subsequent violations. [Amended 4-10-2007 ATM by Art. 39;
4-12-2016 ATM by Art. 32]
Subsequent violations of the rules and regulations at the transfer station,
after the first warning letter has been issued, will result in a fine for each
subsequent violation. Fines are set annually by the Board of Selectmen and
shall be paid within 30 days on notification from the Board of Selectmen or
their designee.
§ 36-9. Appeal to Board of Selectmen. [Amended 4-10-2007 ATM by
Art. 39]
The Board of Selectmen will govern the process for administrating the
imposition of fines, which may be appealed to the Board of Selectmen or
their designee within 30 days of the dates of notification, by the Town. After
due notice and hearing, the Selectmen or their designee shall have the
authority to uphold, modify or repeal any such fine imposed. No fine will be
delinquent while an appeal is pending before the Board or their designee.
Violators shall have 10 days to pay said fines if notified by the Selectmen or
their designee that the appeal has been denied. No transfer station sticker
will be issued to residents with delinquent fines.
§ 36-10. Police Department enforcement.
The Police Department is further authorized to prosecute any delinquent
unpaid fines pursuant to the applicable provisions of state statute.
§ 36-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 36-10
1:79
Chapter 39
TOWN FLAG
§ 39-1. Acceptance; location.
The Town voted to accept as its Town Flag the flag designed by the
Superintendent of Cemeteries and first flown on Memorial Day 1973, which
flag is presently located in the office of the Town Clerk.
Chapter 41
TOWN MEETINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town elections — See Ch. 42.
§ 36-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 39-1
1:80
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted as Arts. I and II of the 1983 Code]
§ 41-1. Date and time of Annual Town Meeting. [Amended
4-12-2016 ATM by Art. 36; 5-22-2018 STM by Art. 5]
§ 41-2. Notice of Meeting. [Amended 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 36]
Notice of every Town Meeting shall be given by posting attested copies of
the warrant on the Town website, at the Town House, the Southborough
Library, the Senior Center and the transfer station seven days at least
before the time appointed for such meeting.
§ 41-3. Notice of adjournment.
The Town Clerk shall, as soon as may be after the adjournment of any Town
Meeting, post notices of such adjournment in the several places named in
the preceding section. Said notice shall state the time to which the Meeting
stands adjourned and shall contain a concise statement of the matters
remaining to be considered and acted upon.
§ 41-4. Warrant Articles inserted by request.
Whenever an Article is inserted in a warrant upon the request of any person
or persons, other than a Town officer, the Selectmen shall cause the name or
names of such persons to appear in connection with such Article by adding
the following: "Proposed by" and the name or names of such persons. If
the number of persons requesting the insertion of an Article in a warrant
exceeds 10, the Selectmen may omit all the names of such persons except
The Annual Town Meeting for the consideration of all business, other
than the election of Town Officers or other matters to be determined
by ballot, shall be held during the week in March designated by the
Selectmen as "Town Meeting Week." The meeting shall be held on a
Saturday commencing at 1:00 p.m. and recessed not later than 5:00
p.m.
A.
In the event that all articles in the warrant have not been acted on,
the meeting shall reconvene at 7:00 p.m. on that Saturday, and recess
no later than 11:00 p.m. If all articles are not acted on by that time,
adjournment of the session shall be to the following Monday night
at 7:00 p.m. and then to each succeeding night at 7:00 p.m. until
completion of the warrant.
B.
In the event that all articles in the warrant have not been acted on
by the end of the Thursday night session, the meeting shall stand
adjourned to a time and date agreeable to the meeting. In the event of
a secular or other holiday during the Town Meeting Week, that session
shall be adjourned to the next night that shall be agreeable to the
meeting by majority vote.
C.
§ 41-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-4
1:81
the name of the first person who has signed the request or petition and,
in such case, they shall add after such name "and . . . others," giving the
number of the signers. If an Article is inserted at the request of a Town
officer or board, the Selectmen shall indicate that such Article was proposed
by such officer or board by adding the words "Proposed by" and then stating
the official title of such officer or board.
§ 41-5. Copy of warrant to be sent to Advisory Committee Secretary.
The Board of Selectmen shall, as soon as may be after issuing a warrant for
a Town Meeting, transmit a copy thereof to the Secretary of the Advisory
Committee.
§ 41-6. Voting procedure. [Amended 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 39]
Before any vote which the Moderator or the Town Meeting requires
to be counted may be taken on any question which is the subject
matter of any Article contained in the warrant for any Town Meeting,
the Moderator shall define the bounds of the voting area and each
individual section thereof and shall appoint two tellers to count the
votes on each side of each section so defined. Such tellers shall be
sworn to the faithful and impartial performance of their duties as such
tellers. When any matter before a Town Meeting requires a count of
votes for any purpose, each group of tellers shall immediately, upon
completion of each count of the area assigned to such group, announce
the same to the Meeting and, immediately thereafter, to the Moderator.
A.
On Town Meeting matters requiring a two-thirds vote by statute, the
Town Moderator may declare the two-thirds vote without taking a
count, and said declaration shall take the place of the statutory counted
vote; provided that the vote so declared is not immediately questioned
by seven or more voters as provided in Chapter 39, Section 15, of
the General Laws. If the vote is questioned, the Moderator shall
immediately put the question to another vote and take a count which
shall then be recorded by the Town Clerk.
B.
The Moderator may select any two or more warrant articles to create
one or more groups of so-called "consent" articles. For each such group
of "consent" articles, the Moderator shall ask the voters at the Town
Meeting, article by article, if any Town Meeting member wishes to
"hold" a particular article, and any such "held" article shall be removed
from the group of "consent" articles. For the remaining "consent"
articles in the group that have not had a request to be "held", the
Moderator may ask for a single vote of the Town Meeting for the
entire group of the remaining "consent" articles, and such single vote
shall have the same effect as an individual vote (to either approve
or disapprove) each of the non-"held" "consent" articles in the group.
[Added 4-9-2018 ATM by Art. 35]
C.
§ 41-4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 41-7
1:82
§ 41-7. Admittance to hall restricted.
Unless otherwise ordered by the Moderator or by vote of the Meeting, no
person whose name is not on the list of registered voters shall be admitted
to the hall where the meeting is being held. This provision shall be in force
by the use of the checklist. The Moderator shall determine the bounds of
the hall.
§ 41-8. Participation by Moderator restricted.
The Moderator, while occupying the Chair, shall not participate in any
discussion before the Meeting.
§ 41-9. Order of warrant action.
Articles in the warrant shall be acted upon in the order in which they appear
in the warrant, unless otherwise ordered by a vote of the Meeting.
§ 41-10. Certain actions to be in writing.
All reports, motions and resolutions submitted for the consideration of
the Meeting which involve the expenditure of money shall be in writing.
Any other report, motion or resolution shall be reduced to writing if the
Moderator so directs.
§ 41-11. Procedure for speaking.
Every person, when about to speak, shall rise, respectfully address the
Chair and wait until he is recognized, and, in speaking, he shall refrain from
mentioning by name any other person present and shall confine himself to
the question under consideration.
§ 41-12. Interruption of speakers. [Amended 4-9-1984 ATM by Art.
14]
No person, while speaking, shall be interrupted by another, except for a call
for the orders of the day, a question of privilege, a point of order or notice
of a motion to reconsider.
§ 41-13. Speaking more than once on any question.
No person shall speak more than once on any question to the exclusion of
any other person who may desire to speak.
§ 41-14. Speakers having personal interest in discussion matters.
Any person who is employed in behalf of a person having an interest in any
matter under consideration at any Town Meeting shall, immediately upon
being recognized by the Moderator, state that he is so employed and shall
also state the name and address of his or her employer.
§ 41-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-15
1:83
§ 41-15. Committee appointments.
All committees shall be appointed by the Moderator, unless the Meeting
by vote otherwise directs, and shall report as directed by the Meeting.
All such appointments by the Moderator shall be made within 60 days
of the adjournment of the Meeting at which it was voted to establish
such committee, and all vacancies occuring in any such committees so
appointed shall be filled by the Moderator within 60 days of such vacancy. If
a committee does not report as directed, or at the succeeding Annual Town
Meeting, it shall be deemed discharged, unless the time during which it may
report has been extended by vote of the Meeting.
§ 41-16. Submittal of committee reports to Advisory Committee.
Whenever the report of a committee contains a recommendation for the
appropriation of Town funds, the committee making such recommendations
shall submit a copy thereof to the Advisory Committee at least six days
before the Town Meeting at which said report is to be considered by the
Town; and no such recommendation shall be acted upon until a report
thereon has been made by the Advisory Committee.
§ 41-17. Submittal of committee reports to Moderator.
Whenever a report of a committee is placed in the hands of the Moderator,
it shall be deemed to have been submitted to the Meeting for its action
thereon, except as is provided in § 41-16.
§ 41-18. Reconsideration of actions. [Amended 4-9-1984 ATM by
Art. 18]
Any action taken at any Town Meeting shall be reconsidered only by a 2/3
vote.
§ 41-19. Motions to dissolve meeting.
No motions, the effect of which would be to dissolve the Meeting, shall be in
order until every Article in the warrant has been duly considered and acted
upon.
§ 41-20. Quorum requirement. [Amended 4-9-2007 ATM by Art. 34]
The presence of 100 voters at an Annual Town Meeting and 100 voters at
a Special Town Meeting for the transaction of business shall constitute a
quorum, and no Article shall be acted upon unless a quorum is present.
§ 41-21. Rules of order. [Amended 4-13-1987 ATM by Art. 35]
The procedure and conduct of Town Meetings not herein provided for or
otherwise regulated by general or special laws of the commonwealth shall
be governed by the most recent edition of Town Meeting Time, so far as it
is applicable.
§ 41-15 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 41-22
1:84
§ 41-22. Reports of noncompliance. [Added 4-9-1984 ATM by Art.
15]
A report or reports shall be given at each Annual Town Meeting of all
resolutions, mandates and directives of all Annual and Special Town
Meetings of the preceding three years with which there has not been full
compliance. Such reports shall be given by the responsible elected official
or officials or an appropriate designee or designees.
§ 41-22.1. Electioneering prohibited. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art.
35]
Except as may be otherwise provided by any other general or special law of
the commonwealth, all candidates or their agents are expressly forbidden
to remain within 150 feet of the entrance to a polling place or Town Meeting
for the purpose of electioneering or greeting citizens or voters, or for
petitioning or soliciting signatures for any purpose.
§ 41-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-22.1
1:85

ARTICLE II
Moderator
[Adopted as Art. IIA of the 1983 Code]
§ 41-23. Election.
A Moderator shall be elected by ballot at each Annual Town Meeting for the
election of officers and shall hold office for the term of one-year.
§ 41-24. Filling of vacancies.
If at the time of any Town Meeting or Special Town Meeting a vacancy exists
in the office of Moderator, the Town Meeting shall, prior to considering the
business of that Meeting, elect by written ballot a Moderator to preside
at that Meeting and to hold office after that Meeting until replaced by a
duly elected and qualified replacement. If no candidate accepts nomination
at said Town Meeting or Special Town Meeting, then the Town Clerk shall
serve as Moderator for that Meeting as provided for in MGL c. 39, § 14.
§ 41-25. Holding of other offices prohibited.
The Moderator shall hold no other elective or appointive Town office.
§ 41-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-25
1:87

ARTICLE III
Report and Warrant
[Adopted as Art. IV, Secs. 8 and 8A, of the 1983 Code; amended in
its entirety 9-29-2009 STM by Art. 13]
§ 41-26. Availability of Annual Report and Warrant.
The Selectmen shall have available copies of the Annual Town Report
(stating in detail what actions have been taken during the preceding year
by all Town officials), together with the Town Warrant (stating the agenda
for the Town Meeting), for residents to take home from the Southborough
Public Library, the Southborough Town House, the Southborough Police
Station and the Southborough Transfer Station. The Town shall place a legal
advertisement in a local newspaper and post a notice on the local cable
television bulletin board no later than seven days before an Annual Town
Meeting stating that both the Annual Report and Warrant are available at
these four locations. This same notice shall be posted together with a copy
of the Annual Town Report and Warrant at 12 public locations no later than
seven days before the Annual Town Meeting. For a Special Town Meeting,
only the legal notice and the Warrant will be posted and made available 14
days before the Special Town Meeting.
§ 41-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 41-26
1:89
Chapter 42
TOWN ELECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Town meetings — See Ch. 41.
§ 41-26 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 41-26
1:90
ARTICLE I
Procedures
§ 42-1. Annual Town election.
The election of Town officers and the voting on questions required by
General or Special Acts on laws shall be held on the second Tuesday of May.
§ 42-2. Poll hours.
Pursuant to MGL c. 54, § 64, as amended, the polls shall be opened from
8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. or earlier as may be determined by the Board of
Selectmen.
§ 42-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 42-2
1:91
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 50
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 50-1. Consumption on public ways prohibited.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage, as defined under Chapter
138 of the General Laws, while in or upon any public way in the Town of
Southborough.
§ 50-2. Consumption in public places restricted.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage, as defined in Chapter 138
of the General Laws, upon any way or place in the Town of Southborough
to which the public have access as invitees or licensees without permission
of the owner or person in control of said premises or unless the sale or
distribution of said beverages has been authorized by license from the
Board of Selectmen under a license as provided by said Chapter 138.
§ 50-3. Possession and consumption in parks, playgrounds and
public schools restricted.
No person shall keep, use, consume or have in his/her possession any
alcoholic beverage, as defined under Chapter 138 of the General Laws,
in any park, playground or public school premises in the Town of
Southborough, except as may be sold and distributed in connection with a
license issued by the Board of Selectmen under said Chapter 138.
§ 50-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of
not more than $50.
Chapter 51
MARIJUANA OR TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL, PUBLIC
CONSUMPTION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 50. Peace and good order — See Ch. 131.
§ 51-1. Consumption and possession.
No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise use or consume marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol (as defined in MGL c. 94C, § 1, as amended) while
§ 42-2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 51-1
1:92
in or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway, stairs,
bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing, public
building, schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any area
owned by or under the control of the Town; or in or upon any bus or
other passenger conveyance operated by a common carrier; or in any place
accessible to the public.
§ 51-2. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
This bylaw may be enforced through any lawful means in law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, enforcement by criminal indictment or
complaint pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21, or by noncriminal disposition
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, by any police officer. The fine for violation of
this bylaw shall be $300 for each offense. Any penalty imposed under this
bylaw shall be in addition to any civil penalty imposed under MGL c. 94C,
§ 32L.
Chapter 52
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 52-1. Licensing authority; annual fee.
The Board of Selectmen is hereby authorized to charge an annual fee, as
set from time to time by Town Meeting action, for the licensing of each
automatic amusement device.
Chapter 53
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 50.
Public consumption of marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol — See Ch. 51.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 131.
§ 53-1. Marijuana establishments prohibited; exception.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c. 94C,
§ 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing
facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other
type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning districts of the
Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale, distribution or cultivation
of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed under Chapter 369 of the Acts
of 2012 and currently permitted in the Town of Southborough.
Chapter 62
§ 51-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-1
1:93
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Demolition delay — See Ch. 63.
Alarms — See Ch. 95.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 124.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 136.
§ 62-1. Applicability; when effective.
§ 62-2. Building Department established.
There shall be a Department, to be called the "Building Department."
§ 62-3. Inspector of Buildings.
The provisions of these regulations shall relate to the construction,
alteration and maintenance of buildings and other structures within the
limits of the Town of Southborough, County of Worcester, except such
as are owned and occupied by the United States or owned and occupied
by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or by any County, and also
excepting bridges, quays and wharves.
A.
These regulations shall become effective upon acceptance by the Town
of Southborough, in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 143, § 3.
B.
A. The Office of Inspector of Buildings is hereby established.
The Inspector of Buildings shall be appointed for a three-year term, and
may, at pleasure, be removed by the Board of Selectmen, who shall fix
his salary and provide for reimbursement of his incidental expenses in
the performance of his duties. [Amended 4-8-1985 ATM by Art. 45]
B.
No person shall be appointed as Inspector of Buildings who has not had
at least five years' experience as a builder, civil engineer or architect
or as a superintendent, foreman or competent mechanic in charge of
construction.
C.
The Inspector of Buildings shall enforce all laws and regulations
relating to the construction, alteration, repair, removal, demolition,
equipment use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings
and structures, except as may otherwise be provided. He shall inspect
all building operations within the Town and shall have the right of
entry at reasonable hours. He shall require that all workmanship and
all building materials shall be of good quality, and that types and
methods of construction shall be in accordance with generally accepted
standards of engineering practice, as defined by the Board of Standards
Basic Principles of Building Construction, and not inconsistent with law.
In case of violation of these regulations, he shall order, in writing, the
D.
§ 53-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 62-3
1:94
§ 62-4. Keeping of records; making of reports.
The Inspector of Buildings shall keep records of applications, permits
issued, certificates issued, inspections, reports and notices or orders issued.
He shall make a report to the Board of Selectmen annually and at such other
times as requested by said Board.
§ 62-5. Permit applications.
§ 62-6. Action on permits; inspections; fees.
§ 62-7. Certificates of occupancy.
suspension of the work, which notice shall state the conditions under
which work may be resumed.
It shall not be lawful to construct, alter, remove, demolish or change
the class of occupancy of any building or structure without first filing
with the Inspector of Buildings an application, in writing, and obtaining
a permit.
A.
An application for a permit shall be submitted in such form as the
Inspector of Buildings may prescribe and shall be made by the owner
or his duly authorized representative.
B.
Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such plans, drawings
and other data as the Inspector of Buildings may require. When
required by the Inspector of Buildings, there shall be filed also a plot
diagram, drawn to scale, showing the size and location by dimension
of the proposed new construction and other existing or proposed
structures on adjoining property within 10 feet of the property lines.
C.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit the filing of amendments to an
application. Such amendments, after approval, shall be filed with and
be deemed a part of the original application. In existing buildings,
minor repairs may be made without filing an application for obtaining a
permit.
D.
It shall be the duty of the Inspector of Buildings to act upon applications
for a permit, plans or amendments thereto without unreasonable or
unnecessary delay.
A.
The Inspector of Buildings shall inspect all buildings or structures
during construction to see that the provisions of these regulations are
complied with and that the construction is prosecuted safely.
B.
The fee required for a building permit shall be that established by the
Board of Selectmen.
C.
It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or premises
or part thereof hereinafter created, erected, changed or converted,
wholly or partly, in its use or structure, until a certificate of occupancy
A.
§ 62-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 62-7
1:95
§ 62-8. Unsafe buildings.
Upon notice of an unsafe building, the Inspector of Buildings shall proceed
in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 143, §§ 6 through 12, inclusive.
§ 62-9. Violations and penalties.
If no other penalty for violations is provided, whoever violates any of the
provisions of these regulations shall be liable to a fine of not less than $50,
nor more than $100.
Chapter 63
DEMOLITION DELAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 62. Zoning — See Ch. 174.
§ 63-1. Intent and purpose.
§ 63-2. Definitions.
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The person occupying the office of Building
Inspector or otherwise authorized to issue demolition permits.
shall have been issued by the Inspector of Buildings, certifying that
the conditions of the permit have been fulfilled in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations.
Upon request of the holder of a permit, or the owner, the Inspector of
Buildings may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for part of
a building, provided that such temporary occupancy or use would not
jeopardize life, limb or property.
B.
This bylaw is enacted for the purpose of protecting and preserving
significant buildings and structures within the Town of Southborough
which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural or
historical resources of the Town, and to encourage owners of such
buildings and structures to seek out alternative options to preserve,
rehabilitate or restore such buildings rather than to demolish them,
thereby promoting the public welfare and preserving the cultural
heritage of the Town.
A.
To achieve these purposes, the Southborough Historical Commission is
authorized to advise the Building Inspector with respect to the issuance
of permits for the demolition of significant buildings. The issuance of
demolition permits for significant buildings is regulated as provided by
this bylaw.
B.
§ 62-7 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 63-2
1:96
BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES — Any combination of materials forming
a shelter for persons, animals, or property that constitute the historic built
environment of the Town.
COMMISSION — The Southborough Historical Commission.
DEMOLITION — Any act of pulling down, destroying, removing or razing a
building or commencing the work of total or substantial exterior destruction
with the intent of completing the same.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — A process of ongoing damage to the
features, viability and/or functionability of an unoccupied building leading
towards and/or causing its eventual demolition due to decay and/or
structural failure and/or severe degradation over a period of time as a result
of a general lack of maintenance, and/or failure to secure the building from
pests or vandals, and/or failure to take reasonable measures to prevent the
ingress of water, snow, ice, and wind through the roof, walls, or apertures.
DEMOLITION PERMIT — The permit issued by the Building Inspector for
a demolition, substantial demolition or removal of a building, excluding
a demolition permit issued solely for the demolition of the interior of a
building.
HISTORICALLY OR ARCHITECTURALLY SIGNIFICANT BUILDING — Any
building, in whole or in part, which was constructed prior to 1925 and
is included in the Southborough Massachusetts Historic Properties Survey
prepared by the Commission in 2000 (with revisions and updates in 2015)
on file with the Town Clerk's office.
PREFERENTIALLY PRESERVED — Any historically or architecturally
significant building which the Commission determines is in the public
interest to be preserved or rehabilitated rather than to be demolished.
§ 63-3. Procedure.
No permit for the demolition of a historically or architecturally
significant building shall be issued other than in conformity with the
provisions of this bylaw, as well as in conformity with the provisions of
other laws applicable to the demolition of buildings and the issuance of
permits generally.
A.
Application contents: Every application for a demolition permit for a
historically or architecturally significant building shall be filed with
the Building Inspector and shall contain the following information: (i)
the address of the building to be demolished; (ii) the owner's name,
address and telephone number; (iii) a brief description of the type
of building and the condition requiring issuance of the permit; (iv)
date of building as established by the Board of Assessors, deed or
documentation verifying year of construction; and (v) a brief
description of the proposed reuse, reconstruction or replacement on
the premises upon which the building is located.
B.
§ 63-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-3
1:97
Within seven business days from receipt of an application for a
demolition permit of a historically or architecturally significant
building, the Building Inspector shall forward a copy to the
Commission. No demolition permit shall be issued during this time.
C.
Within 10 business days after receipt of the application for demolition
permit by the Commission, the Commission shall make a determination
of architectural and/or historical significance based upon the federal
Secretary of the Interior's standards for historic buildings. Upon
determination by the Commission that the building is not
architecturally and/or historically significant, the Commission shall so
notify the Building Inspector in writing. Upon receipt of such
notification, or after the expiration of 15 business days from the date
of submission to the Commission, if the Building Inspector has not
received notification from the Commission, the Building inspector may
issue the demolition permit.
D.
Upon determination by the Commission that the building is historically
and/or architecturally significant, the Building Inspector and applicant
shall be so notified in writing, and a demolition permit shall not be
issued. The Commission shall hold a public hearing within 15 business
days of the determination of significance to determine whether the
building should be preferentially preserved. Public notice of the time,
place and purpose of the hearing shall be published by the Building
Department at the expense of the applicant in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town not less than seven days before the day of said
hearing and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall for
a period of not less than seven days before the day of said hearing.
E.
If after a public hearing the Commission determines that the significant
building should not be preferentially preserved, the Commission shall
notify the Building Inspector, in writing, within five business days of the
hearing, and the Building Inspector may issue a demolition permit upon
receipt of the written decision.
F.
If after a public hearing the Commission determines that the significant
buildings should be preferentially preserved, the Commission shall so
notify the Building Inspector in writing within five business days of the
hearing, and no demolition permit may be issued until nine months
after the date of the determination by the Commission.
G.
Notwithstanding anything contained in Subsection G, the Building
Inspector may issue a demolition permit for a preferably preserved
building at any time after receipt of written advice from the
Commission to the effect that either:
The Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable likelihood
that either the owner or some other person or group is willing to
purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such building; or
(1)
The Commission is satisfied that for at least nine months the owner
has made continuing, bona fide and reasonable efforts to locate a
(2)
H.
§ 63-3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 63-3
1:98
§ 63-4. Responsibility of owners.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of record or his designee to
assist in the facilitation of the above process by providing information,
allowing access to the property and securing the premises; for participating
in the investigation of preservation options; and for actively cooperating in
seeking alternatives with the Commission and any interested parties.
§ 63-5. Emergency demolition.
Nothing in this bylaw shall prohibit the Building Inspector from immediately
ordering the demolition of any building in the event of imminent danger to
the safety of the public pursuant to the applicable standards under the State
Building Code.
§ 63-6. Demolition by neglect.
purchaser to preserve, rehabilitate or restore the subject building,
and that such efforts have been unsuccessful.
If the Building Inspector has reason to believe, through visual
inspection or other means, that a significant building may be
undergoing demolition by neglect, then the Building Inspector shall
notify the Commission and the owner, and the Commission and the
Building Inspector shall jointly hold a public hearing to i) confirm
whether or not the building is a significant building, and ii) determine
whether or not it is undergoing demolition by neglect, which shall
require the concurrence of the Commission. In furtherance of
determining its condition, the Commission may, at any time, request an
inspection of the building by the Building Inspector.
A.
If the Commission and the Building Inspector agree that the building
is undergoing demolition by neglect, the Commission and the Building
Inspector shall attempt to negotiate a voluntary agreement with the
owner for appropriate and timely repairs sufficient to structurally
stabilize the building and/or prevent further deterioration. The Building
Inspector will report the result to the Commission.
B.
In the event that the Building Inspector determines that he is not able
to negotiate such an agreement with the owner, for any reason, or
that the owner has agreed to undertake but has failed to satisfactorily
complete such repairs in a timely manner, then the Building Inspector
may take such action as is permitted, including seeking a court order
that specific repairs be undertaken to secure the building against the
elements, vandals and vermin, to halt further deterioration, and to
stabilize it structurally. The Building Inspector may forbear from
commencing an action in court for any reason and will preferentially
consider any claim of undue economic hardship by the owner.
C.
Upon completion of all repairs that have been agreed upon between
the owner and the Building Inspector or that have been ordered by
D.
§ 63-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-6
1:99
§ 63-7. Enforcement and remedies.
The Building Inspector is specifically authorized to institute any and all
actions and proceedings, in law or equity, as he or she may deem necessary
and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this bylaw
or to prevent a threatened violation thereof. No building permit shall be
issued with respect to any premises upon which a significant building
has been voluntarily demolished in violation of this bylaw for a period of
two years after the date of the completion of such demolition. As used
herein, "premises" refers to the parcel of land upon which the demolished
significant building was located and all adjoining parcels of land under
common ownership or control.
§ 63-8. Historic Districts Act.
Nothing in this bylaw shall be deemed to conflict with the provisions of the
Historic Districts Act, MGL c. 40C. If any of the provisions of this bylaw do
so conflict, that Act shall prevail.
§ 63-9. Additional rules and regulations.
The Historical Commission is authorized to promulgate from time to time
rules and regulations it deems necessary to administer the bylaw that are
not inconsistent with applicable state law.
§ 63-10. Severability.
If any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word or other part of the
bylaw provisions, for any reason, is determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional, then it is the
intent of this bylaw for Home Rule purposes that the remaining provisions
continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 68
CEMETERIES
Chapter 81
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hunting — See Ch. 110.
the Building Inspector, or that have been ordered by the court, and
upon certification by the Building Inspector that said repairs have been
completed, the Building Inspector shall certify that the building is no
longer undergoing demolition by neglect.
§ 63-6 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 63-10
1:100
ARTICLE I
Animals
[Adopted as Art. X, Sec. 2, of the 1983 Code]
§ 81-1. Pasturing in streets or ways prohibited.
No owner or person having charge of any horse, cow, swine, sheep, goat or
other grazing animal shall permit the same to pasture in any street or way
within the Town.
§ 81-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-1
1:101

ARTICLE II
Dogs
[Adopted as Art. XA of the 1983 Code]
§ 81-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
DOG — All animals of the canine species, both male and female.
KENNEL — One pack or a collection of dogs on a single premises, whether
maintained for breeding, boarding, sale, training, hunting or other
purposes, and including any shop where dogs are on sale, and also including
every pack or collection of more than three dogs three months old or over,
owned or kept by a person on a single premises, irrespective of the purpose
for which they are maintained.[Added 9-29-2009 STM by Art. 8]
OWNER — Any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning,
keeping or harboring a dog, as herein defined.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Any dog shall be deemed a "public nuisance" if such
dog is found to be not on the premises of the owner of such dog, if such
dog attacks persons or domestic animals; or if such dog is found to be on a
public school ground when not under restraint, if such dog chases moving
vehicles or if such dog persistently and prolongedly barks and/or howls.
Exceptions to this are as follows:
§ 81-3. Dogs as public nuisances prohibited.
No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit such dog, whether licensed or
unlicensed, to become a public nuisance within the Town of Southborough
at any time.
§ 81-4. Impoundment. [Amended 4-8-1985 ATM by Art. 11]
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to investigate complaints
concerning any dogs which are alleged to be in violation of this article and
to apprehend any dog found by him to be in violation of one or more of the
provisions of this article regarding public nuisances. It shall further be the
duty of the Animal Control Officer to apprehend any dog found by him to be
in violation of the definition of "public nuisance" in § 81-2, even though no
official complaint has been made by a citizen. All such dogs apprehended by
If such dog is attached to a restraining device or under the care and
control of a person competent to restrain such dog so that it will not
be a threat to public safety. The mere muzzling of such a dog shall not
satisfy the requirements of this article.
A.
If such dog is to be used as a so-called "hunting dog" and is being
supervised as such by a person competent to restrain such dog so that
it shall not be a threat to public safety.
B.
§ 81-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-4
1:103
the Animal Control Officer or by the Police Department shall be impounded
in a suitable place.
§ 81-5. Disposition of dogs; storage fees. [Amended 4-8-1985 ATM
by Art. 11; 4-13-1987 ATM by Art. 46; 9-29-2009 STM by Art. 8]
§ 81-6. Disposition of unclaimed dogs.
Any dog which has been impounded and has not been redeemed by the
owner within five days shall be disposed of as provided by MGL c. 140,
§ 151, and any amendment thereto.
§ 81-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-13-1987 ATM by Art.
47; 4-12-2016 ATM by Art. 34]
Any owner or keeper of a dog in the Town that is found to be in violation of
the provisions of Chapter 81 of the Code of the Town of Southborough shall
be liable to a penalty according to the following schedule:
§ 81-8. Dog licensing fees. [Added 4-12-2016 ATM by Art. 349]
If such dog so impounded has upon it the name or address of the owner
thereof, or if the name of said owner is otherwise known, then the
Animal Control Officer shall immediately notify the owner, and if the
owner is not known, then no notice shall be necessary.
A.
Any dog confined by the Animal Control Officer, unless picked up by the
owners, shall be kept for at least 10 days.
B.
A storage kennel fee for the boarding of impounded dogs shall be
charged at a rate based on contractual agreements between the Board
of Selectmen and the contractor/kennel. Such charges will be made
public at least 14 days before being effective, and a copy of such
charges then in effect will be maintained by the Town Clerk for public
inspection.
C.
Any dog confined by the Animal Control Office shall not be released to
the owner until the owner produces evidence of a current dog license
and pays all fines and storage fees.
D.
A. First violation (up to 30 days past deadline): $25.
B. Second violation (30 days or more past deadline): $50.
C. (Reserved)
Failure to comply with the Selectmen's hearing order under MGL c.
140: $100.
D.
E. Trash day nuisance: $15.
The fee for every dog license issued in the Town shall be posted in the
Schedule of Fees in the office of the Town Clerk.
A.
§ 81-4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 81-8
1:104
§ 81-9. Authority to issue fines; disposition of fees. [Added
4-12-2016 ATM by Art. 34]
§ 81-10. (Reserved)
§ 81-11. Removal of dog litter. [Added 4-12-2016 ATM by Art. 33]
The deadline to renew a license shall be 30 days following the
expiration of the prior license. After that date, a penalty will be added
to the license fee, as posted in the Schedule of Fees in the office of the
Town Clerk.
Any dog acquired or moved into the Town shall be required to
obtain a license within 30 days, or upon reaching the age of six
months, whichever occurs last. After 30 days, the owner shall be
subject to late fees as posted in the Schedule of Fees in the office
of the Town Clerk.
(1)
B.
If any matter relating to an expired license remains unresolved after 60
days, either the owner or the Town may bring an action in the District
Court of Westborough requesting that the matter be adjudicated.
C.
Fee exemptions:
No fee shall be charged for any service dog as defined by the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), provided that the dog has
been trained and is in the actual service of a resident of the Town.
(1)
Even if exempt from the licensing fee, all dogs in the Town must
obtain a license following normal procedures, or will be subject to
the fines and penalties posted in the Schedule of Fees in the office
of the Town Clerk.
(2)
D.
Once a dog license fee has been paid to the Town, no fee or portion
thereof shall be refunded.
E.
The Town Clerk, the Animal Control Officer, and the Police Chief shall
have authority to issue fines for violations relating to dog licenses.
A.
All funds received by the Town Clerk as payment for dog licenses,
replacement tags, and related fees and fines shall be paid over to the
Town Treasurer.
B.
It shall be the duty of the owner and each person who possesses or
controls a dog to remove and properly dispose of any feces discharged
by such dog on any sidewalk, walkway, street, park, public area, any
other public property, or any private property in the Town.
A.
9. Editor's Note: This bylaw also repealed former § 81-8, Disposition of funds, as amended;
§ 81-9, Licensing deadline; penalty, added 4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 32; and § 81-10,
Licensing fees, added 9-29-2009 STM by Art. 8]
§ 81-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 81-11
1:105
Any owner or other person who violates the provisions of this section
shall be punished by a fine of $25 for each offense.
B.
The Animal Control Officer or any duly appointed police officer of the
Town shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this bylaw.
C.
§ 81-11 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 81-11
1:106
Chapter 85
EARTH REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 62.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 170.
Zoning — See Ch. 174.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
This bylaw is intended to provide regulation for the filling of land and the
removal of our valuable natural resources, including sand, gravel, stone,
soil, loam, sod, clay and mineral products to protect land, water, scenic and
historic resources.
§ 85-2. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EARTH REMOVAL — The removal of earth materials from a lot or parcel,
including, but not limited to, sand, gravel, stone, soil, loam, sod, clay and
mineral products.
§ 85-3. Applicability.
The filling or removal of materials consisting of more than 400 cubic yards
or stockpiling of materials consisting of more than 100 cubic yards of sand,
gravel, stone, soil, loam, sod, fill and mineral products to or from a lot or
parcel not in public use shall require an earth removal permit granted by
the Board of Selectmen unless such removal is:
At the site of, incidental to, and in connection with, the necessary
excavation, grading and construction of a building, structure, parking
areas and appurtenant driveways pursuant to an approved subdivision,
special permit or site plan decision by the Planning Board; or
A.
Pursuant to a building permit issued by the Building Inspector on a
site on which the earth removal work is occurring on an existing or
proposed slope of 15% or less; or
B.
For the purpose of gardening, landscaping, construction of walkways,
patios, driveways or similar purposes, swimming pools, installation,
repair or replacement of septic systems and wells when approved by
the Board of Health, providing the earth removal work is on an existing
or proposed slope of 15% or less; or
C.
For the purpose of the construction and associated grading of a street
that has been approved by the Planning Board; or
D.
§ 81-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-3
1:107
§ 85-4. Application and procedure.
For the purpose of public works activities related to the maintenance
or improvement of public land or buildings, the maintenance,
reconstruction or resurfacing of any public way; or the installation
of drainage structures or utilities that have been approved by the
appropriate authorities; or
E.
For the removal of earth materials undertaken in connection with a
sand and gravel operation or similar enterprise where such activity is
allowed by zoning; or
F.
For the removal of earth materials undertaken in connection with an
agricultural use if the removal is necessary for or directly related to
planting, cultivating or harvesting or the raising or care of animals; or
G.
In accordance with the terms of an order of conditions or determination
of applicability issued by the Conservation Commission pursuant to
MGL c. 131, § 40, or the Southborough Wetlands Protection Bylaw,
Chapter 170 of the Code of the Town of Southborough.
H.
The Board of Selectmen (hereinafter "the Board") shall be the permit
granting authority for the issuance of an earth removal permit. Such
permit applications shall be submitted, considered, and issued only in
accordance with the provisions of this bylaw.
A.
Any person who desires an earth removal permit shall submit an earth
removal plan prepared and stamped and signed by a professional
engineer registered in Massachusetts, or a registered land surveyor, as
appropriate, showing existing and proposed topography at a scale of
one inch equals 20 feet, including:
The boundaries and topography of the property, including contours
at a two-foot interval specifically indicating the areas with slopes
15% or greater on which the earth removal is proposed to occur;
(1)
The size and location of all existing and proposed buildings,
structures, driveways and parking areas on the site and the
location of all structures on abutting properties within 50 feet of
the property lines of the parcel;
(2)
A plan and narrative description of the method of removal,
including the means proposed to provide erosion and
sedimentation control, to protect groundwater, to control dust, and
to protect abutting properties and/or adjacent areas; and
(3)
A planting plan to ensure permanent revegetation of the site unless
the disturbed area will be covered by gravel, hardscape or a
building or structure.
(4)
B.
Based upon the size or character of the project, including the volume
of earth materials to be removed, area of disturbance and the percent
C.
§ 85-3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 85-4
1:108
§ 85-5. Findings and conditions of approval.
slope on which the work is to occur, the Board may require additional
information or an impact statement or may waive some or all of the
requirements of the earth removal permit application.
The Board shall hold a public hearing within 60 days of receipt of an
application for an earth removal permit. Notice of said hearing shall be
given, at the expense of the applicant, by publication in a newspaper
of general circulation in Southborough and by written notice to all
abutters and abutters to abutters within 300 feet.
D.
The applicant shall make all requests for waivers in writing. The Board
may require the applicant to submit supporting technical information
and documentation to demonstrate why such waiver/s should be
granted. The Board's decision to grant or deny waivers shall be in
writing and shall set forth the reasons for the grant or denial.
E.
The Board shall not approve an application for an earth removal permit
unless it finds that, where applicable, all of the following requirements
will be met:
Reasonable measures shall be employed to minimize adverse
impacts on wildlife habitats and corridors, natural or historic
landscape features, and scenic vistas and views;
(1)
There shall be no net increase in the rate of stormwater runoff from
the site;
(2)
There shall be no net increase in the volume of stormwater runoff
across the boundaries of the site unless provisions have been made
to tie into the public storm drains, where available, with the
approval of the appropriate parties or authorities or the Board
has determined that all reasonable provisions have been made to
minimize any changes in stormwater runoff at the site;
(3)
There shall be no adverse impacts to groundwater resources in
terms of quantity or quality;
(4)
There shall be no adverse impacts to abutting properties from
any change in volume of stormwater runoff resulting from earth
removal, including erosion, silting, flooding, sedimentation or
impacts to wetlands, groundwater resources or wells;
(5)
The duration of exposure of disturbed areas due to removal of
vegetation, soil removal, and/or regrading shall be set forth in a
written time table and approved by the Board;
(6)
Where the site is not proposed to be covered with gravel,
hardscape, or a building or structure, a planting plan to ensure
permanent revegetation of the site has been approved;
(7)
A.
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:109
§ 85-6. Requirements and limitations.
Areas to be planted shall be loamed with not less than six inches
compacted depth of good quality loam and seeded with turf grass
seed or other appropriate ground cover in accordance with good
planting practice;
(8)
Dust control shall be used during grading operations if the grading
is to occur within 500 feet of an occupied residence or place of
business, school, playground, park, cemetery, or place of worship;
and
(9)
Throughout the duration of the earth removal process a gravel
apron of 15 feet wide and at least 25 feet long shall be required
at any site access from a paved public way to prevent unstable
material from being transported onto the roadway by vehicle tires.
(10)
The Board may require a cash performance guaranty to ensure
compliance with these requirements or to reclaim the site. The form
of the bond shall be approved by the Board upon the recommendation
of Town Counsel and the Town Treasurer, as appropriate. With the
approval of the Board and upon the recommendation of Town Counsel
and the Town Treasurer, as appropriate, the applicant may substitute
an irrevocable letter of credit or performance bond in lieu of the
cash performance guaranty. Any performance bond or letter of credit
shall be executed and maintained by a financial institution, surety, or
guaranty company qualified to do business in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
B.
Based upon the nature of the application the Board may impose
reasonable requirements or limitations to minimize the impacts, if any,
on abutting properties or uses.
A.
The Board may deny an earth removal permit if it determines the
requirements of this bylaw are not met, or the intent of the application
is to circumvent other provisions of the Town's bylaws or regulations.
B.
No permit issued pursuant to this bylaw shall be effective for more than
one year from the date of issue. A request to extend said time limits
shall be made in writing to the Board at least 30 days prior to said
expiration date. After consideration of the request for extension, the
Board may grant or deny such extension, and require any appropriate
changes to this approval. Notice of a request to extend said time limits,
shall be made by written notice at the expense of the applicant, to all
abutters and abutters to abutters within 300 feet.
C.
The failure of the Board to act upon any application for an Earth
Removal Permit for a period of 90 days after receipt thereof shall
constitute approval of the application.
D.
§ 85-5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 85-7
1:110
§ 85-7. Enforcement.
The Board or its authorized agent and the Town of Southborough shall have
the power and duty to enforce this bylaw, its regulations, decisions, orders,
violation notices, and enforcement orders issued pursuant to this bylaw, and
may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
§ 85-8. Severability.
Any determination that a particular provision or set of provisions in this
bylaw are invalid or unenforceable shall not render ineffective,
unenforceable, or inapplicable the remainder of this bylaw.
Chapter 91
FEES
§ 85-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8
1:111

ARTICLE I
License Fees
[Fees for various licenses are set from time to time by Town
Meeting action. The up-to-date fee amounts are on file in the office
of the Town Clerk.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8
1:113

ARTICLE II
Police User Detail Fees
[See Ch. 234, Fees, Art. I, Police User Detail Fees.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-8
1:115
Chapter 95
FALSE ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 62.
Gas installations — See Ch. 103.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 124.
§ 95-1. Definitions.
As used in this bylaw, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ALARM SYSTEM — Any device which when activated transmits a signal
to the Police and/or Fire Department, or transmits a signal to a person
or company, who relays information to the Police and/or Fire Department,
or produces an audible or visible signal to which the Police and/or Fire
Department is expected to respond.
ALARM USER — Any person who is the owner or person in charge of
premises where an alarm system is maintained within the Town of
Southborough.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm which results in the Police
Department responding where it is determined after investigation by the
Police Department that no criminal activity or attempted criminal activity
has occurred, or the Fire Department responding where no actual fire is, or
has occurred. A false alarm does not include alarms caused by hurricanes,
surges or failures in the transmission of electrical power or other conditions
that are beyond the control of the user, or in the case of a fire alarm, smoke
caused by cooking, fireplace and stove use where no damage occurs.
TOWN — The Town of Southborough.
§ 95-2. Responsibility to register alarm systems.
Every alarm user shall register an alarm system by completing the
required form which will include his/her name, person who is
authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm
system and who can open or provide access to the premises where the
alarm is located.
A.
All existing alarm systems shall be registered with the Town of
Southborough before January 1, 2005. All alarms users will register
annually by January 1 of each subsequent year. The annual registration
fee will be determined by the Board of Selectmen.
B.
All security alarm systems installed after the effective date of this bylaw
shall be registered with the Chief of Police, and all fire and medical
alarm systems installed after the effective date of this bylaw shall be
registered with the Fire Chief within 30 days of the date of installation.
C.
§ 85-8 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 95-2
1:116
§ 95-3. Equipment limitations.
§ 95-4. False alarms.
Penalty. Failure to comply with any Subsection of § 95-2 shall be
punishable by a fine of $100 for each offense.
D.
Automatic dialer devices prohibited. It shall be unlawful to install a
mechanical protection device that is automatically keyed to and/or
activates the telephone line(s) controlled by and/or listed to the
Southborough Police and Fire Departments. All such devices installed
before the effective date of this bylaw shall be removed before July 1,
2005.
A.
Audible device time limitation. All newly installed security alarm
systems which use an audible bell, horn, or siren shall be equipped with
an automatic shutoff device, which shall deactivate the alarm within 15
minutes. All existing alarm users with an audible bell, horn, or siren
must have such deactivation systems Stalled by January 1, 2005, The
exception shall be fire alarm systems.
B.
Penalty. Failure to comply with any subsection of § 95-3 shall be
punishable by a fine of $100 for each offense.
C.
Notice. An alarm user shall be notified by the Police Department in
writing after the Police Department has recorded two separate false
security alarms from an alarm user within a twelve-month period. An
alarm user shall be notified by the Fire Department in writing after the
Fire Department has recorded two separate false fire or medical alarms
from an alarm user within a twelve-month period. The Police Chief, or
his or her designee, shall notify the alarm user, in writing, of such facts,
including the dates and times of each alleged false alarm. After three
separate false alarms, the Police Chief or designee will again notify
the alarm user, in writing, of such facts. The Fire Chief, or his or her
designee, shall notify the alarm user, in writing, of such facts, including
the dates and times of each alleged false alarm. After three separate
false alarms, the Fire Chief or designee will again notify the alarm user,
in writing, of such facts.
A.
Testing. All users must notify the Police Department for security alarm
systems, and the Fire Department for fire and medical alarm systems
in advance of any testing equipment. Failure to notify the Police or Fire
Department in advance of testing shall constitute a false alarm and be
subject to the assessment schedule contained herein.
B.
Penalties. An alarm user whose alarm system transmits or otherwise
causes more than three false alarms in a twelve-month period shall be
assessed a penalty of $50 for the fourth false alarm in any twelve-month
period; and a $100 penalty for each subsequent false alarm.
C.
§ 95-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-4
1:117
§ 95-5. Monitoring procedures.
A security alarm user, or authorized key-holder is required to respond
to all security alarm calls, unless a verified cancellation is received
before the arrival of the police. The police will accept these verified
cancellations from the owner, key-holder or monitoring company,
before the arrival of the Police patrol unit(s). No fine will be charged for
such cancellation. An alarm user, or authorized key-holder is required
to respond to all fire alarm calls.
D.
An alarm business performing monitoring/central station services for
security systems shall:
Not request dispatch for police response during the first week
after installation of an alarm system, but rather use that week to
train the alarm user on proper use of the alarm system, unless
extenuating circumstances necessitate immediate requests for
response as determined by the Administrator.
(1)
Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers designated by
the Alarm Coordinator;
(2)
Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress or hold-up
alarm activation before requesting a police response to an alarm
signal;
(3)
Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Southborough police
in a manner and form determined by the Alarm Coordinator;
(4)
Communicate verified cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to
the police in a manner and form determined by the Alarm
Coordinator;
(5)
Ensure that all alarm users of alarm systems equipped with duress/
panic alarm are given adequate training as to their proper use;
(6)
No alarm calls received shall be reported by monitoring/central
stations via 9-1-1.
(7)
A.
An alarm business performing monitoring/central station services for
fire alarm systems shall:
Meet all applicable requirements of Underwriters Laboratory and
the National Fire Protection Association Standards for Fire Alarm
monitoring stations.
(1)
(2) Report all fire alarms to Southborough Fire (508) 485-3232.
Report all security alarms to Southborough Police at (508)
485-2121.
(3)
B.
§ 95-4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 95-6
1:118
§ 95-6. Noncriminal enforcement.
This bylaw shall be subject to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D for
noncriminal enforcement. All fines shall be made payable to the Town
Treasurer for deposit in the General Fund.
§ 95-7. Limitation of liability.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this bylaw, the Town, its departments,
officers, agents, and employees shall be under no obligation whatsoever
concerning the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any alarm system
or of alarm monitoring facilities. No liability whatsoever is assumed for
the failure of such alarm devices for monitoring facilities or for failure to
respond to alarms or for any other act or omission in connection with such
alarm devices. Each alarm user shall be deemed to hold and save harmless
the Town, its departments, officers, agents and employees from liability in
connection with the alarm user's alarm device.
§ 95-8. Severability.
If any provision of this bylaw is found or determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction to be unenforceable for any reason, then it is the intent that the
remaining provisions continue in full force and effect.
Chapter 96
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 136.
§ 95-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-8
1:119

ARTICLE I
Pumping of Water From Private Buildings
[Adopted 4-10-2012 ATM by Art. 22]
§ 96-1. Authority of Fire Chief.
The Fire Chief, in his or her sole discretion, and pursuant to general
authority of MGL c. 48, § 42, for public health, safety or welfare purposes
may utilize Fire Department personnel, apparatus, or other resources of
the Department to effectuate the removal of water from within private
buildings, caused by flooding, by pumping or other means, at the written
request of the property owner or tenant in public emergency situations.
§ 96-2. Assessment of fee.
The property owner or tenant may be assessed a fee for such service as
rendered to any private building if, in the sole determination of the Fire
Chief or his or her authorized designee, the water flooding condition could
have been avoided or abated by the owner or tenant by remedial action,
including the installation of sump pumps or other pumping devices.
§ 96-3. Fee schedule.
§ 96-4. Creation of documents.
The Fire Chief may create forms, applications and other documents to be
utilized and executed prior to any Fire Department service being furnished
as specified herein.
§ 96-5. Enforcement of fees as assessed.
The Fire Chief shall have the full authority to pursue any civil action or
judicial remedy available as to enforcement of fees assessed, but which
remain unpaid.
A. First response: no fee assessed.
B. Second response: fifty-dollar fee.
C. Third and subsequent response: one-hundred-dollar fee.
A. First call: No charge.
B. Second call: $50.
C. Third and subsequent calls: $100.
§ 96-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 96-5
1:121
Chapter 103
GAS INSTALLATIONS
§ 103-1. Adoption of standards by reference.
The Town has accepted as a code for the installation of gas appliances and
gas piping within the Town of Southborough the Massachusetts Code for
Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping, as established under Chapter
737 of the Acts of 1960, effective November 26, 1962,10 as promulgated
and adopted by the Massachusetts Gas Regulatory Board, together with all
amendments and addenda which are a part thereof.
Chapter 110
HUNTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 81.
§ 110-1. Permission required.
No person shall be allowed to hunt on public or private property, except by
written permission of the owner of the private or public property, and such
person shall have in his possession such written permission at the time of
hunting.
§ 110-2. Posting of signs.
The Board of Selectmen, as authorized by the landowners, shall post "No
Hunting" signs and shall give further notifications as it deems necessary.
§ 110-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $50.
Chapter 117
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sex offenders — See Ch. 118.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 152.
Pedestrian regulations — See Ch. 195.
10.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 143, §§ 3N and 3O.
§ 96-5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 110-3
1:122
§ 117-1. Conduct prohibited.
No person shall loiter or continue to stand on any sidewalk or public place
in the Town so as to obstruct the passage of or to impede or in any manner
annoy other persons; nor shall any person in a street or way stand or loiter
after being directed by a police officer to move on.
Chapter 118
REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER RESTRICTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 117. Peace and good order — See Ch. 131.
§ 118-1. Determinations and intent.
It is the intent of this bylaw to protect the Town's compelling interest
to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town of Southborough by creating areas around
locales where children, the elderly and mentally retarded regularly
congregate and wherein certain sex offenders are prohibited from
loitering and establishing temporary or permanent residence.
A.
It is determined that this bylaw is the most narrowly crafted means of
restricting to the fullest extent possible the opportunity for registered
sex offenders to approach or interact with children, the elderly and
the mentally retarded where such persons routinely and naturally
congregate and that the protections of the health and safety of our
children, elderly, and mentally retarded is a compelling public and
governmental interest.
B.
This bylaw is intended to create a civil nonpunitive regulatory scheme
in order to protect children, the elderly, and the mentally retarded to
the greatest extent possible under the circumstances of public welfare
protections and not as a punitive measure of any kind.
C.
Registered sex offenders pose a clear threat to the children, the elderly,
and the mentally retarded as vulnerable groups residing in or visiting
the Town, because registered sex offenders are more likely than any
other type of offender to re-offend for another sexual offense, the Town
desires to impose safety precautions in furthering the public purpose
of protecting the children, elderly and mentally retarded. The purpose
of this bylaw is to mitigate the potential risk of harm to children, the
elderly and the mentally retarded of the Southborough Community by
deterring the ability for registered sex offenders to be in contact with
unsuspecting children, the elderly, and mentally retarded in locations
D.
§ 110-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-1
1:123
§ 118-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases when utilized in this chapter shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly described a different meaning:
that are primary utilized by such children, the elderly or mentally
retarded, that is the grounds of public and private schools for children,
centers or facilities that provide day care or children's services, parks,
other recreational facilities, elderly housing facilities or facilities for the
mentally retarded. The Town desires to add location restrictions to such
offenders where state law is silent.
"Registered Sex Offender" for the purposes of this chapter shall mean:
(a) any person who is designated as a sexually violent predator
pursuant to Chapter 6, § 178C, of the Massachusetts General Laws and
who is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to the guidelines
of the Sex Offender Registry Board; (b) any person who is required
to register as a sex offender pursuant to Chapter 6, § 178C, of the
Massachusetts General Laws and who is finally classified as a Level 3
offender pursuant to the guidelines of the Sex Offender Registry; and
(c) any person who is required to register as a sex offender pursuant
to Chapter 6, § 178C, of the Massachusetts General Laws, who is finally
classified as a Level 2 offender pursuant to the guidelines of the Sex
Offender Registry and who has committed a sex offense against a child,
an elder, and/or a mentally retarded person.
1.
"Sex Offender" and "Sex offense" shall have the same meaning as
provided for in MGL c. 6, § 178C.
2.
3. "Child" or "Children" shall mean persons under 18 years of age.
4. "Elder" or "Elderly" shall mean persons over 60 years of age.
"Mentally Retarded person" shall mean, pursuant to MGL c. 123B,
§ 1, a person who, as a result of inadequately developed or impaired
intelligence, as determined by clinical authorities as described in the
regulations of the Department of Mental Retardation, is substantially
limited in his or her ability to learn or adapt, as judged by established
standards available for the evaluation of a person's ability to function in
the community.
5.
"Park" -- Any public land designated for active or passive recreational
or athletic use by the Town of Southborough, the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts or other governmental subdivision, and located within
the Town of Southborough.
6.
"School" -- Any public or private educational facility that provides
services to children in grades Kindergarten through 12.
7.
§ 118-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 118-2
1:124
§ 118-3. Sexual offender residence prohibition, restrictions,
penalties.
"School Bus Stop" -- Any area designated by the public school district
or by a private or parochial school within the Town of Southborough as
a school bus stop.
8.
"Recreational facility" includes, but is not limited to, a playground,
a forest preserve, conservation area, jogging trail or running track,
hiking trail, beach, wading pool, soccer field, baseball field, football
field, basketball court or hockey rink, dance or gymnastic studio, or
whether publicly or privately owned, to which the public has a right
of access as an invitee and which is located within the Town of
Southborough.
9.
"Day-Care Center" -- Any establishment, whether public or private
which provides care for children and is registered with and licensed
pursuant to the applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
by the Office of Child Care Services.
10.
"Elderly housing facility" -- A building or buildings on the same lot
containing four or more dwelling units restricted to occupancy by
households having one or more members 55 years of age or older.
11.
"Permanent Residence" -- A place where a person lives, abides, lodges,
or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
12.
"Temporary Residence" -- A place where a person lives, abides, lodges,
or resides for a period of less than 14 consecutive days or 14 days
in the aggregate during any calendar year, which is not the person's
permanent address or place where the person routinely lives, abides,
lodges, or resides and which is not the person's permanent residence;
but "temporary residence" shall not include residence at a hospital or
other health care or medical facility for less than 14 consecutive days
or 14 days in the aggregate during any calendar year.
13.
"Establishing a Residence" -- To set up or bring into being a dwelling
place or an abode where a person sleeps, which may include more
than one location, and may be mobile or transitory, or by means of
purchasing real property or entering into a lease or rental agreement
for real property (including a renewal or extension of a prior agreement
whether through written execution or automatic renewal).
14.
Prohibition. A registered sex offender is prohibited from establishing
a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of
any school, day-care center, park, other recreational facility, or elderly
housing facility.
A.
It is unlawful for any sex offender who is finally classified as a Level 2
or 3 offender pursuant to the guidelines of the Sex Offender Registry
Board to establish a permanent residence within 1,000 feet of any
school, day-care center, park, or elderly housing facility.
B.
§ 118-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-3
1:125
Evidentiary matters measurements. For purposes of determining the
minimum distance separation under this section, the distance shall be
measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the
permanent or temporary residence to the nearest outer property line of
any school, day-care center, park, recreational facility, elderly housing
facility.
C.
Exceptions. A registered sex offender residing within 1,000 feet of any
school, day-care center, park, recreational facility, or elderly housing
facility does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following
apply:
The registered sex offender established the permanent residence
prior to the effective date of this bylaw; and:
Permanent residence was established by purchasing the real
property where the residence is established, as long as the
registered sex offender continues to reside in, and does not
move to another restricted location in Southborough different
from, the permanent residence established prior to the
effective date of this bylaw; or
(a)
Permanent residence was established through a valid arm's
length, fixed-term, written lease or rental agreement, executed
prior to the effective date of this ordinance, as long as the
registered sex offender continues to reside within, and does
not move to another restricted location in Southborough
different from, the permanent residence established prior to
the effective date of this bylaw; or
(b)
Permanent residence was established through a verbal lease
or rental agreement at the will of the landlord, as long as
the registered sex offender continues to reside within, and
does not move to another restricted location in Southborough
different from, the permanent residence established prior to
the effective date of this bylaw.
(c)
(1)
The registered sex offender is a minor living with his or her
parent(s) or legal guardian(s), which parent(s) or legal guardian(s)
has (have) established a permanent residence pursuant to § 118-3.
(2)
The school, day-care center, park, recreational facility, or elderly
housing facility within 1,000 feet of the registered sex offender's
permanent residence was opened after the registered sex offender
established the permanent residence.
(3)
D.
Forfeiture of exception. If, either after the effective date of this bylaw or
after a new school, day-care center, park, recreational facility, or elderly
housing facility opens, a complaint or an indictment is issued by a
court against a registered sex offender otherwise enjoying an exception
under Subsection D and judgment enters that such sex offender has
E.
§ 118-3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 118-3
1:126
§ 118-4. Additional exceptions.
A person residing within 1,000 feet of any school, day-care center, park,
elderly housing facility or recreational facility does not commit a violation
of this section if any of the following apply:
committed another sex offense, he/she will immediately forfeit that
exception and be required to comply with this section.
Notice to move. A registered sex offender who resides on a permanent
or temporary basis within 1,000 feet of any school, day-care center,
park, recreational facility, or elderly housing facility shall be in violation
of this section and shall, within 30 days of receipt of written notice
of the registered sex offender's noncompliance with the chapter, move
from said location to a new location, but said location may not be within
1,000 feet of any school, day-care center, park, recreational facility, or
elderly housing facility. It shall constitute a separate violation for each
day beyond the 30 days the registered sex offender continues to reside
within 1,000 feet of any school, day-care center, park, recreational
facility, or elderly housing facility. Furthermore, it shall be a violation
each day that a registered sex offender shall move from one location
in the Town to another that is within 1,000 feet of any school, day-care
center, park, recreational facility, and elderly housing facility.
F.
Penalties.
Any violation of this section shall be enforced by noncriminal
disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, as follows:
First offense by registered sex offender: noncriminal fine of
$150 and notification to offender that he/she has 30 days to
move.
(a)
Subsequent offense by registered sex offender: noncriminal
fine of $300 and notification to offender's parole officer and/
or probation officer and the Commonwealth's Sex Offender
Registry Board that the sex offender has violated Town's bylaw.
(b)
(1)
For purposes of this section, notice shall be deemed to be sufficient
and proper if the person service by registered mail, return receipt
requested, or receives in hand service or service by a Constable,
Sheriff or other person authorized to serve civil process within the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or other service as a court of
competent jurisdiction may allow.
(2)
G.
The person established the permanent residence and reported and
registered the residence prior to April 15, 2008.
A.
The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was
not convicted as an adult.
B.
§ 118-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-4
1:127
§ 118-5. Safety zones.
The school, day-care center, park, or elderly housing facility within
1,000 feet of the permanent residence was established after the person
established the permanent residence and reported and registered the
residence pursuant to the Sex Offender Registry Law.
C.
The person is incarcerated in any facility owned, maintained and/or
operated by the Town of Southborough.
D.
The person is admitted to and or subject to an order of commitment at a
public or private facility for the care and treatment of mentally retarded
persons pursuant to MGL c. 123B.
E.
The person is a mentally retarded person subject to guardianship
pursuant to MGL c. 201, § 6,11 or a mentally retarded person subject
to guardianship pursuant to MGL c. 201, § 6A,12 residing with his or
her guardian or residing within a group residence that is professionally
staffed and supervised 24 hours a day.13
F.
Prohibitions.
A registered sex offender is prohibited from entering upon the
premises of a school or day-care center unless previously
authorized specifically in writing by the school administration or
day-care center owner.
(1)
A registered sex offender is prohibited from entering upon the
premises of an elderly housing facility unless previously authorized
in writing by the on-site manager of the elderly housing facility.
(2)
A registered sex offender is prohibited from entering upon the
premises of a park or any recreational facility.
(3)
A.
Exceptions.
The prohibitions defined shall not be construed or enforced so as to
prohibit a registered sex offender from exercising his or her right
to vote in any federal, state or municipal election, or from attending
any religious service.
(1)
The prohibitions defined do not apply to a registered sex offender's
place of residence when such residence is excepted under § 118-3D
and § 118-4.
(2)
B.
Penalties. Any violation of this section may be enforced by noncriminal
disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, resulting in: (1) a noncriminal
fine of $150 for a first violation; and (2) a noncriminal fine of $300
C.
11.Editor's Note: See now MGL c. 190B, §§ 5-301, 5-303, 5-306, 5-306A and 5-309.
12.Editor's Note: See now MGL c. 190B, §§ 5-209, 5-303 and 5-404.
13.Editor's Note: Former MGL c. 201, Guardians and Conservators, was repealed in 2008. See
now MGL c. 190B, the Massachusetts Uniform Probate Code.
§ 118-4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 118-5
1:128
§ 118-6. Enforcement.
§ 118-7. Severability.
If any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or other part of
this bylaw shall for any reason be adjudged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalidated, such judgment
shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder of this bylaw, and it shall
be construed to have been the legislative intent to enact this bylaw without
such unconstitutional or invalid parts therein.
Chapter 124
NUMBERING OF PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 62.
Zoning — See Ch. 174.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 244.
§ 124-1. Required number assignment and display.
No new building erected on any street or way, public or private, shall be
given any occupancy permit until said building shall have been assigned
a house or building number by the Board of Assessors and the owner or
other occupant thereof has affixed the same to the building in a conspicuous
manner.
for each additional violation of this section. A registered sex offender
commits a separate offense for each and every violation of this section.
The Southborough Police Department shall be charged and empowered
with the enforcement of this chapter.
A.
A written list describing the prohibited areas defined in this bylaw
inclusive of school bus stops, as well as a map depicting the residency
restriction areas and a map depicting the safety zones exclusive of
school bus stops, shall be created by the Town and maintained by the
Southborough Department of Public Works. As to school bus stops,
the list, and not the map depicting the safety zones, shall govern. The
Town shall review both the list and the maps no less than annually for
changes. The list, the maps and a copy of this bylaw will be available to
the public at the Southborough Police Department and Southborough
Clerk's office, and on the Town of Southborough website.
B.
§ 118-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-2
1:129
§ 124-2. Placement of numbers. [Added 4-8-1985 ATM by Art. 50]
If, by placing the number on the house, the number is not easily read from
the street, then the number must be placed on a stake or similar structure
near the street at the edge of the driveway leading to the house.
§ 124-3. Enforcement. [Added 4-8-1985 ATM by Art. 50]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Fire Chief.
Chapter 127
PARADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 131.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 152.
Pedestrian regulations — See Ch. 195.
Vehicle regulations — See Ch. 207.
§ 127-1. Permit required.
No person shall form or conduct any parade in any public street, public
sidewalk or public way within the Town, or any procession, except a military
or funeral parade or procession, within such public street, sidewalk or way
without first obtaining a written permit from the Selectmen.
Chapter 131
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sex offenders — See Ch. 118.
Parades — See Ch. 127.
Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 133.
§ 131-1. Prohibited behavior.
No person shall conduct himself in an indecent and disorderly manner, nor
use profane, indecent, obscene or insulting language in any public way or
place or near any dwelling house, nor commit any wanton or willful act on
or about the premises of any person, with intent to annoy or disturb any
inhabitant.
§ 124-2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 131-1
1:130
Chapter 133
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parades — See Ch. 127. Peace and good order — See Ch. 131.
§ 133-1. Hours of activities.
No individual or individuals, group or organization shall solicit door-to-door
on the private property of another between 1/2 hour after sunset and 7:00
a.m. in the Town of Southborough.
§ 133-2. Registration with Police Department required.
Solicitors intending to work between 7:00 a.m. and 1/2 hour after sunset
are asked to register with the Police Department the name or names of
individual solicitors and the make, model, color and registration number of
vehicles being used in connection with the solicitation.
Chapter 136
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 62.
Earth removal — See Ch. 85.
Subdivision regulations — See Ch. 244.
§ 136-1. Covering of wells; penalties.
§ 136-2. Barriers around excavations.
The owners of land whereon is located an abandoned well or a well in
use shall provide a covering for such well capable of sustaining a weight
of 300 pounds or shall fill the same to the level of the ground.
A.
The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500.
B.
The Board of Selectmen may require owners of land which has been
excavated to erect barriers to take other suitable measures within two
days after such owner has been notified in writing by the Selectmen of
the Town that, in their opinion, such excavation involves and constitutes
a hazard to public safety.
A.
§ 131-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-2
1:131
Chapter 143
SECONDHAND SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddlers and solicitors — See Ch. 133.
§ 143-1. Regulations in addition to statute.
All persons or parties granted licenses by the Board of Selectmen in
accordance with MGL c. 140, §§ 54 and 202, regarding dealers in junk, old
metals and secondhand articles, junk collectors and pawnbrokers, shall, in
addition to the restrictions and requirements of said statute, be subject to
the additional following regulations.
§ 143-2. License fee.
The fee for said license shall be $50 per annum.
§ 143-3. Information to be obtained.
Every licensee shall keep a permanent bound book (pages not removable)
in which shall be written, at the time of receipt, the following information:
§ 143-4. Age restrictions.
No licensee shall, directly or indirectly, receive any goods or articles from
a minor, and the responsibility for such determination of the person's age
shall be on the licensee.
§ 143-5. Articles to be retained.
Every licensee shall retain on the licensed premises all goods and articles
received for a specific period of time in accordance with the following
schedule:
The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine not to exceed
$100 per day for every day such person is in violation of such notice,
commencing with the fourth day thereof.
B.
A. Day and hour of receipt of goods or articles.
Specific physical description of goods or articles, including color,
weight, size, markings, etc.
B.
Name, address, age and driver's license number of person who presents
goods or articles. (In case of no license, then suitable pictured
identification will be required.)
C.
§ 136-2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 143-5
1:132
§ 143-6. One address per license; license to be displayed.
Each license shall be effective at only one address, and said license shall be
conspicuously displayed at that address.
§ 143-7. Records to be open for inspection.
All books, records, goods and articles received, held or maintained by every
licensee shall be available for inspection at all times (and without prior
notice) by the Board or designees.
§ 143-8. Bond required; grievances.
Every new licensee, except those who have held a similar license from
the Town for the immediate previous twelve-month period, shall furnish
to the Board a bond in such sum as the Board may require, executed by
the licensee and by a surety company authorized to do business within the
commonwealth. Said bond shall be payable to the Town, for the benefit
of any person aggrieved, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful
observation of the licensee of all applicable statutes, rules and regulations.
Any person so aggrieved may bring suit on the Board in his own name;
provided, however, that the aggregate liability of the surety to all such
persons shall in no event exceed the sum of such bond.
§ 143-9. License to include rules and regulations.
These rules and regulations shall be incorporated into every license granted
hereunder.
§ 143-10. Revocation of license.
The Board may revoke the license of any dealer who violates or fails to
uphold these regulations.
A. Secondhand articles and junk: 14 days.
Old metals, precious metals, precious stones or jewelry, silver and gold:
seven days.
B.
Those articles listed in Subsection B above in those instances where the
Board or designees is satisfied as to the appropriate origin or source of
said goods and articles: four days.
C.
§ 143-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-10
1:133
Chapter 152
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 117.
Parades — See Ch. 127.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 131.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 163.
Pedestrian regulations — See Ch. 195.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 207.
§ 143-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 143-10
1:134
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
[Adopted as Art. IX, Secs. 1 through 5, of the 1983 Code]
§ 152-1. Supervision of streets and sidewalks.
The streets and highways of the Town shall be under the direct supervision
of the Superintendent of Streets appointed by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 152-2. Records to be kept.
The Superintendent of Streets shall keep an accurate account of all money
expended and all work done upon the public ways of the Town and a daily
record of the number of men and teams employed, together with the time
on such work.
§ 152-3. Required reports.
The Superintendent of Streets shall, under the direction of the Selectmen,
cooperate with the State Department of Public Works14 and the County
Commissioners and keep a true and accurate account of all work done
under the authority of Chapters 81 and 90 of the General Laws as they
apply to the Town and report his doings to the Selectmen whenever he
may be required to do so; and he shall also furnish an annual report to the
Selectmen of his doings, together with recommendations for the ensuing
year.
§ 152-4. Excavation permit required; safety requirements.
[Amended 4-10-2000 ATM by Art. 50]
No person shall break or dig up any public sidewalk, street or highway,
or place thereon any staging or other temporary structure, without first
having obtained a written permit approved by the Board of Selectmen or
its designee, or other board having charge of the streets, so to do. Any
person having such a permit shall, before the expiration of the same, restore
such sidewalk, street or highway to its original condition or to a condition
satisfactory to such Board. Any permit issued under the provisions of this
section shall be in force for such time as the Board may specify and shall
always be subject to the condition that during the whole of every night, from
sunset to sunrise, lighted lanterns and proper barriers shall be so placed as
to secure travelers from danger. No person having obtained such a permit
shall fail to comply with the conditions thereof. The Board granting such
permit shall have the right to revoke the same at any time and may require
a bond, either before or after the commencement of work or during its
progress, to secure its proper performance and to save the Town harmless
from all claims for damages which may result therefrom.
14.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 152-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:135
§ 152-5. Curb cut permit required; restoration; bond.
No person shall construct a driveway curb cut or roadway curb cut within a
Town way without first having obtained a written permit from the Highway
Superintendent. Any person having such permit shall, before the expiration
of the same, restore such way, including any sidewalk or grassed area, to
a condition satisfactory to the Highway Superintendent. Any permit issued
under the provisions of this section shall be in force for such time as
the Highway Superintendent may specify. No person having obtained such
a permit shall fail to comply with the conditions thereof. The Highway
Superintendent shall have the right to revoke the same at any time and
may require a bond, either before or after the commencement of work
or during its progress, to secure its proper performance and to save the
Town harmless from all claims for damages which may result therefrom.
The Highway Superintendent may establish rules and regulations governing
said activity.
§ 152-6. Removal of vehicles for snowplowing.
The Superintendent of Streets, or other officer having charge of the ways,
shall be authorized, for the purpose of removing or plowing snow or of
removing ice from any way, to remove or cause to be removed to some
convenient place, including in such term any public garage, any vehicle
interfering with such work, and the liability for the cost of such removal and
the storage charges, if any, resulting therefrom shall be upon the owner of
such vehicle.
§ 152-5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 152-6
1:136
ARTICLE II
Conduct
[Adopted as Art. X, Secs. 3 and 4, of the 1983 Code]
§ 152-7. Coasting upon sidewalks.
No person shall coast on or across any public sidewalk or street of the
Town, except at such times and in such place as may, from time to time, be
designated by the Board of Selectmen.
§ 152-8. Debris on public ways.
No person shall throw or place or cause to be thrown or placed upon any
public street or public way of the Town any nails, spikes, screws, glass, tin
cans or refuse of any kind.
§ 152-9. Placing of snow on public ways. [Added 4-13-1987 ATM by
Art. 56]
No person shall displace snow from privately owned land to a public
way or public sidewalk or so as to impede the operation of any fire
hydrant.
A.
Whoever violates this section shall be liable to a penalty of not less than
$50 nor more than $200 for each such violation.
B.
§ 152-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-9
1:137
Chapter 155
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 62. Zoning — See Ch. 174.
§ 155-1. Permit required.
No swimming pool or appurtenance thereto shall be constructed, installed,
enlarged or altered until a permit has been obtained from the Building
Department.
§ 155-2. Enclosures required.
§ 155-3. Exceptions.
Artificial and man-made ponds and portable wading pools less than 24
inches deep and having a surface area of less than 250 square feet are
exempt from the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 155-4. Enclosures around existing pools.
The owner or owners of land on which a wading or swimming pool is now in
existence shall erect an enclosure as aforesaid within 90 days from the date
on which this chapter takes effect.
§ 155-5. Violations and penalties.
The owner or owners of land on which a wading or swimming pool is
constructed, installed or in existence, who fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, shall be punished by a fine of $20 and an
additional fine of $5 per week for each week the conditions of this chapter
are not complied with.
§ 155-6. Petitions for exceptions.
The Board of Selectmen may, on petitions, after public notice and hearing,
grant exceptions to the provisions of this chapter in cases where the Board
All outside or open-air wading or swimming pools, in existence or to
be constructed or installed, shall be enclosed and made safe by the
erection of a fence, wall or other suitable barrier; said fence and/or
other type of enclosure shall be a minimum of four feet in height and
otherwise meet with the approval of the Building Inspector.
A.
Pools built totally aboveground whose height would form a natural
barrier shall have removable stairs and shall not be left unattended
with these stairs in position.
B.
§ 152-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 155-6
1:138
finds that said exceptions will not be injurious to the neighborhood or
otherwise not detrimental to the public welfare.
Chapter 160
TOXIC AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Gas installations — See Ch. 160. Zoning — See Ch. 174.
§ 160-1. Purpose; authority.
This chapter is intended to protect the ground and surface waters of the
Town from contamination, and to protect the public health and welfare. It is
adopted under the authority of MGL c. 43B, § 13, the Home Rule Procedures
Act.
§ 160-2. Storage requirements.
The requirements of 527 CMR 9.00 Board of Fire Prevention Regulations
for Tanks and Containers, as adopted January 9, 1986,15 shall be complied
with for the design, location, and testing of all storage facilities containing
55 gallons or more of toxic or hazardous materials, regardless of whether
flammable or not, unless, in cases not under jurisdiction of the Fire Chief,
specific departure is authorized by the Board of Health upon its written
determination, following consultation with the Conservation Commission
and Selectmen, that the nature of the materials being stored makes such
departure appropriate, and will result in no compromise in the protection of
ground and surface waters.
§ 160-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Substances listed on the
Massachusetts Substance List contained in 105 CMR 670.000, Appendix A,
substances regulated as hazardous wastes under MGL c. 21C, as amended,
and regulated substances defined under Subtitle 1, Section 9001 of the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended.
§ 160-4. Responsibility for storage.
Where storage is not subject to control under 527 CMR 9.00 Board of
Fire Prevention Regulations for Tanks and Containers,16 responsibilities
15.Editor's Note: See now the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code, 527 CMR 1.00,
which adopts by reference the provisions of National Fire Protection Association NFPA 1,
2012 Edition, as modified by 527 CMR 1.05.
§ 155-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:139
assigned in that regulation to the head of the Fire Department shall be
assumed by the Board of Health.
§ 160-5. Required notice.
All persons applying for a permit or permit renewal under 527 CMR 9.00
Board of Fire Prevention Regulations for Tanks and Containers17 shall
furnish a duplicate copy of the application and plot plan to the Board of
Health, and the head of the Fire Department shall furnish to the Board of
Health copies of all permits granted.
§ 160-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished
by a fine of not more than $100, with each day during which a violation
continues being a separate offense. Upon request by the Board of Health or
on their own initiative, the Board of Selectmen shall take such legal action
as is necessary to enforce this chapter.
Chapter 162
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Swimming pools — See Ch. 155. Water supply — See Ch. 228.
16.Editor's Note: See now the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code, 527 CMR 1.00,
which adopts by reference the provisions of National Fire Protection Association NFPA 1,
2012 Edition, as modified by 527 CMR 1.05.
17.Editor's Note: See now the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire Safety Code, 527 CMR 1.00,
which adopts by reference the provisions of National Fire Protection Association NFPA 1,
2012 Edition, as modified by 527 CMR 1.05.
§ 160-4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 160-6
1:140
ARTICLE I
Water Emergencies
[Adopted 4-10-2000 ATM by Art. 21]
§ 162-1. Procedure for establishing water emergencies.
The Board of Selectmen shall be authorized to establish water emergencies
as may be necessary to conserve the supply of water and to insure the
safe and efficient operation of the water system. During such emergencies
outside use of water drawn from the Town's water system shall be
prohibited for such purposes as irrigation of lawns, gardens, shrubs and
trees, washing of vehicles, recreational use and other use as the Board of
Selectmen may deem appropriate.
§ 162-2. Violations and penalties.
Fines for violation of the water emergency use prohibitions shall be $50 for
the first offense and $100 for subsequent offenses.
§ 162-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-2
1:141
Chapter 163
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicle operation — See Ch. 165. Vehicle and traffic regulations — See Ch. 207.
§ 163-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PROPERTY — Any real property within the Town which is not a street or
highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by power other than human power,
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or
slides, to transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include,
without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor, buggy and
wagon.
§ 163-2. Abandonment prohibited.
Except as to vehicles for which other provisions are made under the laws of
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, no person shall abandon any vehicle
within the Town, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within
the Town for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such
vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned.
§ 163-3. Leaving nonoperating and junked vehicles on streets.
Except as to vehicles for which other provisions are made under the laws
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, no person shall leave any partially
dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or
highway within the Town.
§ 163-4. Unregistered vehicles on private property.
No person shall permit more than one unregistered motor vehicle or trailer
or major parts thereof, except for farm vehicles, to remain ungaraged on
his premises at any time, unless under a Class 1 or Class 2 license for sale
of motor vehicles (MGL c. 140, §§ 57 through 69), or unless given written
authorization by the Selectmen following an investigation and report
§ 162-2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 163-4
1:142
thereon by the Board of Health. Authorization shall be granted only if no
hazard to health or safety is involved and no unsightly condition visible from
adjacent property or public ways is created.
§ 163-5. Disposition of wrecked or discarded vehicles.
No person in charge or control of any property within the Town, whether
as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially
dismantled, inoperative, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain
on such property longer than 10 days, and no person shall leave any such
vehicle on any property within the Town for a longer time than 10 days,
except a vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a
business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary
to the operation of such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate
storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the
Town. This section shall not apply to Class 3 licenses under MGL c. 140,
§ 58.
§ 163-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in
an amount not exceeding $50. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
§ 163-7. Severability.
If any section is held to be invalid, it shall not affect any other section of this
chapter.
Chapter 165
VEHICLES, OPERATION OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 163.
Pedestrian regulations — See Ch. 195.
Vehicle and traffic regulations — See Ch. 207.
§ 165-1. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 163-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-1
1:143
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any real property within the Town, which property
is owned by the Town and which is under the administrative control of the
Recreation Commission, Conservation Commission or School Committee
and which is not a street, highway, paved driveway or paved parking area.
VEHICLE — A machine propelled by power other than human power,
designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or
slides, to transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall include,
without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle trail bike, moped,
tractor, buggy, wagon or snowmobile.
§ 165-2. Operation on public property.
No person shall permit any vehicle in his control or charge to be driven
upon any public property in the Town of Southborough, except with the
express permission of the Board of Selectmen and except for ordinary
maintenance of said property by authorized parties.
§ 165-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any section of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be fined in
any amount not exceeding $200. Each violation shall constitute a separate
offense and shall be punished as such hereunder.
§ 165-4. Severability.
If any section of this chapter is held to be invalid, it shall not affect the other
sections of this chapter.
Chapter 170
WETLANDS PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 62.
Earth removal — See Ch. 85.
Zoning — See Ch. 174.
Water supply — See Ch. 228.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
§ 170-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the wetland-related water
resources and the adjoining land areas in the Town of Southborough by
controlling activities deemed by the Southborough Conservation
Commission to have a significant or cumulative effect upon wetland values:
public or private water supply, flood control, groundwater supply, storm
damage prevention, erosion and sedimentation control, wildlife habitat,
§ 165-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 170-1
1:144
water pollution control, fisheries and freshwater shellfish, and recreation
(collectively "the wetland values protected by this chapter").
§ 170-2. Jurisdiction.
Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission or as provided in this
chapter, no person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade, discharge
into or otherwise alter the following resource areas or within 20 feet of
their borders: any freshwater wetland, bordering vegetated wetland, marsh,
wet meadow, bog or swamp, any bank, beach, lake, river, pond, stream or
any land under said waters, any vernal pool, any land subject to flooding
or inundation by groundwater, surface water or storm flowage (collectively,
"the resource areas"). Any proposed work which falls within 100 feet (the
"buffer zone") of the previously mentioned resource areas must be approved
by the Conservation Commission.
§ 170-3. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
implementation of this chapter:
ABUTTER — The same as owner of land abutting the activity.
ALTER — Includes, without limitation, the following activities when
undertaken to, upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by
this chapter:
Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate
materials of any kind.
(1)
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow
patterns or flood-retention characteristics.
(2)
(3) Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table.
Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may
degrade water quality.
(4)
(5) Placing of fill or removal of material which would alter elevation.
Driving of piles, erection, alteration, replacement or repair of
buildings or structures of any kind.
(6)
(7) Placing of obstructions or objects in water.
(8) Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees.
Changing water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other
physical or chemical characteristics of water.
(9)
Any activities, changes or other work which pollute any body of
water or groundwater.
(10)
A.
§ 170-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3
1:145
§ 170-4. Exceptions.
PERSON — Includes any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business, organization, trust,
estate, the commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent
subject to Town bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public
corporation or body, this municipality and any other legal entity, its
legal representatives, agents or assigns.
Except as otherwise provided in regulations of the Commission, the
definitions of terms in this chapter shall be as set forth in the Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40.
B.
The application and permit required by this chapter shall not be
required for maintaining, repairing, replacing, but not enlarging, a
lawfully located single-family residential structure or appurtenance
thereto, unless said filing is otherwise required by state or federal law.
A.
The application and permit required by this chapter shall not be
required for maintaining, repairing or replacing, but not substantially
changing or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located structure or
facility used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water,
municipal sewage, telephone, telegraph or other telecommunication
services, provided that written notice had been given to the
Conservation Commission prior to commencement of the work and
provided that the work conforms to performance standards and design
specifications in regulations adopted by the Commission.
B.
The application and permit required by this chapter shall not be
required for work performed for normal maintenance or improvement
of land in agricultural use, provided that written notice has been given
to the Conservation Commission prior to commencement of the work,
and provided that the work conforms to performance standards and
design specifications in regulations adopted by the Commission.
C.
The application and permit required by this chapter shall not apply to
emergency projects necessary for the protection of the health or safety
of the public, provided that:
The work is to be performed by or has been ordered to be
performed by an agency of the commonwealth or a political
subdivision thereof.
(1)
Advance notice, oral or written, has been given to the Commission
prior to commencement of work or within 24 hours after
commencement.
(2)
The Conservation Commission or its agent certifies the work as an
emergency project.
(3)
D.
§ 170-3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 170-4
1:146
§ 170-5. Applications for permits; requests for determination.
The work is performed only for the time and place certified by
the Conservation Commission for the limited purposes necessary to
abate the emergency.
(4)
Within 21 days of commencement of an emergency project a permit
application shall be filed with the Commission for review as
provided in this chapter. Upon failure to meet these requirements
of the Commission, the Commission may, after notice and a public
hearing, revoke or modify an emergency project approval and
order restoration and mitigation measures.
(5)
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any orders of
conditions, determinations of applicability or notice of intent filed or
issued prior to the adoption of this chapter.
E.
Other than stated in this chapter, the exceptions provided in the
Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40, as amended) shall not apply.
F.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity or an
area is subject to this chapter may request, in writing, a determination
from the Commission. Such a request for determination shall contain
data and plans specified by the regulations adopted by the Commission.
A.
Written application shall be filed with the Commission to perform
activities regulated by this chapter affecting buffer zones and resource
areas protected by this chapter. The application shall include eight
copies of such information and plans as are deemed necessary by
the Commission to describe proposed activities and their effects on
the environment. No activities shall commence without receiving and
complying with a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
B.
The Commission, in an appropriate case, shall accept as the application
and plans under this chapter the notice of intent and plans filed under
the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40, as amended).
C.
At the time of an application or request for determination, the applicant
shall pay a filing fee specified in regulations adopted by the
Commission. This fee is in addition to that required by the Wetlands
Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40, as amended.) In addition, the
Commission is authorized to require the applicant to pay reasonable
costs and expenses of any expert consultant if deemed necessary by the
Commission to review the application or request for determination. The
exercise of discretion by the Commission in making its determination
to require the payment of a consultant fee shall be based upon its
reasonable finding that additional information acquirable only through
outside consultants would be necessary for the making of an objective
decision. The Commission may waive the filing fee and costs and
expenses for an application or request for determination filed by a
government agency.
D.
§ 170-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6
1:147
§ 170-6. Notice; hearing.
Notice. Any person filing a permit application with the Commission,
at the same time, shall give written notice thereof, by certified mail
(return receipt requested) or hand delivery, to all direct abutters at
their mailing addresses shown on the most recent applicable Tax Map
of the Assessors. The notice to abutters shall state where copies of the
request or application with plans may be examined or obtained. A copy
of the notice mailed or delivered and return receipts shall be filed with
the Commission. When a person requesting a determination is other
than the owner, the request, the plans, the notice of the hearing and
the determination itself shall be sent by the Commission to the owner
as well as to the person making the request. A person complying with
the notice provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to have complied
with the notice requirements of the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c.
131, § 40 as amended).
A.
Hearings.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing on any
application or request for determination, with written notice given
at the expense of the applicant five working days prior to the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Southborough.
(1)
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21 days
from receipt of a completed application or completed request for
determination unless an extension is authorized, in writing, by the
applicant.
(2)
The Commission shall issue its permit or determination, in writing,
within 21 days of the close of the public hearing thereon unless an
extension is authorized, in writing, by the applicant.
(3)
The Commission shall combine its hearing under this chapter with
the hearing conducted under the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c.
131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
(4)
The Commission shall have authority to continue the hearing to a
certain date announced at the hearing or to an unspecified date,
for reasons stated at the hearing. The reasons may include:
Receipt of additional information offered by the applicant or
others.
(a)
An opportunity for the Commission to conduct an on-site
inspection, with or without the applicant of the property.
(b)
Information and plans required of the applicant, deemed
necessary by the Commission in its discretion.
(c)
Snow cover preventing the ground from being seen and
wetland flagging from being verified by the Commission.
(d)
(5)
B.
§ 170-6 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 170-6
1:148
§ 170-7. Review by other boards and officials.
§ 170-8. Permit issuance or denial; determinations; conditions.
Comments and recommendations of boards and officials listed
in § 170-7. In the event that the applicant objects to a
continuance or postponement, the hearing shall be closed, and
the Commission shall take action on such information as is
available.
(e)
Any person filing a permit application with the Commission shall
provide a copy thereof at the same time, together with the date and
time of a scheduled hearing, to the Board of Selectmen, Planning
Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, Board of Health, Town Planner and
Building Inspector. A copy shall be provided to the Conservation
Commission of the adjoining municipality if the permit application
pertains to property within 300 feet of that municipality. The applicant
shall have the right to receive comments and recommendations from
such boards and officials and to respond to them at a hearing of the
Commission prior to final action.
A.
Any comments which other boards and officials wish to have brought
to the attention of the Commission shall be submitted in writing to the
Commission prior to the hearing at which the permit application is to
be heard.
B.
If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the activities
which are the subject of the application are likely to have a significant
or cumulative effect upon the wetland values protected by this chapter,
the Commission, within 21 days of the close of the hearing, shall issue
or deny a permit for the activities requested. If it issues a permit,
the Commission shall impose conditions which the Commission deems
necessary or desirable to protect these values, and all activities shall
be done in accordance with those conditions. The Commission shall
take into account the cumulative adverse effects of loss, degradation,
isolation and replication of protected resource areas throughout the
community and the watershed, resulting from past activities, permitted
and exempt, and foreseeable future activities.
A.
The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet
the requirements of this chapter; for failure to submit necessary
information and plans requested by the Commission; for failure to
meet the design specifications, performances and other requirements
in regulations of the Commission; for failure to avoid or prevent
unacceptable significant or cumulative impacts upon the wetland
values protected by this chapter; and where no conditions are adequate
to protect those values. Due consideration shall be given to any
demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of denial, as
presented at the public hearing.
B.
§ 170-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-8
1:149
§ 170-9. Regulations.
§ 170-10. Security.
As part of a permit issued under this chapter, in addition to any security
required by any other municipal or state board, agency or official, the
Commission may require that the performance and observance of the
A permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance.
Notwithstanding the above, the Commission, in its discretion, may issue
a permit expiring five years from the date of issuance for recurring or
continuous maintenance work, provided that annual notification of time
and location of work is given to the Commission. Any permit may be
renewed for additional one-year periods, provided that a request for
renewal is received, in writing, by the Commission prior to expiration.
C.
For good cause the Commission may revoke or modify a permit issued
under this chapter after notice to the holder of the permit and notice to
the public, abutters and Town boards pursuant to § 170-7 and a public
hearing.
D.
The Commission in an appropriate case shall combine the permit or
other action on an application issued under this chapter with the order
of conditions issued under the Wetlands Protection Act.
E.
No work proposed in any application shall be undertaken until the
permit issued by the Commission with respect to such work has been
recorded in the Registry of Deeds or, if the land affected thereby be
registered land, in the registry section of the land court for the district
wherein the land lies, and until the holder of the permit certifies, in
writing, to the Commission that the permit has been so recorded.
F.
After public notice and public hearing, the Commission shall adopt
rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. The
rules and regulations adopted under this chapter shall not expand
the powers of the Commission beyond the authority granted by this
chapter. Failure by the Commission to adopt such rules and regulations
or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall not act to
suspend or invalidate the effect of this chapter.
A.
Public notice shall be given at least three weeks prior to such hearing
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town and by
posting with the Town Clerk.
B.
At a minimum these regulations shall define key terms in this chapter
not inconsistent with this chapter.
C.
Unless otherwise stated in this chapter or in the rules and regulations
promulgated under this chapter, the definitions, procedures and
performance standards of the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131,
§ 40, and associated Wetlands Regulations, 310 CMR 10.00, shall apply.
D.
§ 170-8 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 170-10
1:150
conditions imposed hereunder be secured wholly or in part by one or more
of the methods described below:
§ 170-11. Enforcement.
§ 170-12. Burden of proof.
The applicant for a permit shall have the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed in the
application will not have unacceptable significant or cumulative effect upon
the wetland values protected by this chapter. Failure to provide adequate
By a proper bond or deposit of money or other undertaking of financial
responsibility sufficient in the opinion of the Commission. This security
shall be received by the Commission prior to the commencement of
the work and will be released in whole or in part upon issuance of a
certificate of compliance for work performed pursuant to the permit.
A.
By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant enforceable
in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the owner of record,
running with the land to the benefit of this municipality whereby the
permit conditions shall be performed and observed before any lot may
be conveyed other than by mortgage deed. This method shall be used
only with the consent of the applicant.
B.
The Commission, its agents, officers and employees shall have authority
to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their
duties under this chapter and may make or cause to be made such
examinations, surveys or sampling as the Commission deems necessary.
A.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce this chapter, its
regulations and permits issued thereunder by violation notices,
administrative orders and civil and criminal court actions. Any person
who violates provisions of this chapter may be required to restore
the property to its original condition and take other action deemed
necessary to remedy such violations or may be fined, or both.
B.
Town boards and officers, including any police officer or other officer
having police powers, shall have authority to assist the Commission in
enforcement.
C.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, regulations
thereunder or permits issued thereunder shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $500 as allowed under MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day
or portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense, and each provision of the chapter, regulation or
permit violated shall constitute a separate offense.
D.
Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen and the Town
Counsel shall take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon
request of the Commission, the Chief of Police shall take legal action for
enforcement under criminal law.
E.
§ 170-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-12
1:151
evidence to the Commission supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause
for the Commission to deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions.
§ 170-13. Appeals.
A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in
an action filed within 60 days thereof in accordance with MGL c. 249, § 4.
§ 170-14. Statutory authority.
This chapter is adopted under the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule statutes, independent of the
Wetland Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and regulations thereunder.
§ 170-15. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this chapter shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof nor shall it invalidate any permit or
determination which previously has been issued.
Chapter 174
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 62.
Demolition delay — See Ch. 63.
Earth removal — See Ch. 85.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 136.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 155.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 170.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
Zoning Board of Appeals — See Ch. 249.
§ 170-12 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 170-15
1:152
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 174-1. Purpose; scope.
§ 174-2. Definitions.
This Zoning Chapter of the Town of Southborough, Massachusetts, has
been adopted and from time to time amended and recodified under the
authority of Chapter 40A and other relevant provisions of the General
Laws of Massachusetts for the purpose of protecting and promoting
the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the current and future
inhabitants of Southborough and for other purposes contained in
Section 2A of Chapter 808, Acts of 1975.
A.
This Zoning Chapter divides the Town of Southborough into districts,
in which the location, construction, occupancy and use of buildings,
structures, premises and land is regulated and restricted as provided
hereinafter.
B.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the word "shall" is
intended to be mandatory, the word "may" is merely permissive, the
singular includes the plural, and the present tense includes the future,
and other words and phrases have the following meanings.
A.
Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ABUTTER — One who abuts.[Added 4-11-1988 STM by Art. 1]
ABUTTING — Having a common property line with, contiguous to,
fronting upon or within 300 feet of any property line thereof.[Added
4-11-1988 STM by Art. 1]
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A subsidiary dwelling unit created within
or as an extension to a single-family dwelling or a structure accessory
thereto, with separate cooking, sleeping and bathroom
facilities.[Amended 4-30-1990 ATM by Art. 50]
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE — A building, structure or use
customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal permitted use of
the building or land, located on the same lot as the principal permitted
building or use, and not prohibited by this chapter. For the purpose
of this chapter, any area on a lot used for the landing and take-off
of aircraft, as defined by MGL Chapter 90, Section 35, or helicopters
(except as allowed in the Industrial Park District by special permit re:
§ 174-8.6C) on a regular or intermittent basis shall not be considered an
accessory to use and therefore not allowed as an accessory or principal
use in any zoning district.[Amended 4-15-1997 ATM; Art. 53]
ALTERATIONS, MINIMUM EXTERIOR — External alterations limited
to those necessary to comply with applicable building, fire or health
B.
§ 174-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-2
1:153
codes and not enlarging the usable area of a building or changing its
character.
BASEMENT — That part of a building which is partly below and partly
above grade, and having at least 1/2 its height above grade.[Added
4-13-1987 ATM by Art. 41]
BUILDING — A structure having a roof and intended or used as a
shelter for humans, animals or goods, to be construed as if followed
by the words "or any part thereof." Buildings which are touching,
structurally connected or attached shall be considered as one
"building."
CELLAR — That part of a building which is partly or completely below
grade, and having at least 1/2 its height below grade.[Added
4-13-1987 ATM by Art. 41]
CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION — The use of a portion, not
exceeding 25%, of a one-family home, including the accessory
buildings, by persons resident therein for a gainful occupation that is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use as a residence; that does not
generate a significant increase in traffic, noise, smoke, vibration, dust,
odors, glare, unsightliness or other effects not normally produced by a
residence; that involves no exterior display or storage of goods, tools,
materials or equipment or the parking of more than one commercial
vehicle; that gives no exterior indication of such occupation, other than
one sign not over four square feet; that involves only motive power
normally found in a home; that does not employ more than two persons
not resident therein; that involves the exercise of artistic, domestic,
personal or professional skills; and that requires the approval of the
Board of Health for disposal of any waste generated by such occupation
that differs in quantity or composition from domestic solid or liquid
waste; provided, however, that exceptions are provided in § 174-13.8
titled "Adaptive reuse of historic buildings."[Amended 4-25-2017
ATM by Art. 27]
DOG KENNEL — The keeping for sale or boarding purposes, including
convalescence or treatment, of more than three dogs that are more
than six months old.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units.[Added 4-30-1990 ATM by Art. 48]
DWELLING UNIT — Living quarters for a single family.[Added
4-30-1990 ATM by Art. 48]
FAMILY — Any number of individuals related by blood, marriage or
adoption, and not more than six individuals not so related, living
together as a single housekeeping unit. (The limit on the number of
unrelated individuals shall not apply to foster children under 16 years
of age.)
FARM — Land or premises used to raise agricultural, silvicultural or
horticultural products, livestock, poultry and dairy products, but
§ 174-2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-2
1:154
excepting, to the extent permitted pursuant to applicable state law and
regulation, piggeries, dog kennels, riding stables and the raising of
carnivorous fur-bearing animals.[Amended 10-7-2013 STM by Art.
9]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The aggregate horizontal area, in square feet,
of all floors of a building or several buildings on the same lot, measured
from the interior faces of walls enclosing each building, exclusive of
stair and elevator wells, garages, basement and other areas used only
for storage or for services incidental to the operation and maintenance
of such a building or buildings. In the absence of information as to what
portion of the building will be used for such storage and services, 80%
of the aggregate floor area shall be deemed to be the floor area for
the purposes of computing the required off-street parking and loading
spaces.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The ratio of the aggregate gross floor area of
all floors of a building or buildings on a lot to the total lot area. The
gross floor area shall not include unenclosed porches, cellars, attics or
garages not used for human occupancy.
FRONTAGE — The distance along a continuous portion of a street
line between intersections with lot side lines, provided that for lots
abutting more than one street, frontage shall be required and measured
along one street only, but the yard required by Article III hereof shall
be provided along each street the lot abuts, and that for corner lots,
frontage shall be measured to the intersection of street lines or to the
middle of the corner rounding curve connecting such street lines, and
further provided that a lot shall only be deemed to have "frontage"
along any street to which it has both legal and physical access.
FUR FARM — The keeping or raising of carnivorous fur-bearing animals
for commercial purposes.
GARAGE — A garage in the Residence A and Residence B Districts
shall be considered an accessory use to a home or building.[Added
4-15-2003 ATM by Art. 62]
HEIGHT — The vertical difference between the average of the mean
finished ground elevations of all sides of the building or structure
and the elevation of the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to
the deckline of mansard roofs and to the mean height between eaves
and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. This definition shall not
include signs and the structural features exempt by § 174-15 hereof
and extending not more than 20 feet above the permitted height. For
buildings subject to site plan approval under § 174-10 hereof, the
average finished ground elevation shall not be raised above the original
natural ground through fill or regrading to more than two feet above
the center-line grade of the frontage street opposite the proposed
building, unless the approved site plan provides for such
buildup.[Added 4-8-1985 ATM by Art. 38]
§ 174-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-2
1:155
HISTORIC BUILDING(S) — A building or structure listed on the
Historic Properties Survey of Southborough Massachusetts June 2000,
on file with the Town Clerk's office, and as may be subsequently
amended and approved by the Southborough Historical Commission, or
any other building or structure that is more than 85 years old.[Added
4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 28]
HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY — Housing with occupancy of each
dwelling unit reserved to no more than two persons, one of whom must
either be 55 years of age or older or handicapped.[Added 4-14-1986
ATM by Art. 37]
IMPERVIOUS — Impenetrable by surface water.[Added 4-14-1986
ATM by Art. 40]
INDIVIDUAL — A human being.
JUNKYARD — Premises used for the collecting, storage and sale of
wastepaper, rags, scrap metal or discarded materials or for collecting,
dismantling, storage, salvage and sale of used machinery, vehicles or
parts thereof.
LOT — A single tract of land in identical ownership throughout with
definite boundaries ascertainable through a recorded plan or deed.
MAJOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — Refer to § 174-13.2A.[Added
4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 36; amended 4-10-1995 ATM by Art. 46]
MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more units,
built on a permanent chassis, equipped with wheels for towing to its
destination, provided with internal heating, plumbing and electrical
systems and designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the
required utilities, with or without a foundation.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING, LOT OR USE — A legally existing
building, lot, location of building on a lot or use of buildings or land
which does not conform to the zoning regulations for the district in
which it is located.
NONPROFIT COMMUNITY HOUSING ORGANIZATION — A
Massachusetts corporation or foundation, no part of the net earnings
of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual,
established by Southborough residents for the sole purpose of
providing housing facilities and services.[Added 4-14-1986 ATM by
Art. 37]
ONE-FAMILY HOUSE — A detached dwelling intended and designed to
be occupied by a single family.
OPEN SPACE — That portion of the lot area that is not covered by
any structure and not used for drives, parking, storage or display.
Wetlands, ponds and man-made retention areas shall not be considered
open space for the purpose of calculating the requirements of this
bylaw. Subsurface sewage disposal systems shall not be allowed within
designated open space except that areas designated for reserve or
§ 174-2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-2
1:156
expansion of an individual or shared system shall be allowed only if in
the opinion of the Board of Health no other options are available or if in
the opinion of the Planning Board it would be beneficial to the overall
layout of the development. All open space shall be stabilized with
natural vegetative cover. Open space shall be permanently protected by
recorded deed.[Added 4-10-2000 ATM by Art. 53]
PERSON — One or several individuals, a family, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, company or institutional organization of any
kind.
PIGGERY — The keeping of five or more pigs over one-year old.
PREMISES — A lot, with all buildings, structures, improvements and
uses thereon.
RESTAURANT — An establishment primarily for serving by a waiter or
waitress, and consumption of meals at tables or at a counter, on the
premises.[Added 1-27-1996 STM by Art. 5]
ROADSIDE STAND — A structure erected and used exclusively for the
sale of flowers or farm and garden products, the majority of which,
by value, have been grown on the premises or within the Town of
Southborough. The structure may be located within the minimum
required front yard, but at least 12 feet from the nearest street line,
if built of wood and other readily movable materials, without a
foundation, integral heating or permanent utility connections, and not
over 350 square feet gross floor area.
STORY — The part of a building between the top of any floor and the
top of the floor or roof next above, including a basement, but excluding
a cellar or attic.[Added 4-13-1987 ATM by Art. 41]
STORY, HALF — That part of a building under a gable or sloping roof
in which the intersection of the bottom of the rafters with the interior
faces of the outside walls is four feet or less above the floor level or
that part of a building if more than half of its exterior wall is below
the mean finished ground elevation, and excluding a cellar or attic used
solely for utilities, services or storage and not for sustained human
occupancy.[Added 4-8-1985 ATM by Art. 38; amended 4-13-1987
ATM by Art. 41]
STREET — A public way laid out for vehicular traffic; a private way
laid out and approved under the authority of the Subdivision Control
Law, Chapter 41 of the General Laws; a way which the Town Clerk
certifies has been used and maintained as a public way; or a way in
existence when the Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the
Town of Southborough and having, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
adequate width, construction and grades for the needs of the existing
and future buildings and uses abutting thereon or to be served thereby.
STRUCTURE — A man-made combination of materials assembled in
a fixed location to give support or shelter or for any other purpose,
including buildings, frameworks, platforms, sheds and the like,
§ 174-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-2
1:157
provided that signs, utility poles and small decorative or accessory
structures not over three feet in height or six feet in any dimension,
such as sculptures, mailboxes, birdbaths, benches and the like, shall not
be subject to the yard requirements of this chapter if located at least
five feet from side or rear lot lines. Fences that are not over six feet in
height shall not be considered structures.[Amended 4-10-2000 ATM
by Art. 56]
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — Substances listed on the
Massachusetts Substance List contained in 105 CMR 670, Appendix A,
substances regulated as hazardous under MGL c. 21C, as amended,
and regulated substances defined under Subtitle 1, Section 9001, of
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended.[Added
4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 40]
TRAILER — A wheeled vehicle designed to be towed and having no
own motive power, including, without limitations, camping or travel
trailers equipped to be used for business, for transportation of goods
or for living or sleeping purposes, but not as a dwelling in a permanent
location.
VEHICULAR USE AREA — Includes all areas used for the circulation,
parking and/or display of any and all types of vehicles, boats or heavy
construction equipment, whether self-propelled or not, and all land
upon which vehicles traverse as a function of the primary uses.
Driveways and parking spaces serving single-family residential uses
shall be an exception to this definition.[Added 4-26-1990 ATM by Art.
42]
WIDTH — The straight-line distance between lot lines parallel to a line
connecting lot corners at frontage street and applicable for the entire
front yard or setback depth.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — A structure (with antennas,
if any) designated to facilitate the following types of services: cellular
telephone service, personal communications service and enhanced
specialized mobile radio service.[Added 4-15-1997 ATM by Art. 52]
YARD — A strip of land, unoccupied by buildings or structures, between
a street or a lot line and a line parallel thereto at a depth equal to
the minimum distance to the nearest part of any building or structure,
measured at right angles to such street or lot line. If a lot is triangular
or wedge-shaped, it shall have no rear yard, while on an irregularshaped
lot, the rear yard shall be adjacent to the lot line most nearly
opposite the frontage street. The minimum required yard may also be
referred to as the required setback.
§ 174-2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-2
1:158
§ 174-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-2
1:159

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Districts
§ 174-3. Districts enumerated.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Southborough is hereby divided
into the following classes of districts:
§ 174-4. Zoning Map.19 [Amended 4-15-2008 ATM by Art. 37]
The location and boundaries of zoning districts are as shown on the Zoning
Map of the Town of Southborough, dated April 9, 1984, as from time to time
amended by votes of the Town Meeting, which map hereby is incorporated
into and made a part of this chapter. The original Zoning Map, signed by the
Planning Board and the Town Clerk, shall be in custody of the Town Clerk,
and facsimile copies thereof shall be reproduced for distribution and sale
with this chapter. Whenever the Zoning Map is amended, a notation of the
Article and date of the Town vote of such an amendment shall be entered
on the Zoning Map as soon as possible upon approval of the amendment
A. Residence A Districts, which may be referred to as RA Districts.
B. Residence B Districts, referred to as RB Districts.
C. (Reserved)18
D. Industrial Districts, referred to as ID Districts.
E. Industrial Park Districts, referred to as IP Districts.
F. Conservation Districts, referred to as C Districts.
G. Wetland and Floodplain Districts, referred to as WFP Districts.
Research, Scientific and Professional Districts, referred to as SP
Districts.
H.
Critical Resource Districts, referred to as CR Districts. [Added
4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 38]
I.
Village Business Districts, referred to as BV Districts. [Added
4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 49]
J.
Highway Business Districts, referred to as BH Districts. [Added
4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 49]
K.
Wireless Communication Service Districts, referred to as WCS
Districts. [Added 4-15-1997 ATM by Art. 52]
L.
18.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, Business Districts, was repealed 4-14-1986 ATM by
Art. 49.
19.Editor's Note: The Town voted at the 4-10-2006 ATM, by Art. 42, to amend the Zoning Map
by deleting in its entirety the Zoning Map dated March 1984 and substituting in its place
the Zoning Map dated March 2006.
§ 174-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-4
1:161
by the Attorney General, but any delay in showing the amendment shall not
affect its validity. The addition of new streets or other geographic features
to the Zoning Map to facilitate orientation may be undertaken from time to
time without action by the Town and without changing district boundaries.
For the purpose of defining the boundaries of Wetland and Floodplain
Districts, the following maps on file in the office of the Town Clerk are
hereby specifically, by reference, incorporated into and made a part of
this chapter and the Zoning Map: Profiles - Main Stem Upper Sudbury
River, and all land shown thereon at or below the one-hundred-year flood
elevation along or sloping toward Sudbury River between Westborough-
Hopkinton and Ashland town lines, as shown in Zone A (100-Year Flood
Zone) on the current version of the National Flood Insurance Rate Map
(as may be updated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or its
successor from time to time), is included in the WFP District, and Town
of Southborough Natural Resources Map and all wetlands three acres or
larger shown thereon are included in the Wetland and Floodplain District.
For the purposes of defining the boundaries of the Conservation District, the
map entitled "Planning Board, Town of Southborough, Worcester County,
Massachusetts," dated 1964, James V. Sewall Company, Oldtown, Maine, is
hereby, by reference, incorporated into and made a part of this chapter, and
the Zoning Map, and all land shown on said map as green, shall be deemed
to be in the Conservation District.
§ 174-5. Interpretation of boundaries.
Where a right-of-way, street, railroad or watercourse is shown on the
map as a district boundary, the center line thereof shall be the boundary
line.
A.
Where a district boundary is shown approximately parallel to a street, it
shall be deemed parallel to the exterior street line and at such distance
therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map.
B.
Where district boundary lines specifically follow property lines as
indicated on the Zoning Map, the location of said lines shall be deemed
to be established to coincide with those property lines as they existed
at the time said boundary lines were adopted.
C.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing at the time such
line is adopted, the regulations relating to the less restricted portion
of such lot may extend not more than 30 feet into the more restricted
portion, provided that the lot has frontage in the less restricted district,
and further provided that this Subsection D shall not apply to the
boundaries of Wetland and Floodplain Districts. [Amended 4-14-1986
ATM by Art. 53]
D.
§ 174-4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-5
1:162
ARTICLE III
Use Regulations
§ 174-6. Applicability.
No land in any district shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building
or structure shall hereafter be occupied, used or erected or the use of
buildings and land altered except as set forth in the following Schedule of
Use Regulations or as specifically regulated or provided otherwise under
other sections hereof, provided that the accessory uses and buildings not
enumerated in the schedule but necessarily or customarily incidental to a
principal use, including the signs otherwise allowed, shall be deemed to fall
into the same category as such principal use. Streets and easements for
public services are a permitted use in all districts, except the Wetland and
Floodplain Districts.
§ 174-7. Conflict of classifications.
Where an activity may be classified under more than one use listed in the
Schedule of Use Regulations, the more specific classification shall apply,
and if equally specific, the more restrictive classification shall govern.
§ 174-8. Schedule of Use Regulations. [Amended 4-8-1985 ATM by
Art. 37; 4-14-1986 ATM by Arts. 5, 25, 36, 37, 38, 40, 46 and 49;
4-30-1990 ATM by Arts. 48 and 50; 4-8-1991 ATM by Art. 52;
4-12-1993 ATM by Art. 43]
No building or structure shall be constructed and no building, structure
or land or part thereof shall be used for any purpose or in any manner
other than for one or more of the uses hereinafter set forth as permitted
in the district in which such building, structure or land is located or set
forth as permissible by special permit in said district and so authorized.
A.
Further, no building shall be constructed and no building, structure or
land or any part thereof shall be used and no lot shall be changed in
size or shape unless in conformity with the dimensional regulations set
forth for each district.
B.
The following notes apply to all districts:
All uses and buildings for which off-street parking is required, other
than one- and two-family dwellings, shall be subject to the site
plan review and approval by the Planning Board, as provided in
§ 174-10.
(1)
Not more than one principal permitted use shall be located on
any lot, provided that a multiple occupancy building used for the
same category of use, such as retail sales and services, light
manufacturing or offices in a business district or Industrial Park
District shall be deemed to be in a single principal permitted use.
The Board of Appeals may, by special permit, allow several different
(2)
C.
§ 174-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8
1:163
§ 174-8.1. C Conservation District. [Added 4-12-1993 ATM by Art.
43]
uses if otherwise permitted in the district or several buildings on
the same lot if such uses or buildings are deemed to be compatible,
meet the requirements of § 174-9 and result in improved
circulation and land use patterns.
For uses subject to a special permit:
(a) Refer also to § 174-9, Special permit requirements;
References to a special permit being required for piggeries,
dog kennels, riding stables and the raising of carnivorous furbearing
animals are effective to the extent that such activities
are not allowed by applicable state law or regulation;
(b)
References to a special permit being required for riding stables
are effective to the extent that such activities are not allowed
by applicable state law or regulation;
(c)
References to a special permit being required for a private
school, nursery or kindergarten are effective to the extent
that such activities are not allowed by applicable state law or
regulation;
(d)
References to a special permit being required for multifamily
dwellings are effective if such dwellings are within a major
residential development created with an optional special
permit as specified in § 174-13.2A, and not for multifamily
dwellings within a major residential development created by
right as specified in § 174-13.2A; and
(e)
References to a special permit being required for major
residential development are effective if a major residential
development is created with an optional special permit as
specified in § 174-13.2A, and not for a major residential
development created by right as specified in § 174-13.2A.
(f)
(3)
(4) (Reserved)
Any lot created after April 8, 1996, in any zoning district except
the BV Business Village District shall contain a minimum lot area of
20,000 square feet exclusive of wetlands as defined in the Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40. Lots created under the Major
Residential Development Bylaw (§ 174-13.2) flexible development
provision that are less than 20,000 square feet shall be entirely
exclusive of wetlands. [Added 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 54]
(5)
A. Permitted uses are as follows:
§ 174-8 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.1
1:164
§ 174-8.2. RA Residence A District. [Added 4-12-1993 ATM by Art.
43]
Park, open space, noncommercial recreation, fishing and hunting
where legally permitted, wildlife management and conservation
area.
(1)
Agriculture, horticulture, floriculture or viticulture, but excepting,
to the extent permitted pursuant to applicable state law and
regulation, piggeries and fur farms. [Amended 10-7-2013 STM
by Art. 9]
(2)
Temporary nonresidential structure accessory to farming, fishing
or similar permitted use of the land.
(3)
(4) Signs as permitted under § 174-11.
(5) Roadside stand.
Uses by special permit are as follows:
Private garage or parking for more than three cars or one truck
or other commercial vehicle. (Note: For uses subject to a special
permit, refer also to § 174-9, Special permit requirements.)
(1)
B.
Uses prohibited. All uses which are not listed above, legally
nonconforming or otherwise allowable by the provisions of the zoning
regulations are prohibited. (Note: New or expanded uses required by
the Metropolitan District Commission or other public agency having
jurisdiction there for the purposes of water supply, drainage and land
or water conservation are permissible in the Conservation District.)
C.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
D.
Permitted uses are as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the Conservation District.
(2) One-family houses.
(3) Religious uses, public or nonprofit school.
Public or nonprofit library, museum, art gallery or a similar cultural
institution.
(4)
(5) Town or other government building.
A.
§ 174-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.2
1:165
Renting of rooms or furnishing of board to not more than four
persons by a resident family in a one-family house.
(6)
Mobile home or travel trailer used as a dwelling for 30 days or
fewer in a year.
(7)
Construction of private garage or private parking for not more
than three vehicles, that is accessory to a permitted principal use
and on the same lot as such use. One vehicle may be a truck or
other commercial vehicle. [Amended 4-8-2002 ATM by Art. 67;
4-15-2003 ATM by Art. 61]
(8)
(9) Customary home occupation.
Parking in a garage or out of doors for employees, customers,
clients, occupants or students, accessory to a permitted principal
use and on the same lot as such use.
(10)
Uses by special permit are as follows:
(1) Accessory apartment.
Boat livery, cemetery, children's camp, golf course, private
nonprofit membership club, public utility, riding stable, ski tow.
(2)
(3) Hospital, nursing home, home for the aged.
(4) Private school, nursery or kindergarten.
(5) Veterinarian, animal hospital, dog kennel.
Conversion of a one-family house in existence for two years or
longer to a two-family dwelling, on a lot with a minimum of 15,000
square feet.
(6)
Mobile home or travel trailer used as a dwelling for more than 30
days in a year.
(7)
Multifamily housing for the elderly, owned by a public or a
nonprofit community housing organization.
(8)
Other multifamily dwellings if within a major residential
development. (Note: Special permit from the Planning Board.)
(9)
Major residential development. (Note: Special permit from the
Planning Board.)
(10)
(11)Office-type trailer or mobile home used as business quarters.
Private garage or private parking for more than three vehicles, that
is accessory to a permitted principal use and on the same lot as
such use. [Amended 4-8-2002 ATM by Art. 67; 4-15-2003 ATM
by Art. 61]
(12)
B.
§ 174-8.2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.2
1:166
Adaptive Reuse of Historic Buildings Bylaw (Note: special permit
from Planning Board). [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 29]
(13)
Prohibited uses. All uses which are not listed above, legally
nonconforming or otherwise allowable by the provisions of the zoning
regulations are prohibited.
C.
Development standards are as follows:
Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet; minimum 20,000 square feet. [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 54]
(1)
(2) Minimum frontage: 150 feet.
Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front: 35 feet.
Rear: 50 feet; 10 feet for accessory buildings and swimming
pools.
(b)
Side: 25 feet; 10 feet for accessory buildings and swimming
pools.
(c)
(d) Other street: 35 feet.
(3)
Maximum height: 35 feet, 2 1/2 stories (17 feet, one story for
accessory buildings). [Amended 4-8-2002 ATM by Art. 68]
(4)
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.18.
In the RA District, no lot shall be considered a building lot unless
the center of a seventy-five-foot diameter circle can be passed
along a continuous line from the lot frontage to the rear yard
setback without the circumference intersecting any lot lines and
unless the center of the seventy-five-foot diameter circle can be
passed along 40% of the required frontage without the
circumference intersecting any side or rear lot line. This
Subsection D(6) shall not apply to an existing lot or existing
dwelling for which a building permit has been issued as of the
effective date of adoption of this Subsection D(6), or to any
alteration, extension or structural change thereto. [Added
4-10-1995 ATM by Art. 47; amended 4-12-1999 ATM by Art.
64]
(6)
D.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
E.
§ 174-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.3
1:167
§ 174-8.3. RB Residence B District. [Added 4-12-1993 ATM by Art.
43]
A. Permitted uses are the uses permitted in the Residence A (RA) District.
Uses by special permit are all uses permitted by special permit in the
Residence A (RA) District.
B.
Prohibited uses. All uses which are not listed above, legally
nonconforming or otherwise allowable by the provisions of the zoning
regulations are prohibited.
C.
Development standards are as follows:
Minimum lot area: 25,000 square feet; minimum 20,000 square
feet exclusive of wetlands. [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 54]
(1)
(2) Minimum frontage: 125 feet.
Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front: 30 feet.
Rear: 35 feet; 10 feet for accessory buildings and swimming
pools.
(b)
Side: 15 feet; 10 feet for accessory buildings and swimming
pools. [Amended 4-11-1994 ATM by Art. 41]
(c)
(d) Other street: 30 feet.
(3)
Maximum height: 35 feet, 2 1/2 stories (17 feet, one story for
accessory buildings). [Amended 4-8-2002 ATM by Art. 68]
(4)
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: .30.
In the RB District, no lot shall be considered a building lot unless
the center of a 62.5 foot diameter circle can be passed along a
continuous line from the lot frontage to the rear yard setback
without the circumference intersecting any lot lines and unless the
center of the 62.5 foot diameter circle can be passed along 40% of
the required frontage without the circumference intersecting any
side or rear lot line. This Subsection D(6) shall not apply to an
existing lot or existing dwelling for which a building permit has
been issued as of the effective date of adoption of this Subsection
D(6), or to any alteration, extension or structural change thereto.
[Added 9-10-1995 ATM by Art. 47; amended 4-12-1999 ATM
by Art. 64]
(6)
D.
Residence C Districts were discontinued in 1966; however, lots laid out
and recorded in Residence B Districts prior to the discontinuance may
be built onto the following dimensions for one-family houses:
(1) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
E.
§ 174-8.3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.3
1:168
§ 174-8.4. BV Business Village District. [Added 4-12-1993 ATM by
Art. 43]
(2) Minimum frontage: 100 feet.
Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front: 25 feet.
Rear: 30 feet; 10 feet for accessory buildings and swimming
pools.
(b)
(c) Side: 10 feet.
(3)
Maximum height: 35 feet, 2 1/2 stories (one story for accessory
buildings).
(4)
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.45.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
F.
Permitted uses are as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the residential districts (RA and RB).
A mobile home or travel trailer used as a dwelling or business
quarters for 30 days or fewer in a year.
(2)
A.
Permitted uses up to 2,000 square feet are as follows:
Retail sales and services which do not involve manufacturing on the
premises.
(1)
(2) Newspaper, job printing and publishing.
(3) Office, bank, office building.
Hotel or motel, restaurant (excluding drive-through food service
establishments). [Amended 1-27-1996 STM Art. 5]
(4)
(5) Clinic or medical testing laboratory.
(6) Dwelling on the premises for a night watchman or janitor.
Cafeteria on the premises for use by employees and not the general
public.
(7)
B.
§ 174-8.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.4
1:169
Permitted uses by special permit from the Planning Board are as
follows:
All uses listed in Subsection B that are greater than 2,000 square
feet.
(1)
(2) Major residential development.
(3) Multifamily dwellings if within a major residential development.
(4) Hospital, nursing home, home for the aged.
(5) Private school, nursery or kindergarten.
(6) Veterinarian, animal hospital, dog kennel.
Multifamily housing for the elderly, owned by a public or a
nonprofit community organization.
(7)
Private garage or parking for more than three cars or more than
one truck or other commercial vehicle.
(8)
Indoor recreation, athletic or exercise facility. [Amended
4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 56]
(9)
Sale or storage of fuel, lumber, building materials and equipment,
contractor's yard.
(10)
Retail sales and services involving manufacturing of products, the
majority of which will be sold on the premises to consumers, with
not more than four persons engaged in manufacturing operations.
(11)
Automotive service, gasoline station or repair garage, automotive
sales.
(12)
C.
Uses by special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals are as follows:
(1) Accessory apartment.
Boat livery, cemetery, children's camp, golf course, private
nonprofit membership club, public utility, riding stable, ski tow.
(2)
Conversion of a one-family house in existence for two years or
longer to a two-family dwelling, on a lot with a minimum of 15,000
square feet.
(3)
A mobile home or travel trailer used as a dwelling or business
quarters for more than 30 days in a year.
(4)
D.
Prohibited uses. All uses which are not listed above, legally
nonconforming or otherwise allowable by the provisions of the zoning
regulations are prohibited.
E.
Development standards (Note: Also refer to § 174-10.1, Village
Business District plan review.) are as follows:
F.
§ 174-8.4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.4
1:170
§ 174-8.5. BH Highway Business District. [Added 4-12-1993 ATM by
Art. 43]
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum frontage: 60 feet.
Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front: 10 feet; 25 feet if on Route 9.
(b) Rear: 35 feet.
(c) Side: 10 feet; 25 feet if adjacent to a residential district.
(d) Other street: 10 feet; 25 feet if on Route 9.
(3)
(4) Maximum height: 35 feet, three stories.
Residential dwellings. Residential dwellings in the Business Village
District must comply with RB District standards.
(5)
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
G.
Permitted uses are as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the Residential Districts.
(2) Dwelling on the premises for a night watchman or janitor.
Cafeteria on the premises for use by employees and not for the
general public.
(3)
A.
Permitted uses up to 50,000 square feet are as follows:
Office-type trailer or mobile home used as business quarters for 30
days or fewer in a year.
(1)
Retail sales and services which do not involve manufacturing on the
premises.
(2)
Retail sales and services involving manufacturing of products, the
majority of which will be sold on the premises to consumers, with
not more than four persons engaged in manufacturing operations.
(3)
(4) Newspaper, job printing and publishing.
(5) Office, bank, office building.
B.
§ 174-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.5
1:171
Hotel or motel, restaurant (excluding drive-through food service
establishments). [Amended 1-27-1996 STM by Art. 5]
(6)
(7) Clinic or medical testing laboratory.
Automotive service, gasoline station or repair garage, automotive
sales.
(8)
Uses permitted by special permit are as follows:
(1) All uses allowed in Subsection B that exceed 50,000 square feet.
(2) Accessory apartment.
Boat livery, cemetery, children's camp, golf course, private
nonprofit membership club, public utility, riding stable, ski tow.
(3)
(4) Hospital, nursing home, home for the aged.
(5) Private school, nursery or kindergarten.
(6) Veterinarian, animal hospital, dog kennel.
Conversion of a one-family house in existence for two years or
longer to a two-family dwelling, on a lot with a minimum of 15,000
square feet.
(7)
Mobile home or travel trailer used as a dwelling or business
quarters for more than 30 days in a year.
(8)
Multifamily housing for the elderly, owned by a public or a
nonprofit community housing organization.
(9)
Private garage or parking for more than three cars or more than
one truck or other commercial vehicle.
(10)
Indoor recreation, athletic or exercise facility; theater for cultural
arts. [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 56]
(11)
Sale or storage of fuel, lumber, building materials and equipment,
contractor's yard.
(12)
Hazardous waste storage and disposal facilities, other than small
generators, as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency
and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, except that a special
permit may be issued for such a facility upon approval by the
appropriate federal and state agencies, review and comment by
the Southborough Board of Health, Conservation Commission,
Planning Board and Fire and Police Chiefs, following a duly
advertised public hearing and in accordance with the Hazardous
Waste Facilities Siting Law.20
(13)
C.
20.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 21D.
§ 174-8.5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.5
1:172
§ 174-8.6. IP Industrial Park District. [Added 4-12-1993 ATM by Art.
43]
Registered marijuana dispensary as defined in 105 CMR 725.004.
[Added 4-16-2014 ATM by Art. 17]
(14)
Prohibited uses. All uses which are not listed above, legally
nonconforming or otherwise allowable by the provisions of the zoning
regulations are prohibited.
D.
Development standards are as follows:
Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet (minimum 20,000 square
feet exclusive of wetlands). [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 54]
(1)
(2) Minimum frontage: 200 feet.
Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front: 50 feet; 75 feet if on Route 9.
(b) Rear: 50 feet.
(c) Side: 50 feet.
(d) Other street: 25 feet; 37 1/2 feet if on Route 9.
(3)
(4) Maximum height: 45 feet, three stories.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60.
Residential dwellings. Residential dwellings in the Highway
Business District must comply with RB District standards.
(6)
E.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
F.
Permitted uses are as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in the Conservation District.
(2) Dwelling on the premises for a night watchman or janitor.
Cafeteria on the premises for use by employees and not for the
general public.
(3)
A.
Uses permitted up to 50,000 square feet are as follows:
(1) Newspaper, job printing and publishing.
B.
§ 174-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.6
1:173
(2) Office, bank, office building.
Wholesale distribution and storage within a building other than a
solid waste transfer station.
(3)
Scientific research and development, including manufacturing,
instruction and other activities clearly incidental thereto at the
maximum density of three employees per acre of lot and with
a direct access to an arterial street, as defined by the Town of
Southborough Planning Board.
(4)
Uses requiring a special permit are as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in Subsection B that exceed 50,000 square feet.
(2) Accessory apartment.
Conversion of a one-family house in existence for two years or
longer to a two-family dwelling, on a lot with a minimum of 15,000
square feet.
(3)
Mobile home or travel trailer used as a dwelling or business
quarters for more than 30 days in a year.
(4)
Multifamily housing for the elderly, owned by a public or nonprofit
community housing organization.
(5)
Boat livery, cemetery, children's camp, golf course, private
nonprofit membership club, public utility, riding stable, ski tow.
(6)
(7) Hospital, nursing home, home for the aged.
(8) Private school nursery or kindergarten.
(9) Veterinarian, animal hospital, dog kennel.
Private garage or parking for more than three cars or more than
one truck or other commercial vehicle.
(10)
Light manufacturing, fabrication, assembly and processing
utilizing electric or other similar quiet motive power and processes
and generating no adverse impacts on the neighborhood and
properties therein.
(11)
Hazardous waste storage and disposal facilities, other than small
generators, as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency
and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, except that a special
permit may be issued for such a facility upon approval by the
appropriate federal and state agencies, review and comment by
the Southborough Board of Health, Conservation Commission,
Planning Board and Fire and Police Chiefs, following a duly
advertised public hearing and in accordance with the Hazardous
Waste Facilities Siting Law.21
(12)
C.
§ 174-8.6 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.6
1:174
§ 174-8.7. ID Industrial District. [Added 4-12-1993 ATM by Art. 43]
Adult bookstore, adult video store, adult paraphernalia store, adult
motion-picture theater, adult live entertainment (see § 174-9I).
[Added 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 56]
(13)
Heliport or landing place for helicopter, not including storage or
maintenance facilities as an accessory use to a permitted principal
use. [Added 4-15-1997 ATM by Art. 53]
(14)
Registered marijuana dispensary as defined in 105 CMR 725.004.
[Added 4-16-2014 ATM by Art. 17]
(15)
Prohibited uses. All uses which are not listed above, legally
nonconforming or otherwise allowable by the provisions of the zoning
regulations are prohibited.
D.
Development standards are as follows:
Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet (minimum 20,000 square
feet exclusive of wetlands). [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 54]
(1)
(2) Minimum frontage: 200 feet.
Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front: 50 feet; 75 feet if on Route 9.
(b) Rear: 50 feet.
(c) Side: 50 feet.
(d) Other street: 50 feet.
(3)
(4) Maximum height: 45 feet, three stories.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60.
E.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
F.
Permitted uses are as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in residential districts.
Boat livery, cemetery, children's camp, golf course, private
nonprofit membership club, public utility, riding stable, ski tow.
(2)
A.
21.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 21D.
§ 174-8.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.7
1:175
(3) Hospital, nursing home, home for the aged.
(4) Private school, nursery or kindergarten.
(5) Veterinarian, animal hospital, dog kennel.
(6) Dwelling on the premises for a night watchman or janitor.
Cafeteria on the premises for use by employees and not for the
general public.
(7)
Uses permitted up to 50,000 square feet are as follows:
Private garage or parking for more than three cars or more than
one truck or other commercial vehicle.
(1)
Indoor recreation, athletic or exercise facility; theater for cultural
arts. [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 56]
(2)
Sale or storage of fuel, lumber, building materials and equipment,
contractor's yard.
(3)
Retail sales and services which do not involve manufacturing on the
premises.
(4)
Retail sales and services involving manufacturing of products, the
majority of which will be sold on the premises to consumers, with
not more than four persons engaged in manufacturing operations.
(5)
(6) Newspaper, job printing and publishing.
(7) Office, bank, office building.
Hotel or motel, restaurant (excluding drive-through food service
establishments). [Amended 1-27-1996 STM by Art. 5]
(8)
(9) Clinic or medical testing laboratory.
Automotive service, gasoline station or repair garage, automotive
sales.
(10)
B.
Uses requiring a special permit are as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in Subsection B that exceed 50,000 square feet.
(2) Accessory apartment.
Conversion of one-family house in existence for two years or longer
to a two-family dwelling, on a lot with a minimum of 15,000 square
feet.
(3)
Mobile home or travel trailer used as a dwelling or business
quarters for more than 30 days in a year.
(4)
Multifamily housing for the elderly, owned by a public or nonprofit
community housing organization.
(5)
C.
§ 174-8.7 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.7
1:176
Major residential development. (Note: Special permit from the
Planning Board.)
(6)
Multifamily dwellings, if within a major residential development.
(Note: Special permit from the Planning Board.)
(7)
(8) (Reserved)22
Wholesale distribution and storage within a building, other than
a solid waste transfer business; warehousing (excluding trucking
terminals with through shipping). [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by
Art. 56]
(9)
Hazardous waste storage and disposal facilities, other than small
generators, as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency
and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, except that a special
permit may be issued for such a facility upon approval by the
appropriate federal and state agencies, review and comment by
the Southborough Board of Health, Conservation Commission,
Planning Board and Fire and Police Chiefs, following a duly
advertised public hearing and in accordance with the Hazardous
Waste Facilities Siting Law.23
(10)
(11) (Reserved)
Scientific research and development, including manufacturing,
instruction and other activities clearly incidental thereto, and with
direct access to an arterial street, as defined by the Town of
Southborough Planning Board.
(12)
Light manufacturing, fabrication, assembly and processing
utilizing electric or other similar quiet motive power and processes
and generating no adverse impacts on the neighborhood and the
properties therein.
(13)
Registered marijuana dispensary as defined in 105 CMR 725.004.
[Added 4-16-2014 ATM by Art. 17]
(14)
Prohibited uses. All uses which are not listed above, legally
nonconforming or otherwise allowable by the provisions of the zoning
regulations are prohibited.
D.
Development standards are as follows:
Minimum lot area: 43,560 square feet (minimum, 20,000 square
feet exclusive of wetlands). [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 54]
(1)
(2) Minimum frontage: 200 feet.
(3) Minimum setbacks:
E.
22.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(8), Bottling plant, was repealed 4-8-1996 ATM by Art.
56.
23.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 21D.
§ 174-8.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.7
1:177
§ 174-8.8. SP Research, Scientific and Professional District. [Added
4-12-1993 ATM by Art. 43]
(a) Front: 50 feet; 75 feet if on Route 9.
(b) Rear: 50 feet.
(c) Side: 50 feet.
(d) Other street: 25 feet; 37.5 feet if on Route 9.
(4) Maximum height: 45 feet, three stories.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.60.
Residential dwellings. Residential dwellings in the ID District must
comply with the standards of the RB District.
(6)
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
F.
Permitted uses are as follows:
(1) All uses permitted in residential districts.
Office-type trailer or mobile home used as business quarters for 30
days or fewer.
(2)
(3) Dwelling on the premises for a night watchman or janitor.
Cafeteria on the premises for use by employees and not for the
general public.
(4)
A.
Uses permitted by special permit are as follows:
(1) Accessory apartment.
Boat livery, cemetery, children's camp, golf course, private
nonprofit membership club, public utility, riding stable, ski tow.
(2)
(3) Hospital, nursing home, home for the aged.
(4) Private school, nursery or kindergarten.
(5) Veterinarian, animal hospital, dog kennel.
Conversion of a one-family dwelling, in existence for two years or
longer, to a two-family dwelling, on a lot with a minimum of 15,000
square feet.
(6)
B.
§ 174-8.7 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.8
1:178
Mobile home or travel trailer used as a dwelling or business
quarters for more than 30 days in a year.
(7)
Multifamily housing for the elderly, owned by a public or a
nonprofit community housing organization.
(8)
Other multifamily dwellings, if within a major residential
development. (Note: Special permit from the Planning Board.)
(9)
Major residential development. (Note: Special permit from the
Planning Board.)
(10)
Private garage or parking for more than three cars or more than
one truck or other commercial vehicle.
(11)
Scientific research and development, including manufacturing,
instruction and other activities clearly incidental thereto, at the
maximum density of three employees per acre of lot and with
direct access to an arterial street, as defined by the Town of
Southborough Planning Board.
(12)
Prohibited uses. All uses which are not listed above, legally
nonconforming or otherwise allowable by the provisions of the zoning
regulations are prohibited.
C.
Development standards are as follows:
Minimum lot area: 50 acres; minimum 20,000 square feet exclusive
of wetlands. [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 54]
(1)
(2) Minimum frontage: 500 feet.
Minimum setbacks:
(a) Front: 150 feet.
(b) Rear: 200 feet.
(c) Other street: 200 feet.
(3)
(4) Maximum height: 35 feet, three stories.
(5) Maximum floor area ratio: 0.40.
Residential dwellings. Residential dwellings in the SP District must
comply with the standards of the RA District.
(6)
D.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
E.
§ 174-8.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.9
1:179
§ 174-8.9. WFP Wetland and Floodplain District. [Added 4-12-1993
ATM by Art. 43; amended 4-12-2011 ATM by Art. 32; 4-16-2014 ATM
by Art. 19]
The Wetland and Floodplain District is considered to be an overlay
district. The District includes all special flood hazard areas within the
Town of Southborough designated as Zone A and AE, on the Worcester
County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the
National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Worcester
County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of
Southborough are Panel Numbers 25027C0654F, 25027C0658F,
25027C0659F, 25027C0662F, 25027C0666F, 25027C0667F,
25027C0668F, 25027C0669F, 25027C0678F and 25027C0686F, dated
July 16, 2014. The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by
the one-hundred-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and
further defined by the Worcester County Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
report dated July 16, 2014. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated
herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk, Planning
Board, Building Official, Conservation Commission and Department of
Public Works.
A.
Base flood elevation and floodway data.
Floodway data. In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have
not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available
federal, state, local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase
in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(1)
Base flood elevation data. Base flood elevation data is required for
subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots
or five acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A Zones.
(2)
B.
Notification of watercourse alteration. In a riverine situation, the
Conservation Commission shall notify the following of any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse:
(1) Adjacent communities.
NFIP State Coordinator:
Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation
251 Causeway Street, Suite 600-700
Boston, MA 02114-2104
(2)
(3) NFIP Program Specialist:
C.
§ 174-8.9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.9
1:180
Federal Emergency Management Agency, Region I
99 High Street, 6th Floor
Boston, MA 02110
Reference to existing regulations.
The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all
other districts. All development in the District, including structural
and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by
special permit, must be in compliance with Chapter 131, Section
40, of the Massachusetts General Laws and with the following:
Section of the Massachusetts State Building Code which
addresses floodplain and coastal high hazard areas (currently
780 CMR).
(a)
Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) (currently 310 CMR 10.00).
(b)
(c) Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00).
Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of
Sanitary Sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5).
(d)
(1)
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above
referenced state regulations may only be granted in accordance
with the required variance procedures of these state regulations.
(2)
D.
Other use regulations.
All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
(a) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(b)
Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(c)
(1)
In Zones AE, along watercourses in the Town of Southborough that
have a regulatory floodway designated on the Worcester County
FIRM, encroachments are prohibited in the regulatory floodway
which would result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2)
E.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
F.
§ 174-8.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.9
1:181
§ 174-8.10. CR Critical Resource District. [Added 4-12-1993 ATM by
Art. 43]
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
Purpose. The purpose of the Critical Resource District is to ensure that
lands critical to the environmental quality of the Town of Southborough
are not physically developed prior to consideration of alternatives to
such development.
A.
Regulations. Critical Resource Districts, as shown on the Zoning Map,
shall be considered to be superimposed over any other district
established in this chapter. Land in a Critical Resource District may be
used as otherwise permitted in the underlying district, subject to the
following:
No density bonuses as authorized under § 174-13.2F shall be
allowed for development within the Critical Resource District, but
land within the district may be used to earn development bonuses
for development to be located outside the district through
transferring of development rights, as provided by § 174-13.2F.
(1)
Submittals under major residential development pursuant to an
optional special permit as specified in § 174-13.2A must include
a flexible development proposal. [Amended 10-7-2013 STM by
Art. 9]
(2)
In acting on major residential development proposals pursuant
to an optional special permit as specified in § 174-13.2A, if the
Planning Board determines that neither the basic development
proposal before it nor any submitted alternatives can adequately
protect scenic views, habitats, fragile natural environments or
other critical environmental resources, it shall grant a special
permit only either: [Amended 10-7-2013 STM by Art. 9]
Upon determination that nondevelopment alternatives for
utilization of site value have been reasonably pursued and
found to be infeasible, including transfer of development rights
or sale of land or rights to the Town or other organization
having land preservation purposes; or
(a)
Upon imposition of a stipulation that no building permit is to
be issued under the special permit and no site preparation
is to take place until either 120 days lapse from the date of
approval or a Town Meeting has earlier acted on a proposal for
acquisition of fee or rights over part or all of the premises in
question.
(b)
(3)
B.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
C.
§ 174-8.9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-8.10
1:182
§ 174-8.11. IWCS Wireless Communication Service District. [Added
4-15-1997 ATM by Art. 52]
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish a district in which
wireless communications services may be provided while protecting,
to the greatest extent possible, public health, safety and the general
welfare. Specifically, the Wireless Communications Services District
has been created to protect the general public from hazards associated
with wireless communications towers and minimize visual impacts from
wireless communications towers on residential districts within
Southborough. For the purposes of this section, "wireless
communications services" shall mean the provision of the following
types of services: cellular telephone service, personal communications
and enhanced specialized mobile radio service. Such services, it is
anticipated, will be provided via wireless communications towers,
including antennas and accessory structures, if any.
A.
Location. The Wireless Communications Services District shall be
located on all land owned by the Town of Southborough which is held in
the care, custody, management and control of the Board of Selectmen,
School Committee and Conservation Commission, and all land located
in Highway Business Districts, Industrial Districts and Industrial Park
Districts. The Wireless Communications Services District shall be
construed as an overlay district with regard to said locations. All
requirements of the underlying zoning district shall remain in full force
and effect, except as may be specifically superseded herein.
B.
Submittal requirements. As part of any application for a permit,
applicants shall submit, at a minimum, the information required for
site plan approval, as set forth herein in § 174-10, as may be amended.
Applicants shall also describe the capacity of the tower, including the
number and types of antennas that it can accommodate and the basis
for the calculation of capacity, and any accessory structures.
C.
Use restrictions. A wireless communications tower (including antennas
and accessory structures, if any) may be erected in a Wireless
Communications Services District upon the issuance of a special permit
by the Board of Appeals pursuant to § 174-9, subject to site plan
approval, as set forth herein at § 174-10, as may be amended, and
subject to all of the following conditions:
To the extent feasible, all service providers shall colocate on a
single tower. Towers shall be designed to structurally
accommodate the maximum number of foreseeable users (within a
ten-year period) technically practicable.
(1)
D.
§ 174-8.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-8.11
1:183
New towers shall be considered only upon a finding by the Board
of Appeals that existing or approved towers cannot accommodate
the wireless communications equipment planned for the proposed
tower.
(2)
In no event shall any such tower be located closer to two miles to
any other such tower.
(3)
(4) Tower height shall not exceed 75 feet above the existing terrain.
A tower shall not be erected nearer to any property line than a
distance equal to the vertical height of the tower (inclusive of any
appurtenant devices), measured at the mean finished grade of the
tower base.
(5)
To the extent feasible, all network interconnections from the
communications site shall be via land lines.
(6)
Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent practicable.
(7)
The tower shall minimize, to the extent feasible, adverse visual
effects on the environment. The Board of Appeals may impose
reasonable conditions to ensure this result, including painting and
lighting standards.
(8)
Traffic associated with the tower and accessory facilities and
structures shall not adversely affect abutting ways.
(9)
Applicants proposing to erect wireless communications towers,
accessory facilities and structures on municipally owned land or
structures shall provide evidence of contractual authorization from
the Town of Southborough to conduct wireless communications
services on municipally owned property.
(10)
Nonuse. All unused towers or parts thereof or accessory facilities and
structures which have not been used for two years shall be dismantled
and removed at the owner's expense.
E.
Exemptions. Towers used for the purposes set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 3,
are exempt from the provisions of this section.
F.
The operation of any marijuana establishment as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1, including without limitation a marijuana cultivator, marijuana
testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or
any other type of licensed marijuana facility is prohibited in all zoning
districts of the Town. This prohibition shall not apply to the sale,
distribution or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes, licensed
under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and currently permitted in the
Town of Southborough. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by Art. 32]
G.
§ 174-8.11 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-9
1:184
§ 174-9. Special permit requirements. [Amended 4-14-1986 ATM by
Art. 46]
In acting on applications for special permits, the special permit granting
authority, whether the Board of Appeals or as otherwise designated by
this chapter, shall conform to the procedural, decision-making and filing
requirements of Chapter 40A of the General Laws, shall make general and,
as appropriate, specific findings as provided herein or called for by the
subject matter and may impose conditions, limitations and safeguards. No
special permit shall issue except upon a general finding that the use sought
and its characteristics shall be in harmony with the intent and purpose of
this chapter, shall not be in conflict with public health, safety, convenience
and welfare and shall not be substantially detrimental or offensive to the
neighborhood or destructive of property values therein. In addition, the
following special requirements shall apply:
Decision considerations. Special permits shall be granted only if the
special permit granting authority determines that the proposal's
benefits to the Town will outweigh any adverse effects for the Town
or the vicinity, after consideration of the following preferred qualities,
among other things:
Location.
The proposal should be located near uses which are similar to
the proposed use, or if not, the nearby uses should be ones
likely to benefit from rather than be damaged by having the
proposal nearby or be permanently buffered from it.
(a)
Providing adequate water and drainage for this location should
pose no special public problems.
(b)
The site should be able to accommodate the proposal without
substantial environmental damage due to wetland loss, habitat
disturbance or damage to valuable trees or other natural
assets.
(c)
(1)
Activity type and mix.
Nonresidential proposals should contribute to the diversity of
services available locally.
(a)
Residential proposals should serve housing needs of local
residents.
(b)
(2)
Visual consequences.
Scenic views from public ways and developed properties
should be considerately treated in the site arrangement and
building design.
(a)
(3)
A.
§ 174-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-9
1:185
Visibility of parking and service areas from public streets
should be minimized through site arrangement, and such areas
should be screened from abutting premises.
(b)
Except on Route 9 and in special circumstances, domestic
scale should be maintained in the building's design through
massing devices, such as breaks in wall and roof planes and
through the design of architectural features.
(c)
Access.
Access to the location should increase existing traffic by no
more than 10% at any point, taking into consideration any
special access provisions committed (ride-sharing, etc.).
(a)
Pedestrian and vehicular movement to, from and within the
site should be safe and convenient and arranged so as not to
disturb abutting properties.
(b)
(4)
Development rate.
Townwide, development should not outpace the ability of the
Town to provide necessary off-site services, including schools,
water and local road capacity.
(a)
Development making unusually large demands on service
capacities should not be allowed to preempt smaller
developments from gaining a fair share of that capacity.
(b)
(5)
Accessory apartments. Special permits for accessory apartments may
be issued upon referral of the application and receipt and consideration
of a report, or after 35 days elapse without such report, from the
Board of Health, certifying that adequate provisions have been made in
accordance with the requirements of the Board of Health for drainage
and for the disposal of sewage and waste generated by the occupancy
of the apartment, and from the Planning Board, describing the lot on
which the dwelling is located, the neighborhood where it is located and
the effect of the proposed apartment thereon, the adequacy of ingress
and egress provisions, the recommendations of the Planning Board as
to the advisability of granting the special permit and any restrictions
that should be imposed as a condition thereof and the provisions for
off-street parking in a manner consistent with the character of the
premises. If the decision of the Board of Appeals differs from the
recommendations of the Planning Board, the reasons therefor shall be
stated in the decision. The accessory apartment shall comply with the
following conditions and requirements: [Amended 4-30-1990 ATM by
Art. 50]
The habitable floor area of the accessory unit shall not exceed 25%
of the habitable floor area of the entire dwelling plus that of any
accessory building used for the accessory dwelling.
(1)
B.
§ 174-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-9
1:186
There is no other apartment on the lot on which the accessory
apartment is proposed.
(2)
Not more than the required minimum exterior alterations have
been or will be made to the one-family house and to any accessory
buildings, and the site plan of the lot and floor plans of the dwelling
thereon have been filed with the Building Inspector prior to the
application to the Board of Appeals.
(3)
The total cumulative number of accessory apartments permitted by
the Board of Appeals since January 1979 shall at no time exceed
5% of the total number of one-family houses in Southborough at
the beginning of the year in which the application is filed, based on
the Assessor's records. Residences containing apartments shall be
counted as one-family houses for the purposes of this subsection.
(4)
Hazardous waste facilities. Special permits for hazardous waste
facilities may be issued only in BV, BH, ID, IP and SP Districts upon
site assignment by the Board of Health, approval by appropriate federal
and state agencies, including the Hazardous Waste Facility Site Safety
Council, and the conclusion of siting processes by the Local Assessment
Committee, as provided in Chapter 21D of the General Laws. In
considering a special permit for such a facility, the Board of Appeals
shall give due weight to the findings and comments of the Planning
Board, Conservation Commission, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Metropolitan
District Commission and the Local Assessment Committee, including
the imposition of conditions, limitations and safeguards called for in the
recommendations of these agencies. [Amended 4-14-1986 ATM by
Art. 49]
C.
Large signs. See § 174-11E, Special permits for signs. [Amended
4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 49; 4-8-2002 ATM by Art. 70]
D.
Nonconforming uses, lots and structures. Special permits may be
issued for the extension or alteration of legally nonconforming uses,
structures and lots, including a change in the nonconforming use to
another nonconforming use, provided that the Board of Appeals finds
that such extension, alteration or change shall not be substantially
more detrimental to the neighborhood, will not increase the extent of
nonconformance in size or in impact and that the cost thereof shall not
exceed 50% of the assessed value of the nonconforming structure at
the time of application, and further provided that the estimate of the
cost of any extension or alteration utilized by the Board of Appeals in
evaluating the above specified 50% requirement of the assessed value
shall not be less than a cost estimate of such extension or alteration
based on a nationally recognized building cost estimate manual or
system acceptable to the Zoning Board of Appeals. No special permits
under this subsection shall be granted for nonconforming signs subject
to Chapter 93 or 93D of the General Laws. [Amended 4-15-2008 ATM
by Art. 38]
E.
§ 174-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-9
1:187
Wetland and Floodplain District uses. Special permits may be issued for
alterations, additions and new structures and uses in WFP Districts only
when the following conditions are met:
The Board of Appeals finds no potential detrimental impact on the
neighborhood, as provided in the lead-in of this section above.
(1)
The application is referred to the Planning Board, the Conservation
Commission and the Board of Health, and their reports are
received and given due consideration, or 35 days elapse following
the referral without the receipt of said reports.
(2)
No alteration, fill, additions or new construction will occur within
the floodway, as defined by the Federal Emergency Management
Administration.
(3)
The land is not, in fact, subject to flooding and not unsuitable
for the purposes of the special permit due to topography, soils
or hydrological conditions; if located in a floodplain, a registered
professional engineer certifies that the proposed development shall
not result in any increase of flood levels during the occurrence
of a one-hundred-year flood and that adequate protection shall
be provided against the effects of current, uplift, battering and
washout.
(4)
If the special permit is for the construction or improvement of
access to existing uses or to land not in a WFP District, it must
be shown that there is no feasible alternate access and that the
natural flow of watercourses will not be impeded or altered.
(5)
If the special permit is for the construction of a barn, garage or
other accessory building or structure, the applicant shall prove, to
the satisfaction of the Board of Appeals, that the special permit
will not result in an increase of ground coverage by principal and
accessory structures of more than 25%, compared to the conditions
in May 1975.
(6)
The Board of Appeals may consider compensatory storage and
other mitigating measures acceptable to the Conservation
Commission to meet the requirements of this Subsection F.
(7)
If the special permit is for a dam, watercourse alteration,
excavation, drainage or wetland improvements or mosquito control
activities, the Board of Appeals shall consider also the broader
impacts thereof and weigh any potential detrimental impacts
against the benefits of the proposed improvements.
(8)
F.
Two-family dwelling. The conversion of a one-family house which has
been in existence for two years or longer to a two-family dwelling is
allowed by special permit from the Board of Appeals. The application
will be considered after receipt of a report, or after 35 days elapse
without such a report, from the Board of Health certifying that
G.
§ 174-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-9
1:188
adequate provisions have been made in accordance with the
requirements of the Board of Health for drainage and the disposal
of sewage and waste generated by the occupancy of the two-family
dwelling. There shall also be a report from the Planning Board
describing the lot on which the dwelling is located, the neighborhood
where it is located and the effects of the proposed two-family dwelling
thereon, the adequacy of ingress and egress provisions, any
recommendations by the Planning Board as to the advisability of
granting the special permit and any restrictions that should be imposed
as conditions thereof and the provisions for off-street parking in a
manner consistent with the character of the premises. If the decision of
the Board of Appeals differs from the recommendations of the Planning
Board, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the decision. The twofamily
dwelling shall comply with the following conditions and
requirements: [Added 4-8-1991 ATM by Art. 49]
The lot on which a one-family residence is to be converted to a twofamily
dwelling must be a minimum of 15,000 square feet.
(1)
There must be no other apartment on the lot on which the twofamily
residence is proposed.
(2)
Not more than the required minimum exterior alterations have
been or will be made to the one-family house and to any accessory
buildings, and the site plan of the lot and floor plans of the dwelling
thereon must be filed with the Building Inspector prior to the
application to the Board of Appeals.
(3)
Multifamily housing for the elderly is allowed by special permit per the
Schedule of Use Regulations, § 174-8. [Added 4-8-1991 ATM by Art.
50; amended 4-15-1997 ATM by Art. 56]
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall grant a special permit for elderly
housing only after considering the following criteria:
No development shall exceed an average per site of a
maximum three units per contiguous acre exclusive of 80%
of wetlands, and six bedrooms per contiguous acre exclusive
of 80% of wetlands. No unit shall have more than three
bedrooms; or no development shall exceed an average per site
of a maximum three units per contiguous acre exclusive of
wetlands, and six bedrooms per contiguous acre exclusive of
wetlands. No unit shall have more than three bedrooms. Any
application submitted to the Zoning Board of Appeals for a
special permit for multifamily housing for the elderly prior to
December 10, 1997, shall be exempt from the exclusion of
wetlands when calculating the maximum number of units per
site. [Amended 12-10-1997 STM by Art. 3]
(a)
(1)
H.
§ 174-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-9
1:189
Evidence shall be shown that, to the greatest extent possible,
the development is offering to provide for the needs of
Southborough residents of varying economic levels.
(b)
The units shall have an exterior design that is consistent with
the styles of the surrounding residential neighborhoods and
the Town of Southborough in general.
(c)
Wherever possible, pedestrian connection to local services
should be incorporated into the site design to lessen the
dependency on the automobile.
(d)
The plan shall be designed to maximize the preservation of the
natural features of the site through the use of cluster housing
and/or creative site planning. Wherever possible, existing
vegetation should be retained throughout the site as a natural
buffer to adjacent properties.
(e)
The proposed development shall satisfy the criteria of this
section (§ 174-9) outlined in Subsection A, Decision
considerations.
(f)
The total cumulative number of units approved under this
section by the Zoning Board of Appeals since January 1998
shall at no time exceed 7% of the total number of one-family
houses in Southborough at the beginning of the year in which
the application is filed, based on the Assessor's records.
Residences containing apartments shall be counted as onefamily
houses for the purposes of this subsection. [Added
4-13-1998 ATM by Art. 52]
(g)
The granting of a special permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals for
multifamily housing for the elderly does not relieve the applicant
from receiving all other applicable approvals, including
Conservation Commission, Board of Health, and Site Plan approval
from the Planning Board (re: § 174-10).
(2)
Adult uses. [Added 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 57]
Purpose and intent. This bylaw is enacted pursuant to MGL c. 40A,
§ 9A, to serve the compelling interests of the Town of Southborough
by preventing the clustering and concentration of adult
entertainment enterprises as defined herein because of the
deleterious effect on character and values of adjacent areas.
(1)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines and
other matter which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or
sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
(2)
I.
§ 174-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-9
1:190
ADULT VIDEO STORE — An establishment having as a substantial
or significant portion of its stock-in-trade videos, movies or other
film material which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or
sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE — An establishment having as
a substantial or significant portion of its stock devices, objects,
tools or toys which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or
sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used
for presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual
excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.
Special permit standards. No special permit may be granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals for an adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult paraphernalia store or adult motion-picture theater unless
the following conditions are satisfied:
No adult bookstore, adult video store, adult paraphernalia
store or adult motion-picture theater may be located less than
1,000 feet from a residential zoning district, school, library,
church or other religious use, child care facility, park,
playground, recreational areas or another adult bookstore,
adult video store, adult paraphernalia store or adult motionpicture
theater. The distance of 1,000 feet shall be measured
from all property lines of the proposed adult use.
(a)
No pictures, publications, videotapes, movies, covers or other
implements, items or advertising that fall within the definition
of adult bookstore, adult video store, adult paraphernalia store
or adult motion-picture theater merchandise or are erotic,
prurient or related to violence, sadism or sexual exploitation
shall be displayed in the windows of or on the building of any
adult bookstore, adult video store, adult paraphernalia store or
adult motion-picture theater or be visible to the public from the
pedestrian sidewalks or walkways or from other areas, public
or semipublic, outside such establishments.
(b)
No special permit shall be issued to any person convicted of
violating the provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63, or MGL c. 272,
§ 28.
(c)
(3)
All existing adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult
paraphernalia stores and adult motion-picture theaters shall apply
for such special permit within 90 days following the adoption of this
subsection.
(4)
§ 174-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-9
1:191
Any special permit granted under this section shall lapse within
one-year of the date of the grant, not including the time required
to pursue or await the termination of an appeal referred to in MGL
c. 40A, § 17, if substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced,
except for good cause, or, in the case of permit for construction,
if construction has not begun within one-year of the date of grant,
except for good cause.
(5)
Medical marijuana.24 [Added 4-16-2014 ATM by Art. 17]
General provisions.
Purpose and intent. This section is enacted in order to serve
the compelling interests of the Town to address possible public
health, safety and quality of life effects related to the location
and operation in the Town of a registered marijuana dispensary
or any other activities permitted or related to Chapter 369 of
the Acts of 2012 (an Act for the Humanitarian Medical Use of
Marijuana). This bylaw establishes specific zoning regulations
for the limited establishment of any registered marijuana
dispensary in appropriate places and under strict conditions,
for medical marijuana infused products, medical marijuana
paraphernalia, and medical marijuana dispensing and
cultivation (either related to a registered marijuana dispensary
or the personal cultivation by qualified patients or by personal
caregivers on the behalf of qualified patients). It is the intent
of this section to minimize impacts on adjacent properties,
residential neighborhoods, schools and other places where
children congregate, and other land uses potentially
incompatible with medical marijuana activities.
(a)
Applicability. No registered marijuana dispensary or related
use shall be established except in full compliance with the
provisions of the State Department of Public Health (DPH)
regulations for medical marijuana as promulgated in the Code
of Massachusetts Regulations (105 CMR 725) and this
§ 174-9J. The cultivation, production, processing, assembly,
packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade, distribution or
dispensing of marijuana for medical use is prohibited unless
permitted hereunder.
(b)
Special terms used in this § 174-9J shall have the meanings
defined in the promulgated DPH regulations for medical
marijuana (105 CMR 725.004).
(c)
Nothing in this § 174-9J shall be construed to supersede or
preempt any federal or state laws governing the sale,
distribution or consumption of narcotic drugs. If the
application of any provision of this § 174-9J shall be
(d)
(1)
J.
24.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 51, Marijuana or Tetrahydrocannabinol, Public Consumption
of.
§ 174-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-9
1:192
determined to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder
hereof shall not be affected thereby, and the provisions of this
section are severable.
Basic requirements.
The Board of Appeals as special permit granting authority may
grant a special permit for a registered marijuana dispensary
only in the Highway Business District [as identified in
§ 174-8.5C(14)], Industrial Park District [as identified in
§ 174-8.6C(15)], or Industrial District [as identified in
§ 174-8.7C(14)], and only upon compliance with the following
requirements:
No applicant shall have been convicted of violating the
provisions of Massachusetts General Laws c. 119, § 63, or
c. 94C, or similar laws in other jurisdictions.
[1]
The applicant has consented in writing to a criminal
background check that includes jurisdictions beyond
Massachusetts.
[2]
A registered marijuana dispensary and/or cultivation
activities shall only be located (i) on property that borders
Route 9, and (ii) not less than 1,000 linear feet from a
property line of a school, recreational facility or day-care
center, or any facility in which children commonly
congregate [see definitions in § 174-9J(2)(c) below] located
in the Town of Southborough, and (iii) not less than 100
linear feet from a property line of a residence located in
the Town of Southborough. The required distances shall be
measured from all property lines of the proposed facility.
[Amended 4-12-2016 ATM by Art. 37]
[3]
Any permitted registered marijuana dispensary site shall
comply with the requirements of the Town's Sign Bylaw25
at all times and, upon penalty of special permit revocation,
shall not use any advertising material that is misleading,
deceptive, false, or that is designed to appeal to minors.
Off-site signage or advertising in any form (including
billboards) is prohibited.
[4]
No activities, products or treatment occurring within or
on the premises of a registered marijuana dispensary shall
be displayed in the windows or on the building thereof,
or be visible to the public from the pedestrian sidewalks
or walkways or from other areas, public or semi-public,
outside such facility or premises.
[5]
(a)
(2)
25.Editor's Note: See § 174-11, Signs.
§ 174-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-9
1:193
§ 174-9.1. Common driveways. [Added 4-11-1994 ATM by Art. 40]
No person shall be deemed to have any entitlement or vested
rights to permitting under this bylaw by virtue of having
received any prior permit from the Town of any kind, including
prior permitting under this bylaw.
(b)
For purposes of this § 174-9J, the following terms shall have
the meanings ascribed:
DAY-CARE CENTER — Any establishment, whether public or
private, that provides care for children and is licensed by the
Massachusetts Department of Early Education and Care.
RECREATIONAL FACILITY — A park, playground, forest
preserve, conservation area, running trail or track, hiking trail,
beach, wading pool, soccer field, baseball field, football field,
basketball court, hockey rink, dance or gymnastic studio,
whether publicly or privately owned, to which the public has a
right of access as an invitee.
SCHOOL — Any public or private educational facility that
provides services to children in grades 12 or under.
(c)
Term of special permit. Any special permit issued pursuant to this
§ 174-9J shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of
issuance. Any renewal of a special permit shall be governed by the
then-existing standards and procedures set forth in this bylaw, and
any regulations adopted pursuant thereto by the Board of Appeals.
(3)
Common driveways serving more than two or more detached singlefamily
dwellings shall not be allowed in any district unless evidence
can be presented to the Planning Board that a common driveway would
be more beneficial to the Town than a conventional plan. The Planning
Board, in considering the granting of a permit for a common driveway,
must be assured the following minimum requirements have been met:
Frontage: each lot served by a permitted common driveway must
have its own full required frontage on a public way.
(1)
The design of common driveways shall assure adequate access
for emergency and public safety vehicles to include turnaround
provision in all seasons, provide water service, if available,
including hydrants, and provide adequate drainage of surface
waters.
(2)
A declaration of covenants, easements and restrictions for the use
and maintenance of said common driveways shall be required by
the Planning Board and shall include satisfactory arrangements
concerning driveway maintenance, snowplowing and restriction
against future use as a public way. Said covenants, easements and
restrictions shall be perpetual, run with the land and be recorded
at the Registry of Deeds.
(3)
A.
§ 174-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-9.1
1:194
§ 174-10. Site plan approval. [Amended 4-8-1985 ATM by Art. 39;
4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 48; 4-13-1987 ATM by Art. 43; 4-11-1988
STM by Art. 4; 4-26-1990 ATM by Art. 41]
In the best interest of public safety, the Planning Board may require
the common driveway to be officially named, clearly identified
with appropriate signage and with all residences within the way
addressed to indicate this name.
(4)
The Planning Board shall act on any request for a common driveway
permit within 30 days of application, in which time they will seek input
from the Departments of Public Safety, Public Works, Board of Health
and solicit comments from the Conservation Commission.
B.
Enforcement. To assure that the conditions of the common driveway
permit are met to the greatest extent possible, the following items must
be satisfied prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for any house
on the common driveway: [Added 4-15-1997 ATM by Art. 51]
A Town-approved Declaration of Common Driveway, Easement and
Covenant shall be signed by the buyer and filed with the Registry of
Deeds. A master covenant, designed by the Planning Board, could
be used.
(1)
It would be the responsibility of the developer to provide the
Inspector of Buildings with the above required documentation,
including, if appropriate, an engineering report asserting that all
required work has been completed per the plans and conditions
approved by the Planning Board.
(2)
C.
The purpose of the site plan review procedure is to encourage a
desirable and compatible character of development within the Town
of Southborough and to assure safety, promote logic, imagination and
innovation in the design process while complying with all zoning
requirements. The requirements of this section shall be applicable to
the following:
Any nonresidential development that results in an increase in onsite
parking.
(1)
All modifications to existing development projects which fall within
the applicability of the Town's regulations for parking and loading
(§ 174-12) or landscaping (§ 174-13).
(2)
Any change in use or reactivation of a facility that has not been in
use for a period of two years. [Added 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 51]
(3)
Multifamily housing for the elderly. [Added 4-15-1997 ATM by
Art. 56]
(4)
Adaptive reuse of historic buildings. [Added 4-25-2017 ATM by
Art. 30]
(5)
A.
§ 174-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-10
1:195
Site plan review will be processed by one of the following means:
Minor plan review. Any new development, or expansion in use other
than a single-family or two-family residence which adds less than
2,000 square feet of floor area or which would require at least
five but fewer than 20 parking spaces regardless of the number
of parking spaces existing on the premises, or any change of use
of a facility that totals less than 2,000 square feet shall be subject
to minor plan review by the Site Plan Review Committee. The
Site Plan Review Committee shall be chaired by the Town Planner
and will consist of a Selectmen or its designee, Building Inspector,
Highway Superintendent, Board of Health Agent, Superintendent
of the Water Department, Police Chief and Fire Chief or their
designee, who will meet at a regularly scheduled time and place
to review plans. The Committee shall also seek the advice of the
Conservation Commission in the review of all minor plan
submissions. [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 51]
Minor plan review will require 10 copies of the site plan to be
submitted to the office of the Planning Board, together with an
application form and filing fee. All plans will be prepared at
a scale no greater than one inch equals 40 feet on standard
twenty-four-by-thirty-six-inch sheets and shall show, as a
minimum:
[1] All existing and proposed buildings, including setbacks.
[2] Existing and proposed parking.
[3] Driveway openings.
[4] All property and street lines.
[5] Existing and proposed landscaping.
[6] Existing and proposed signs.
[7] Surfacing, indicating treatment of all surfaces.
[8] Location of all wetlands.
[9] Method of sewage disposal.
[10]Water supply.
[11]Stormwater drainage.
Such other information as the Site Plan Review Committee
may reasonably request.
[12]
(a)
Any dispute arising from the minor plan review process or
any plan not receiving unanimous approval from the Site Plan
Review Committee shall be referred to the Planning Board
for action. The Committee may also refer any site plan that,
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 174-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-10
1:196
due to unusual circumstances or a unique situation, it feels
should be approved by the Planning Board. All site plans sent
to the Planning Board by the Site Plan Review Committee for
action will be handled through the minor plan review process.
[Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by Art. 51]
The Site Plan Review Committee shall approve, disapprove
or refer to the Planning Board all submittals for minor plan
review within 30 days of a completed application to the office
of the Planning Board.
(c)
Where applicable, all other criteria and conditions of this
section will govern minor plan review.
(d)
Major plan review. Any new development, or expansion in use
other than a single-family or two-family residence which adds 2,000
square feet or more of floor area or which would require 20 or
more parking spaces, regardless of the number of parking spaces
existing on the premises, or any change of use of a facility that
totals 2,000 square feet or more shall be subject to major plan
review by the Planning Board. The major site plan submission shall
consist of the following elements: [Amended 4-8-1996 ATM by
Art. 51]
Ownership, zoning, use and the general location of structure
and topography within 300 feet of the property lines of the site
or adjacent land contiguously owned with the site.
(a)
All site features, existing or proposed, including but not limited
to the following:
[1] Driveways, including widths.
[2] Parking facilities, including dimensions thereof.
[3] Loading facilities.
[4] Service areas.
[5] Street line, including widths.
[6] Roadways, including widths.
[7] Pedestrian walks, including widths and types of surface.
[8] Landscaping designation, specific plantings.
[9] Screening.
Signs, including proposed sizes, mounting heights, types
and drafted design.
[10]
Lighting, including plan location and detail information,
size, type and wattage.
[11]
(b)
(2)
§ 174-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-10
1:197
[12]Surfacing, indicating treatment of all surfaces.
Existing trees on the site which are a caliper of six inches
or larger.
[13]
[14]Wetlands.
[15]Drainage, including detailed design data, pipe sizing, etc.
[16]Stone walls.
[17]Topography at two-foot contour intervals.
[18]Sewage disposal, including detailed design information.
[19]Water supply.
[20]Curbing.
Such other information as the Planning Board may
reasonably request.
[21]
The construction of the work as detailed on the site plan shall
not deviate from the work shown on the approved site plan.
Accordingly, the site plan shall contain a sufficient level of
detail to ensure the constructability of the project. Supporting
details and documentation shall be presented as part of the site
plan submission.
(c)
Incomplete applications for both the minor and major review shall
not be accepted by the Planning Board. Following submission of
a site plan to the Planning Board, the Board or its designee shall
review the plan for completeness within three business days of the
submission. Completeness shall be based on the requirements of
this subsection. If the submission is determined incomplete by the
Planning Board or its agent, notice will be mailed to the applicant
by certified mail within three business days of the submission
specifying the deficiencies.
(3)
The plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer, land surveyor,
architect or landscape architect registered to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and shall be submitted with 11 copies
to the office of the Planning Board, together with an application form
and a filing fee, if any.
C.
Approval required.
Site plan approval shall be granted upon determination by the
Planning Board that the following are complied with. Any new
building construction or other site alteration shall provide
adequate access to each structure for fire and service equipment
and adequate provision for utilities and stormwater drainage
consistent with the functional requirements of the Southborough
Planning Board's Rules and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land
(1)
D.
§ 174-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-10
1:198
and shall be so designed that for the given location and type and
extent of land use, the design of building form, building location,
egress points, grading and other elements of the development shall
be so as to:
Minimize the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed
trees six inches in caliper and larger, the length of removed
stone walls, the area of wetland vegetation displaced, the
extent of stormwater flow increase from the site, soil erosion
and the threat of air or water pollution.
(a)
Maximize pedestrian and vehicular safety and convenience
within the site and egressing from it.
(b)
Minimize obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible
locations.
(c)
Minimize visual intrusion by minimizing the visibility of
parking, storage or other outdoor service areas viewed from
public ways or premises residentially used or zoned;
minimizing glare from headlights through plantings or other
screening; minimizing lighting intrusion through use of such
devices as cutoff luminaires confining direct rays to the site;
fixture mounting height not higher than 20 feet except
adjacent to Route 9; and avoiding unreasonable departure
from the character of building in the vicinity.
(d)
The Planning Board shall adopt and from time to time amend
reasonable regulations for the administration of these guidelines.
(2)
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the application
for site plan approval, with a written notice of the time and place of
said hearing being given the applicant and the Board of Selectmen.
The applicant is responsible for sending this notice to the certified
abutters by certified mail return receipt requested, at least 10 days
before the scheduled hearing. The Planning Board shall not act on
the application until it has received and given due consideration to
the recommendations of the Board of Selectmen or until 10 days have
elapsed after the public hearing without receipt of the Selectmen's
comments.
E.
The Planning Board shall act on an application for site plan approval
and shall notify, in writing, the applicant, the Board of Selectmen and
the Building Inspector of its action within 60 days of the receipt of
the application. Failure of the Planning Board to so act and to notify
the applicant within said 60 days shall constitute approval of the site
plan. The actions allowed by the site plan approval are authorized for a
one-year period from the date of grant thereof. The applicant shall be
granted a single one-year extension by applying to the Planning Board,
in writing, prior to the date of expiration. If the actions permitted are
not exercised or the approval not extended, they shall lapse, and a new
application notice and hearing will be required.
F.
§ 174-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-10
1:199
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board on a site plan
approval application may appeal said action to a Court of competent
jurisdiction in accordance with M.G.L. c.40A, Section 17. [Amended
5-22-2018 STM by Art. 3]
G.
Minor departures from the site plan as approved may be authorized
by the Building Inspector after approval of the Site Plan Review
Committee if required by engineering or other circumstances not
foreseen at the time of plan approval. Any change increasing the size
of any building or structure, changing the location of any building,
parking or access road by more than 10 feet or reducing landscaping
or screening may be made only through review by the Planning Board
following the same procedures as for an original submittal. Any
departure must be requested, in writing, with the basis for the change
given. Any change authorized shall be recorded on the file copy of the
site plan with the Building Inspector's signature and the date.
H.
The removal, fill or change of grade of earth materials, including soil,
loam, sand or gravel, undertaken in order to construct or locate
buildings, structures and such features accessory thereto as ways,
driveways, areaways, walks or parking areas, and therefore exempt
from regulations under Chapter 85 of this Code, is a part of
construction and development process regulated by the Zoning
Chapter. Except as necessary for the construction of detached one- or
two-family dwellings and of features accessory thereto, the removal,
fill or change of grade of earth materials for the purposes defined
above shall be subject to approval under this section. Where the
commencement of removal, fill or change of grade of earth materials
precedes construction by three months or more, the submission and
approval of the site plan may be undertaken in two stages, with the
information for the first stage limited to property boundaries, existing
and proposed topography at two-foot or lesser contour intervals, the
character of the soil to be removed, added or relocated, the location
and depth of any service and drainage conduits or pipes and the
approximate location of any existing or proposed buildings, structures
or physical features accessory thereto. Each stage shall be treated as a
separate site plan for the purposes of this section, and the approval of
Stage 1 of a site plan shall not be construed to assure the subsequent
approval of Stage 2.
I.
Compliance. The issuance of an occupancy permit will not be given
prior to the satisfactory completion of all elements and conditions of
the approved site plan. A temporary occupancy permit may be issued
after the satisfactory completion of all items essential to public health
and safety and sufficient bonding acceptable to the Planning Board is
provided to the Town to cover all outstanding items.
J.
§ 174-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-10.1
1:200
§ 174-10.1. Village Business District plan review. [Added 4-14-1986
ATM by Art. 49; amended 4-8-1991 ATM by Art. 48]
Within the Village Business District, major site plan approval shall be by
special permit from the Planning Board, subject to the procedural
requirements and decision criteria of § 174-9, Special permit requirements,
and § 174-10, Site plan approval, and the following in addition to the above:
Submittals must include floor plans and architectural elevations of all
proposed buildings.
A.
Design shall comply with the following guidelines, except as provided
at Subsection C below:
Scenic views, if any, visible from public ways should be preserved
to the degree reasonably consistent with the given type and scale
of use.
(1)
Major dimensions of any building should be approximately parallel
or perpendicular to one or more nearby streets, if within 100 feet
of such street.
(2)
The appearance of primary wall and roof materials should match
that of materials commonly found on existing buildings within the
Town.
(3)
Except for buildings adjacent to Route 9, domestic scale should be
produced through massing devices such as breaks in wall and roof
planes and through design of architectural features.
(4)
The building should not be made, in effect, a sign, through painting
with bold patterns, checks or other graphics devices or use of
unconventional building form.
(5)
There should be some element of consistency with any buildings on
abutting premises facing the same street, such as consistency in
eave height, wall materials or window proportions.
(6)
B.
A design may be approved despite noncompliance with one or more of
the guidelines under Subsection B if one or more of the following are
determined to be true.
The proposal, despite not meeting the guidelines, is nevertheless
appropriate to its context, considering the established character
of the vicinity, the degree of departure of this proposal from that
character and the functional or symbolic role the structure is
proposed to play.
(1)
The proposal will have minimal consequence for Town appearance
because of its low public visibility, owing to obscure location or
screening.
(2)
C.
§ 174-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-10.1
1:201
§ 174-11. Signs. [Amended 4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 41; 4-14-1986
ATM by Art. 49; 4-10-2000 ATM by Art. 57]
No better compliance would be reasonably possible, taking into
consideration the basic use and intensity of the proposal.
(3)
Purpose. The Town of Southborough regulates and restricts the use of
signs and other identification devices within the Town for the purpose
of:
Promoting public safety and convenience of the streets and roads,
sidewalks and other pedestrian spaces, public property and private
property within public view;
(1)
Preserving for the present and future inhabitants the natural,
architectural and historical assets and other qualities which
distinguish the Town as a highly desirable community;
(2)
Protecting business viability, economic opportunity, property
values, educational values, aesthetic integrity, Village character,
creativity and community appearance by exercising prudent
control; and
(3)
Encouraging compatibility and harmony with surrounding
buildings, land and land uses.
(4)
A.
Definitions. As used in section (§ 174-11), the following words and
terms shall have and include the following meanings:
AGRICULTURAL SIGN — A sign which has wording that may be
changed periodically to advertise products raised or grown principally
on the premises.
AWNING SIGN — Any and every sign displayed on an awning or canopy.
An "awning" or "canopy" is any device, fixed or retractable, of any
material, which extends over or otherwise covers a sidewalk, courtyard,
walkway, eating area, driveway or other area or space, whether that
area or space is intended for pedestrians, vehicles or other purposes.
BANNER — Any and every sign whatever the nature of the material
or manner of composition, message or design, frequently displayed on
a pole or staff which can be freestanding or attached to a building
or structure, and temporary or removable in nature. Official flags of
governmental jurisdictions properly displayed shall not be considered
as banners or otherwise considered as signs for the purposes of this
Zoning Bylaw.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Each separate place of business
whether or not consisting of one or more buildings.
FACADE OF THE BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — That portion of the
building wall facing a street or containing a public entrance, which
corresponds to the height and width of the interior space rented or
owned by the tenant of the business establishment.
B.
§ 174-10.1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-11
1:202
HEIGHT — The maximum vertical distance measured from the finished
grade to the highest point of the sign or its supporting structure,
whichever is higher.
INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED SIGN — Each and every sign which
utilizes translucent panels, canvas or other fabric, letters, devices
including gas-filled luminous tubes or other similar components to
create an image by allowing light to pass through.
LEGAL NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any nonconforming sign legally
erected prior to the adoption of this section, or any amendment thereof.
MOVING SIGNS — Any and every sign any part of which moves, is
designed to move or to be moved, by any means.
ROOF SIGN — Any and every sign located above, or projecting above,
the apex of the roof or the top of a parapet wall of any building, or which
is painted or otherwise attached or affixed to a roof.
SIGN — Any letter, word, symbol, drawing, picture, design, device,
article or object that advertises, calls attention to or indicates any
premises, persons, products, businesses or activities or that conveys or
is intended to convey any message whatever the nature of the material
and manner of composition or construction. (Historical date plaques
and markers approved by the Historical Commission and flags and
insignias of governmental jurisdictions shall not be considered signs
except when displayed for the purpose of commercial promotion.)
STANDING SIGN — Any and every freestanding sign erected on or
affixed to the land and includes any and every sign that is not attached
to a building.
TEMPORARY SIGNS — Any and every sign which by its design and/or
use is temporary in nature, frequently composed of paper, posterboard
and/or cardboard or other material attached so as to be visible through
windows and glass doors or otherwise displayed on a property, typically
containing messages relative to sale, lease, rental or construction of
property, garage or yard sales and similar occasional uses, special
sales, bazaars, dinners or other events.
TRAFFIC SIGNS — Any sign limited solely to directing traffic within or
setting out restrictions on the use of parking areas.
TRAILER OR VEHICLE SIGNS — For the purposes of this sign bylaw, a
vehicle, motor vehicle or self-propelled vehicle shall be considered and
regulated as a sign when or under such circumstances any such vehicle
is not engaged in the usual business or work of the owner or lessee but
is used for advertising purposes.
WALL SIGN — Any and every sign attached to a building and not
considered to be a roof sign or window sign.
WINDOW SIGN — Any and every sign consisting of individual letters or
graphics painted or otherwise similarly affixed directly to, or hanging
§ 174-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-11
1:203
behind, the glass surface of a window or door and designed to be visible
from the outside of any building.
General provisions.
Permit not required. The following types of signs do not require a
permit from the Inspector of Buildings:
Signs not exceeding four square feet in area and bearing only
property numbers, or names of residents of premises.
(a)
Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed
in connection with commercial promotion.
(b)
Legal notices, identification information or direction signs
erected by governmental bodies.
(c)
Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings,
except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights.
(d)
Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private
property, but bearing no advertising matter.
(e)
In accordance with MGL c. 94, § 295C, standard gasoline fuel
pump signs on service station fuel pumps bearing thereon in
usual size and form the name, type and price of the gasoline.
(f)
Open/closed signs not exceeding two feet by three feet; one per
business.
(g)
Open flags, not exceeding three feet by five feet and not
containing any promotional logos or advertising; one per
business.
(h)
(i) Temporary signs.
(1)
Basic requirements, all districts.
The only signs allowed in the Town of Southborough are signs
that advertise, call attention to or indicate the person
occupying the premises on which the sign is erected or
maintained or the business transacted thereon or that
advertise the property itself or any part thereof as for sale or
rent and which contain no other matter.
(a)
(b) Billboards and similar signs are specifically prohibited.
Flashing, moving, changing message and animated signs are
prohibited.
(c)
No sign may be illuminated between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
except signs identifying police or fire stations or businesses
open to serve the public on site.
(d)
(2)
C.
§ 174-11 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-11
1:204
"No hunting, fishing, etc.," signs exceeding one square foot are
prohibited.
(e)
Permits. No sign shall be erected or altered on the exterior
of any building or on any land unless and until application for
the erection or alteration of such sign has been filed with the
Building Inspector, with such information and drawings as he
may require, and permit for the erection of the sign has been
issued by him.
(f)
No sign may depict or represent any sexual conduct or state of
sexual excitement as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, nor shall any
such representations or depictions be placed upon or within
the windows or walls of the premises so as to be visible to the
public from the exterior of the premises.
(g)
Banners, pennants, streamers, ribbons, spinners and other
moving, fluttering, revolving or changing devices and strings
of lights shall not be used as signs or parts thereof, provided
that lights may be used as part of a religious celebration not
connected to commercial promotion, and further provided that
banners or similar devices may be used for temporary political
signs.
(h)
Illumination of signs. Illumination shall be by white, steady,
stationary light shielded and directed solely (or by silhouette) at
the sign. The foregoing is applicable to signs exterior to a building
and to permanent interior signs designed to be visible through a
door or window. No sign may utilize translucent panels, canvas or
other fabric, letters, devices or other similar components to create
an image by allowing light to pass through, except for businesses
fronting on Route 9. The light, whether internal or illuminating the
sign from the outside, shall not be placed, directed or arranged so
as to throw a beam of light, glare or reflection on any street or
highway, walk or nearby properties of others in such a manner as to
create a traffic hazard or nuisance. Illuminated signs are prohibited
in residential and conservation districts.
(3)
Maximum number of signs allowed. Unless otherwise provided
herein there shall be not more than two of the four following
types of signs: wall, window, standing or awning for each business
establishment with the following exceptions:
If a business establishment has more than one public entrance
at street level there may be additional signs at each such
entrance, other than the wall to which the principal sign is
attached. Such signs shall not exceed 15 square feet or 10%
of the facade of the business establishment, whichever is less.
If a business establishment consists of more than one building,
a secondary sign, not exceeding 15 square feet or 10% of the
facade of the business establishment, whichever is less, may
(a)
(4)
§ 174-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-11
1:205
be affixed to a wall of each such building, not including the
building to which the principal sign is attached.
In addition to the foregoing sign or signs, one directory of the
business establishments occupying a building may be attached
to the exterior wall of the building at each public entrance
to the building. Such directory shall not exceed an area
determined on the basis on one square foot for each
establishment occupying the building or six square feet in total
area, whichever is less.
(b)
Maximum area of signs allowed. For purposes of determining the
maximum size limitations, any intermediary removable surface to
which a sign is attached shall be deemed part of the sign; and any
sign composed of separate letters, numbers or symbols cut into
or attached to a wall or painted on or otherwise attached to an
awning, canopy or window shall be deemed to the extreme limits of
the sign. A two-sided sign, with messages on opposite sides (backto-
back), will be deemed to be one sign; a sign with faces at an
angle to each other shall be deemed to consist of several signs, one
for each direction faced. The sum of the areas of wall, window and
awning signs of a business in the aggregate shall not exceed the
lesser of the following two amounts:
(a) Ten percent of the facade of the business establishment.
Fifty square feet in districts fronting on streets other than
Route 9, or 75 square feet in districts fronting on Route 9.
(b)
(5)
Nonconforming signs. Any legal nonconforming sign may continue
to be maintained but shall not be enlarged, reworded, redesigned
or altered in any way unless it is brought into conformity with these
requirements. Any such sign which has been destroyed or damaged
to such an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed 35%
of the replacement value of the sign at the time of the destruction
or damage shall not be repaired or rebuilt or altered unless in
conformity with this section. The exemption herein granted shall
terminate with respect to any sign which:
(a) Shall have been abandoned for six months or more;
Advertises or calls attention to any products, businesses or
activities which have not been carried on or sold for six months
or more; or
(b)
Shall not have been repaired or properly maintained within 60
days after notice to that effect has been given by the Inspector
of Buildings.
(c)
(6)
Construction and maintenance. No sign shall be painted or posted
directly on the exterior surface of any wall or roof. All signs must
be painted, posted or otherwise securely attached to a substantial
(7)
§ 174-11 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-11
1:206
intermediary removable surface which shall be securely attached
to the building. The foregoing, however, shall not prevent
installation of a sign consisting of individual letters or devices
securely attached to the building. The material and construction
of any sign and intermediary surface and the manner of attaching
the sign to the intermediary surface and the intermediary surface
to the wall of the building shall be in accordance with applicable
provisions of the State Building Code. All signs, together with their
structural elements, shall be kept in good repair and in proper state
or preservation to the reasonable satisfaction of the Inspector of
Buildings. The Inspector of Buildings may order the removal of any
sign that is not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
Zoning Bylaw.
Roof signs. No sign shall be erected or maintained on the roof of
any building or structure in any district.
(8)
Standing signs. No standing sign shall be erected if, in the opinion
of the Building Inspector, it creates a safety hazard to vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
(9)
Wall signs. A wall sign shall be parallel to or perpendicular to
a wall of the building and shall not project beyond the face of
any other wall of the building, or above the top of the wall to
which attached. A wall sign shall not project more than one-foot,
in the case of a sign parallel to the wall, or four feet in the case
of a sign perpendicular to the wall, from the face of the wall to
which attached, provided that in no case shall a perpendicular sign
project into, on or over a public sidewalk, street or way.
(10)
Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be removed promptly after
the sale, event or reason for the sign message has been concluded.
Temporary signs shall not be maintained for more than a thirtyday
period, except as may be otherwise specifically provided below,
as determined by the Inspector of Buildings, unless proper sign
permits have been obtained. A temporary sign erected for the
purpose of the sale, lease, rental or construction of real estate is
not subject to the thirty-day display limitation but shall be removed
promptly after such sale, lease, rental or construction has been
effected or completed. Temporary signs pertaining to construction
shall not be erected prior to the commencement of work.
(11)
Traffic signs. The regulations contained herein shall not apply to
traffic signs not exceeding four square feet in area.
(12)
Gasoline filling stations and garages. Gasoline filling stations and
garages may, if they elect to do so, divide the principal sign area
to which they are entitled into separate signs attached to and
parallel to the wall to which the principal sign may be attached and
indicating the separate operations or departments of the business;
provided, however, that the total size of the separate signs shall not
(13)
§ 174-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-11
1:207
exceed the maximum size permitted under this section for a single
exterior sign on such wall. Signs displayed on structural canopies
over gasoline pumps or gasoline pump islands shall be regulated as
wall signs.
Agricultural signs. One sign not to exceed 32 square feet shall be
allowed and the wording may be changed periodically to advertise
products raised or grown principally on the premises.
(14)
Awning signs. The following provisions shall apply to all awning
signs:
Awning signs may only be located at the first floor level and
must be painted on or attached flat against the surface of the
awning or canopy and shall not extend beyond the valance or
any other part of the awning or canopy nor be attached to or
displayed on the sides or underside;
(a)
The area of an awning sign shall not exceed 25% of the surface
area of the awning or canopy eligible for placement of signs;
(b)
(c) Awning signs shall not be back lit or internally illuminated; and
Awning signs shall not be used in combination with wall signs
except as provided below. An awning sign which consists of
letters only, not more than eight inches in height and includes
no other form of graphic, logo or symbol; and is located only
on the valance of the awning or canopy and no other sign,
graphic, logo or symbol is displayed on the awning or canopy;
and does not occupy more than 50% of the horizontal length
of the valance of the awning or canopy shall not be subject to
the limitations of Subsection C, General Provisions, Subsection
(4), Maximum number of signs allowed, and Subsection (5),
Maximum area of signs allowed.
(d)
(15)
Sign regulations. (See notes at end of this Subsection D.)
Sign Type
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Area
Maximum
Number
Residential,1 Conservation
Districts, Research,
Scientific and
Professional District
Standing or wall 6 4 sq. ft. 1 per lot
Temporary 6 6 sq. ft. 1 per lot
Business Village District
Standing 10 25 sq. ft. 1 per building
Wall 15 25 sq. ft. 1 per business
D.
§ 174-11 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-11
1:208
Sign Type
Maximum
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Area
Maximum
Number
Awning — 25% of
awning or
canopy2
1 per business
Temporary 10 15 sq. ft. 1 per building
Highway Business,
Industrial, Industrial Park
Districts fronting streets
other than Route 9
Standing 15 75 sq. ft. 1 per lot
Wall 20 50 sq. ft. 1 per business
Window (permanent) — 10 sq. ft.3 1 per business
Awning 25% of
awning or
canopy2
1 per business
Temporary window 25% of
window4
Temporary 10 25 sq. ft. 1 per lot
Highway Business,
Industrial, Industrial Park
Districts fronting Route 9
Standing 25 100 sq. ft. 1 per lot
Wall 20 75 sq. ft.2 1 per business
Window (permanent) 10 sq. ft.3 1 per business
Awning 25% of
awning or
canopy2
1 per business
Temporary window 25% of
window4
Temporary 10 25 sq. ft. 1 per lot
Municipal, state, federal or private educational institution, religious
institution within a Residential District
Standing 6 10 sq. ft. 1 per lot
Wall 15 10 sq. ft. 1 per building
Awning sign Not
allowed
Temporary 6 12 sq. ft. 1 per lot
§ 174-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-11
1:209
NOTES:
1 Residential development within other districts in Town must comply
with the sign regulations for residential district.
2 Or 10% of the total area of the facade of the business establishment,
whichever is less.
3 Or 10% of the total area of exterior area of exterior windows of the
business establishment excluding doors, whichever is less.
4 Paper or posterboard only. Such signs shall not be placed on any
window with a permanent window sign.
Special permits for signs.
The Board of Appeals shall consider requests for special permits
in accordance with §§ 174-9, 174-11 and 174-25 of this Zoning
Bylaw. The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for a sign
not meeting limitations of sign height, maximum number of signs
allowed, illuminations of signs, maximum area of signs allowed and
minimum setback; provided, however, that the sign is otherwise in
compliance with the provisions of this section. In no case, however,
shall approval be granted for:
(a) A wall sign which exceeds in height the top of the wall;
A sign in a Residential District, except that a special permit
may be granted for a sign at a legal nonconforming use.
(b)
A standing sign in districts other than Residential,
Conservation, Research, Scientific and Professional Districts:
Which exceeds in height:
[a] Fifteen feet in the Business Village Districts.
Twenty feet in districts other than Business Village
Districts fronting on streets other than Route 9.
[b]
Twenty-five feet in districts other than Business
Village Districts fronting on Route 9.
[c]
[1]
Or exceeds in area:
Thirty-five square feet in the Business Village
Districts.
[a]
Seventy-five square feet in districts other than
Business Village Districts fronting on streets other
than Route 9.
[b]
Two hundred square feet in districts other than
Business Village Districts fronting on Route 9.
[c]
[2]
(c)
(1)
E.
§ 174-11 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-11
1:210
§ 174-12. Parking and loading regulations. [Amended 4-8-1985
ATM by Art. 36; 4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 47; 4-26-1990 ATM by Art.
43]
A wall sign in districts other Residential, Conservation,
Research, Scientific and Professional Districts which exceeds
in area:
[1] Thirty-five square feet in Business Village Districts.
Seventy-five square feet in districts other than Business
Village Districts fronting on streets other than Route 9.
[2]
One hundred square feet in districts other than Village
Business Districts fronting on Route 9.
[3]
(d)
The Board of Appeals will not act on any special permit or variance
application without first receiving a written report from the
Planning Board. A favorable report of the Planning Board shall
indicate that:
Sign scale is determined to be in reasonable relation to
development scale, viewer distance and travel speed and sign
sizes on nearby structures.
(a)
Sign size, shape and placement serves to define or enhance
architectural elements of the building such as columns, sill
lines, cornices and roof edges and do not unreasonably
interrupt, obscure or hide them.
(b)
Sign design is in harmony with other signage on the same
or adjacent structures and provides reasonable continuity in
mounting location and height, proportions and materials.
(c)
Sign materials, colors, lettering style, illumination and form
are reasonably compatible with building design, neighborhood
context and use.
(d)
Sign size, location, design and illumination are not judged
to present a safety hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
An unfavorable report of the Planning Board shall indicate
which of the above criteria were not met and shall state what
modifications to the sign or signs could be made to render a
favorable report.
(e)
(2)
General requirements. There shall be provided off-street parking and
loading facilities in accordance with the requirements of this section on
the same lot as the use to which they are accessory, except that parking
for nonresidential uses may be provided on a contiguous lot in the same
ownership and zoning district as the lot on which the principal building
or use is located. The Building Inspector shall interpret and apply the
requirements for parking and loading spaces. Loading or parking layout
A.
§ 174-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-12
1:211
for nonresidential uses shall be shown on and approved as part of a site
plan under the provisions of § 174-10.
Surfacing. Required vehicular use areas shall be paved with bituminous
concrete unless serving a single-family dwelling. An alternative surface
may be approved by the Planning Board upon its determination that
drainage, erosion, siltation, dust and appearance will be satisfactorily
controlled. Where an alternative to bituminous concrete is authorized
by the Planning Board, the following shall be complied with:
Access drives shall be paved with bituminous concrete or other
pavement authorized by the Planning Board for at least 15 feet
inside of the street or property line unless the street itself is not
paved.
(1)
Grading and materials selection shall assure that surface materials
will not be carried into the street and that drainage is positively
provided for.
(2)
If there are eight or more parking spaces there shall be provisions
for identifying individual spaces through use of segmented bumper
strips or other similar permanent means.
(3)
B.
Dimensional requirements.
Loading. Each loading space shall be not less than 10 feet in
width, 14 feet in height and of such length that a truck or trailer
occupying the space shall be entirely in the loading space and
shall not project into any street, vehicular accessway or pedestrian
walk. The loading space may use common access driveways and
aisles with parking spaces, where such access is adequate for both
purposes. If located within 50 feet of a residence district or if
used frequently at night, loading spaces shall be enclosed. Loading
spaces shall not be located within the required front yard.
(1)
Parking. Each parking space shall be at least 9 1/2 feet wide and 18
feet long, exclusive of aisles and maneuvering space; for parking
at right angles to a central aisle, the width of the aisle shall not
be less than 22 feet, and an equal width shall be provided at each
end of a row of parking spaces; for angle or herringbone parking
at 45° or 60° and one-way circulation, the width of aisles shall be
consistent with the dimensions recommended by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers, provided that for parking facilities for
more than five cars, the total area shall be not less than 300 square
feet times the number of parking spaces. Unobstructed access to
and from a street shall be provided and shall not require backing
out into a street. Two or more nonresidential uses may share a
combined facility, provided that its continued availability is assured
and the total number of spaces equals or exceeds the number
required by this section. The number of parking spaces required
by the Architectural Barriers Board located nearest to and to both
sides of the entrance of a building used by the public and/or by
(2)
C.
§ 174-12 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-12
1:212
employees shall be reserved for the exclusive use of handicapped
persons and shall be identified by appropriate signs at each parking
space and by the wheelchair symbol painted within each such
parking space. Up to 25% of parking spaces dedicated to use by
employees or occupants and not by the general public and up to
15% of such spaces for use by customers, visitors or general public
may be reduced to not less than 17 feet by eight feet and marked
as being reserved for compact cars only.
Loading requirements. Not fewer than the number of loading spaces
indicated in the following table shall be provided:
Floor Area of Building or
Structure
(square feet)
Retail Trade,
Wholesale
Trade, Storage,
Manufacturing
Consumer Service
Offices, Hotels,
Institutions,
Dormitories, Other
Nonresidential
Uses
5,000 to 15,000 1 0
15,001 to 50,000 1 1
50,001 to 100,000 2 1
100,001 to 150,000 3 2
150,001 to 300,000 4 3
Each additional 100,000
over 300,000
1 additional
Each additional 200,000
over 300,000
1 additional
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided
according to the following schedule, and not more than 25% of the
required parking spaces, other than for dwellings, shall be located in
the required front yard.
Dwellings: two spaces for each dwelling unit containing one or two
bedrooms, three spaces for each dwelling unit containing three or
more bedrooms, plus one space for each 80 square feet of floor
area devoted to a customary home occupation or a professional
use.
(1)
Hotels, motels, board or rooming houses and other places
providing overnight accommodations: one space for each room
accommodation, plus one space for each two employees, plus one
space for each 400 square feet of public meeting area and
restaurant.
(2)
Restaurants and other places serving food or beverages: one space
for each three seats, plus one space for each employee, provided
that drive-in establishments shall instead provide one space for
(3)
E.
§ 174-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-12
1:213
each 50 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each two
employees.
Schools and colleges: two spaces per classroom for elementary and
intermediate; 2 1/2 spaces per classroom for secondary, and one
space per two students beyond secondary; none to be fewer than
one space per teacher and staff.
(4)
Banks and libraries: one space for each 250 square feet of floor
area in public use, plus one space for each 500 square feet of other
gross floor area.
(5)
Hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the aged. Hospitals: one space
per bed; nursing homes: one space per two beds; homes for the
aged: one space per 1 1/2 units.
(6)
Theaters, membership clubs and places of amusement, recreation
and assembly (public or private): one space per four seats.
(7)
Retail stores and consumer service establishments: one space for
each 150 square feet of gross floor area, exclusive of storage space.
(8)
Gasoline service stations: two spaces for each lubrication pit, lift or
bay, plus one space for each employee.
(9)
Warehouses: one space for each 1,500 square feet of gross floor
area.
(10)
Medical and dental offices: one space per 200 square feet gross
floor area.
(11)
Industry, processing, manufacturing, assembly and research and
development: one space for each 300 square feet of floor area, plus
space for company-owned trucks and vans and the required loading
spaces.
(12)
All other offices and nonresidential uses: 3 1/2 spaces for each
1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(13)
Temporary reduction in the number of paved parking spaces.
Whenever new or increased off-street parking spaces are required
to be provided on premises subjected to a site plan review and
approval by the Planning Board under the provisions of § 174-10
hereof and if, in the opinion of the Planning Board, based on
evidence presented by the applicant, the full number of parking
spaces will not be needed for at least three years, the Planning
Board may, in its approval of the site plan, temporarily reduce the
number of parking spaces paved, designated, striped and graded,
subject to the following requirements: [Amended 4-8-1991 ATM
by Art. 47]
The Planning Board shall have the right to review the
temporary reduction every three years or whenever evidence
(a)
(14)
§ 174-12 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-12
1:214
is presented to it that such review is warranted and shall have
the right to require the paving and development of additional
parking spaces up to the full number required by this chapter.
The applicant shall be required to provide the entire area
called for by this chapter and shall landscape, plant with grass
or shrubbery and maintain as open space any part thereof not
needed for parking.
(b)
In no case shall the number of parking spaces developed,
paved, marked and available for parking be less than 60% of
the total number of such spaces called for by this chapter,
and no cars shall be parked on undeveloped reserved land,
except in an emergency. The areas to be developed and paved
and to be temporarily held as landscaped open space shall
be clearly identified on the site plan, and their location and
layout shall be consistent with § 174-10B, C and D. Anyone
required to provide at least 12 parking spaces and wishing
to take advantage of this temporary reduction provision shall
proceed in accordance with the provisions of this subsection
and of § 174-10 hereof, even though not otherwise subject to
its requirements.
(c)
Egress.
Any driveway likely to carry more than 200 trips per average
business day must comply with the following unless the Board of
Appeals grants a special permit for an alternative configuration,
upon its determination that safety will be adequately protected,
based on commonly employed engineering standards:
On Route 9 Other Locations
Exiting vehicle unobstructed
sight distance at edge of
traveled way
500 feet 200 feet
Driveway center-line separation
from other driveways serving
200 plus trips
300 feet 100 feet
Driveway center-line separation
from intersecting street sideline
150 feet 50 feet
Maximum driveway width unless
greater width justified by
engineered design
24 feet 18 feet
Curb radius 50 feet 25 feet
Acceleration/deceleration lanes
required
Yes No
(1)
F.
§ 174-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-12
1:215
§ 174-12.1. Outdoor illumination. [Added 4-11-2005 ATM by Art.
40]
No existing parcel shall be divided into lots with frontage which
would preclude meeting the driveway separation requirements,
unless access rights-of-way are deeded to enable shared egress.
(2)
Purpose. This section recognizes the benefits of outdoor lighting and
provides clear guidelines for its installation, so as to help maintain and
complement Southborough's character. The intent of this section is to
encourage lighting that provides safety, utility and security: prevent
glare on public roadways; protect the privacy of residents; promote
energy-efficient outdoor lighting; limit the total allowable illumination
of lots located in the Town of Southborough; and to reduce atmospheric
light pollution. Appropriately regulated, and properly installed, outdoor
lighting will contribute to the safety and welfare of the residents of
Southborough.
A.
Applicability. Outdoor illumination by flood or spot luminaries rated
at 900 lumens or more (which is approximately equal to one sixtywatt
incandescent light bulb) or by any other luminaires rated at 1,800
lumens or more (which is approximately equal to one one-hundredtwenty-
watt incandescent light bulb) shall be subject to the provisions
of this section, with the following exceptions: emergency lighting;
hazard warning; temporary decorative or holiday lighting or public
roadway illumination. It shall also not apply to any luminaire intended
solely to illuminate any freestanding sign, flag or the walls of any
building, but such luminaire shall be shielded so that its direct light is
confined to the surface of such sign, flag or building.
The replacement of existing fixtures shall be subject to the
provisions of this section; however, the replacement of existing
nonconforming lamps or fixtures with the same or lower output
nonconforming lamps or fixtures is exempted.
(1)
The Planning Board, in performing review pursuant to § 174-10,
Site plan approval, may determine that special circumstances of
the site, context or design make an alternative lighting design at
least equally effective in meeting the purposes of this section and,
in such cases, may modify the requirements of this section.
(2)
B.
Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall
be defined as indicated below. Although set forth here for convenience,
the terms shall have the same effect as if in § 174-2 of this Bylaw.
FIXTURE — The assembly that houses a lamp or lamps, and which may
include a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a
ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor, lens or diffuser lens.
FULL CUTOFF — A luminaire designed with an opaque shield
surrounding and extending below the lamp, such that no direct light is
emitted above a horizontal plane.
C.
§ 174-12 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-12.1
1:216
GLARE — Light emitted from a luminaire with intensity great enough
to produce annoyance, discomfort or a reduction in a viewer's ability to
see, and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness.
LAMP — The component of a luminaire that produces the actual light.
LIGHT TRESPASS — The shining of direct light produced by a luminaire
beyond the boundaries of the lot on which it is located.
LUMEN — A measure of light energy generated by a light source. One
footcandle is one lumen per square foot. For purposes of this bylaw, the
lumen output shall be the initial lumen output of a lamp, as rated by the
manufacturer.
LUMINAIRE — A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps
and a fixture.
Exterior lighting plan. Applications subject to the provisions of
§ 174-10, Site plan approval, shall submit a lighting plan which shall
include the following information, except to the extent waived by the
Planning Board. All other lighting not subject to the provisions of said
§ 174-10 does not require a lighting plan but shall meet the standards
as set forth in this section, unless as may otherwise be provided herein.
The lighting plan shall include the following information:
Location, orientation and type of outdoor luminaire, including the
height of the luminaire, both existing and proposed;
(1)
Luminaire manufacturer's specification data, including lumen
output and photometric data showing cutoff angles, as well as a
description of all illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports,
reflectors, both existing and proposed; this may include, but is not
limited to, catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers;
(2)
Type of lamp, such as metal halide, compact fluorescent, high
pressure sodium;
(3)
Photometric plan showing the intensity of illumination expressed in
footcandles at ground level within the interior of the property and
at the property boundaries;
(4)
Evidence that the plan complies with light trespass restrictions as
set forth herein.
(5)
D.
Flickering and flashing lights. No flickering or flashing lights shall be
permitted. Processes, such as arc welding, which create light flashes
shall be confined within buildings or shielded to prevent either direct
glare or flashing.
E.
Wall-mounted fixtures. In nonresidential districts, a luminaire attached
to the exterior of a building or structure for area lighting shall be
mounted no higher than 15 feet above grade and shall be shielded to
control glare. "Wal-pac" lighting fixtures are prohibited.
F.
§ 174-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-12.1
1:217
Pole-mounted fixtures. Pole-mounted exterior lighting fixture types are
defined and restricted as follows:
(1) Type A: no light cutoff.
Type B: luminaire shielded such that peak candlepower is at an
angle of 75° or less from straight down, and essentially no light is
emitted above the horizontal.
(2)
Type C: luminaire shielded such that total cutoff is at less than
90° from straight down, and no light source is in direct view of an
observer five feet above the ground at any point off the premises.
(3)
G.
Pole-mounted fixtures height limitation. Illustrations of pole-mounted
exterior lighting fixture types are shown in Chart I herein. Polemounted
fixtures shall not exceed the applicable pole-mounted height
limitation set forth in Chart II in any district. The Type A pole-mounted
exterior lighting fixture is prohibited in all nonresidential districts,
unless equipped with shields.
CHART I. ILLUSTRATIONS
CHART II. POLE MOUNTING HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
Maximum Luminaire Mounting Height
(feet above grade)*
"District" is that in which fixtures are located.
District
Residential Nonresidential
Fixture Type A 10 Not allowed (unless
shielded)
Fixture Type B 15 20
Fixture Type C 20 20
* Note: Feet above grade refers to the overall average grade of the
area being illuminated.
H.
Ceiling-mounted fixtures. In nonresidential districts, luminaires
mounted on an exterior ceiling such as under a canopy shall be
I.
§ 174-12.1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-12.1
1:218
§ 174-13. Landscaping. [Amended 4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 42;
4-26-1990 ATM by Art. 42; 4-9-2001 ATM by Art. 64; 4-11-2005 ATM
by Art. 39]
mounted with the refractor or lens flush with or recessed in the ceiling
or fixture.
Lighting levels. Any luminaire with a lamp or lamps rated at a total
of 1.800 lumens or more (which is approximately equal to one onehundred-
twenty-watt incandescent light bulb) and all flood or spot
luminaires rated at 900 lumens or more (which is approximately equal
to one 60-watt incandescent light bulb) shall not emit any direct light
above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part
of the luminaire. If any spot or flood luminaire rated 900 lumens or less
is directed or focused such as to cause direct light from the luminaire
to be cast toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to
create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public
ways, the luminaire shall be redirected or its light output controlled as
necessary to eliminate such conditions. The Planning Board reserves
the right to limit and regulate the amount of illumination on a project
site between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 as, while understanding
the need for safety and security lighting.
J.
Light trespass limitations. There shall be no light trespass by a
luminaire beyond the property boundaries of the lot on which it is
located, except as within a street right-of-way for which there shall be
no limit.
K.
Purpose and applicability.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to preserve and protect the
community's ecological resources and to improve the appearance,
environment, character, and value of the total community; and to
protect nearby properties, thereby promoting the public health,
safety and general welfare. It is intended to establish minimum
standards for the design of landscapes for all land development
projects requiring Planning Board approval. This section also
ensures that any development will make landscaping an integral
part of that plan.
(1)
Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply as
specified below to any new building, addition, or change of use
in an existing structure that requires a parking increase of five
or more spaces, or is subject to site plan review by the Planning
Board. In performing site plan review under § 174-10, the Planning
Board may authorize alternatives to the following specifications,
taking into consideration existing vegetation, topography, soils and
other site conditions, provided that equivalent screening, shading
and articulation are achieved.
(2)
A.
§ 174-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13
1:219
Exceptions. The requirements of this section do not apply to
developments or renovations in the Business Village District.
However, the Planning Board may require landscaping as part of
the site plan or special permit application within the Business
Village District.
(3)
Landscape standards and specifications.
All submissions for projects subject to this section shall include a
comprehensive landscape plan and planting schedule.
(1)
The developer shall furnish and install all plant materials listed on
the approved landscaping plan.
(2)
Plant materials shall conform to the requirements described in the
latest edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock, which is
published by the American Association of Nurserymen.
(3)
Shade trees must be a minimum of three inches in caliper six
inches above grade, be of a species common in the area and be
ones which reach an ultimate height of at least 30 feet. Ornamental
trees must be a minimum of eight feet at the time of planting.
(Eight feet from the top of the root ball to the top of the tree).
Shrubs must be at least 36 inches in height at the time of building
occupancy, reach an ultimate height of at least five feet and be of a
species common in the area.
(4)
Do not use staking materials unless absolutely necessary. If staking
is necessary, then the developer/property owner must remove
staking materials after one full growing season.
(5)
Property owners ensure the survival and health of required trees. If
any plant material dies, the property owner must replace it within
180 days.
(6)
All plant materials required by this chapter shall be maintained in a
healthful condition. Any and all fences required for screening shall
be properly maintained.
(7)
All planting areas shall be mulched with a three- to four-inch layer
of bark mulch or other similar material to cover the complete
planting area. However, in no case shall more than 25% of the
planting area be strictly bare mulch.
(8)
A permanent water supply system, or other acceptable watering
method, shall be provided for all planting areas. In order to protect
the Town's water supply, and encourage sound landscaping
practices, the Town of Southborough recommends sustainable
watering systems, such as: rainwater recycling systems, automatic
shut-off devices, drought-tolerant native plant material, and careful
irrigation scheduling, among others.
(9)
(10)Plantings.
B.
§ 174-13 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13
1:220
Plantings shall consist of at least one tree per 40 linear feet
of planting area length, except one tree per 20 linear feet of
street planting area abutting Route 9, and at least one shrub
per three feet. Plantings preferably will be grouped, not evenly
spaced, and shall be located or trimmed to avoid blocking
egress visibility. The planting area shall be unpaved except for
access drives and walks essentially perpendicular to the area
and shall be located wholly within the lot.
(a)
Applicants are encouraged to specify salt-tolerant species for
street trees to prevent early plant loss due to winter road salt.
(b)
Invasive plants, as defined by the Massachusetts Invasive Plant
Group, are "plants that have spread into native or minimally
managed plant systems in Massachusetts. These plants cause
economic or environmental harm by developing self sustaining
populations and becoming dominant and/or disruptive to those
systems." (Under this definition all synonyms, species,
subspecies, varieties, forms, and cultivars of that species are
included unless proven otherwise by a process of scientific
evaluation.) The Town of Southborough encourages the use of
native species in all landscaping plans. Please note that many
of the invasive species listed below have native counterparts
that could be considered.
(c)
The following invasive species of plants are prohibited from
being planted:
Ailanthus altissirna Tree of heaven
Berberis thunbergil Japanese barberry
Celastrus orbiculatus Asian or, Asiatic bittersweet,
oriental bittersweet
Elacagnus umbellata Autumn olive
Frangula alnus European buckthorn, glossy
buckthorn
Lonicera x bella Zabel
[morrowii x tatarica]
Bell's honeysuckle
Lonicera japonica Japanese honeysuckle
Lonicera morrowili Morrow's honeysuckle
Lythrum salicaria Purple loosestrife
Phragmites australis (Ceav.)
Trin. ex Steud.
Common reed
Rhamnus cathartica Common buckthorn
Robinia psendoacacia Black locust
Rosa multiflora Multiflora rose
Acer platanoides Norway maple
(d)
§ 174-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13
1:221
Acer pseudoplatanus Sycamore maple
Euonymus alatus Burning bush
Ligustrum species Privet
Spiraea japonica Japanese spirea
Street planting area. Street planting is required for all nonresidential
premises. Street plantings at the front of lots shall contribute to the
creation of an impression of a separation of the street and the
developed area of the site without necessarily eliminating visual
contact between them. Street plantings adjoining or facing residential
uses or residential zoning districts shall provide the strongest possible
visual barriers between uses at the pedestrian level and a sense of
separation. A landscaped buffer strip shall be a minimum of 15 feet in
depth. The Planning Board may reduce or modify this requirement if, in
their judgment, strict compliance would create a substantial hardship
due to existing conditions such as lot size, location of existing buildings,
or environmental conditions. Also refer to Subsection H, Existing
vegetation.
C.
Side and rear line planting area. A landscape buffer strip a minimum of
10 feet in width shall abut all side and rear property lines.
D.
Vehicular use area plantings. All new or expanded parking lots of five or
more spaces shall be required to comply with this section. If an existing
parking lot is expanded or improved to increase the number of spaces
by five or more, it shall comply with this section within the expanded or
improved portion.
Trees shall be planted at a rate of two shade trees or three
ornamental trees for every 10 spaces or fraction thereof.
(1)
Required trees shall be located within or adjacent to parking lots
as tree islands, medians, and at the end of parking bays, traffic
delineators, or between rows of parking spaces in a manner such
that no parking space is located more than 60 feet from a tree.
(2)
Planting areas within parking areas shall provide a minimum of 81
square feet per tree with a minimum inside dimension of nine feet
and a minimum prepared depth of 18 inches.
(3)
The exterior perimeter of all vehicular use areas shall be planted
with a buffer strip at least five feet in width, excluding accessways.
Any vehicular use area abutting a lot that is residentially used or
zoned shall be planted with a buffer strip at least 10 feet in width
and shall be supplemented with an opaque fence or wall at least six
feet high, unless there is vegetation sufficiently dense to effectively
obscure vision. Trees and soil plots shall be so located as to provide
visual relief and wind interruption within the parking area and to
assure safe patterns of internal circulation.
(4)
E.
§ 174-13 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13
1:222
Ratios of Parking Spaces to Trees
(choose one column of trees only)
# of Parking
Spaces
# of
Shade
Trees
or # of
Ornamental
Trees or # of Mixed
10 2 3 3
15 3 5 4
20 4 6 5
25 5 8 6
30 6 9 7
35 7 11 8
40 8 12 9
45 9 14 10
50 10 15 11
55 11 17 13
60 12 18 14
65 13 20 15
70 14 21 16
75 15 23 18
80 16 24 19
85 17 26 20
90 18 27 21
95 19 29 23
100 20 30 24
To determine the number of trees needed for a number of parking
spaces not shown on the chart above, use the following formulas
(choose one only):
(a) Shade trees: number of spaces x 20%.
(b) Ornamental trees: number of spaces x 30%.
(c) Mix of both: number of spaces x 25%.
(5)
Zoning district boundary planting area. A landscaped buffer strip, a
minimum of 20 feet in width, is required on any nonresidential premises
along the full length of any boundary abutting property that is
residentially used or zoned, except that in the Industrial Park District
(IP) the buffer strip shall be a minimum of 50 feet in width. The
buffer strip shall contain existing vegetation and/or plantings that are
sufficiently dense to adequately screen adjacent residential properties.
F.
§ 174-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13
1:223
Berms. When berms are used to meet the requirements for a buffer
strip, they shall be planted with living vegetation. The minimum top
width shall be five feet with a minimum slope of 3:1. In no case shall
more than 25% of the berm planting area be strictly bare mulch or nonliving
material.
G.
Existing vegetation. Wherever possible, the above requirements shall
be met by retention of existing plants. If located within 25 feet of a
street, no existing tree of six inches in caliper or greater (measured four
feet above grade), dense hedgerow of four or more feet in both depth
and height or existing earth berm providing similar visual screening
shall be removed or have grade changed more than one-foot unless
dictated by public health, access safety or identification of the
premises.
H.
Exceptions. Where plant materials as required would harmfully
obstruct a scenic view, substitution of additional low level plantings
which will visually define the street edge or property line may be
authorized, provided that proposed buildings are also designed and
located to preserve that scenic view.
I.
Site distance restrictions. When an accessway intersects a public street
or another access way, required plantings shall conform to the
requirements of unobstructed site distance as outlined in the parking
and loading regulations (§ 174-12F).
J.
Nonconforming landscaping and screening.
Any improvement along the property boundary, including
landscaping, screening and fencing, legally erected and
conforming to the requirement of this chapter when so erected,
may continue to be maintained, even though as a result of changes
to this chapter the boundary improvements no longer conform to
its requirements, provided that such boundary improvements shall
not be enlarged, redesigned or altered except so as to make them
conform to said requirements, and further provided that any such
boundary improvements which have been destroyed or damaged to
such an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed 50% of
the replacement value of the boundary improvements at the time
of destruction or damage, shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered,
except so as to make said boundary improvements conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
(1)
The exemption for nonconforming landscaping and screening
herein granted shall terminate with respect to any boundary
improvements which shall:
(a) Have been abandoned; or
Not have been repaired or properly maintained for at least 60
days after written notice to that effect has been given by the
Building Inspector.
(b)
(2)
K.
§ 174-13 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.1
1:224
§ 174-13.1. Concept plans. [Added 4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 46]
Applicability. Any use which is designated in § 174-8 as being subject
to this article requires concept plan approval by Town Meeting prior
to being acted upon for special permit approval. Approval shall be by
two-thirds' vote of the Town Meeting and may be made with conditions
or limitations. Special permits shall then be required and shall be
approved by the special permit granting authority only upon
determination by that authority that the proposal is consistent with the
approved concept plan or, in the event of an inconsistency, that the
departure is necessitated by changed conditions or earlier error and
that the inconsistency does not result in less beneficial development,
based on the considerations of Subsection B below.
A.
Considerations. Compliance of the proposal with the considerations of
§ 174-9, Special permit requirements, shall be reported to the Town
Meeting by the Planning Board and shall be the basis for subsequent
special permit approval.
B.
Procedures.
Submittals. Five copies of the concept plan shall be filed with the
Planning Board.
(1)
Concept plan contents. A concept plan should consist of the
following:
A schematic development plan, indicating boundaries of the
lot, buildings, roads, drives, parking, reserved open space,
existing topography and proposed grading, areas of retained
vegetation and proposed planting areas, and a locus plan
showing relation to nearby streets, zoning district boundaries
and water bodies.
(a)
Floor plans and elevations of all existing and proposed
structures.
(b)
Materials indicating the proposed ultimate floor area in each
use; time schedule for development; service improvements
proposed at the developer's and those anticipated at the
Town's expense.
(c)
(d) An estimate of peak hour trips on to and off of the site.
Analysis indicating degree of consistency with each of the
considerations of § 174-9, Special permit requirements.
(e)
(2)
C.
Pre-Town Meeting hearing. Prior to Town Meeting action, the Planning
Board shall hold a public hearing on the concept plan with timing,
notice and procedures the same as those required for a hearing on
a Zoning Bylaw amendment. The Planning Board shall report its
recommendation to the Town Meeting, with a copy of the concept plan
D.
§ 174-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.1
1:225
§ 174-13.2. Major residential development. [Added 4-14-1986 ATM
by Art. 36; amended 4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 38; 4-13-1987 ATM by
Art. 42; 4-30-1990 ATM by Arts. 48, 49; 4-8-1991 ATM by Art. 53;
4-10-1995 ATM by Art. 45]
and the recommendation to be filed with the Town Clerk not less than
14 days prior to the Town Meeting vote on the concept plan.
Special permit. Application for an initial special permit must be made
not more than 12 months after the Town Meeting approval of the
concept plan.
E.
Applicability.
Special permit option. Major residential development, that is, the
creation of eight or more lots or construction of eight or more
dwelling units within an eight-year period from or on a property
or set of contiguous properties in common ownership as of January
1, 1986, is allowed either (at the applicant's option): [Amended
4-15-2004 ATM by Art. 45; 10-7-2013 STM by Art. 9]
With a special permit from the Planning Board, as indicated in
§ 174-8, Schedule of Use Regulations, with applicants applying
under this section required to concurrently file the application
with the Southborough Housing Opportunity Partnership
Committee (SHOPC); or
(a)
By right, commonly referred to as "conventional" development
[and without the flexible development option available only
with the special permit option in Subsection A(1)(a) above],
provided that the plan conforms to the State Subdivision
Control Law, to other applicable state and Town laws and
regulations, to the recommendations of the Board of Health
and to the Planning Board's regulations relative to the
subdivision of land.
(b)
(1)
Repetitive subdivision and phasing of large properties. [Amended
4-10-2006 ATM by Art. 43]
Land outside a major residential development. Where a byright
subdivision of fewer than eight lots (that is, a
development under the threshold size for a major residential
development) is first created on one portion of a property,
thereby leaving another portion of the same property
remaining undeveloped, and if the applicant later desires to
subdivide this remaining portion thereby creating eight or
more lots overall within the eight-year period [as described
in Subsection A(1) above], then the applicant may do so by
applying for a special permit for a major residential
development for the remaining portion. On large properties to
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 174-13.1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.2
1:226
be developed in phases, the applicant may apply for more than
one special permit with no time limit.
Lots inside a major residential development. Lots created
inside a major residential development, and made a part of the
development, may not be further subdivided within eight years
except by amending the original special permit.
(b)
Flexible development option for small properties. Except as
provided below, a development creating fewer than eight units does
not require approval of a special permit, because it is below the
threshold size. However, if an applicant wants to take advantage
of this section's special features (such as flexible development) for
a development of fewer than eight lots, then the applicant may do
so by applying for a special permit. In this case, all requirements
of this section shall apply as if the development was a major
residential development, with one exception, that affordable
housing shall not be required under Subsection E. [Amended
4-10-2006 ATM by Art. 43]
(3)
Exceptions. The above requirements shall not be applicable if the
lots are restricted from residential use.
(4)
Subdivision approval. Subsequent to, or in conjunction with the
granting of the special permit, compliance with the rules and
regulations regarding the subdivision of land must be met.26
(5)
Objectives. The objectives of the special permit for a major residential
development are to:
Allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of
residential developments.
(1)
Encourage the permanent preservation of open space, agricultural
and forestry land and other natural resources.
(2)
Maintain the Town of Southborough's traditional New England
rural character and land use pattern in which small villages
contrast with open space and farmland.
(3)
(4) Encourage more affordable and diverse housing types.
(5) Protect scenic vistas.
(6) Preserve unique and significant natural and historical resources.
Facilitate the construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and
public services in a more economical and efficient manner.
(7)
(8) Encourage a less sprawling form of development.
B.
26.Editor's Note: See Ch. 244, Subdivision of Land.
§ 174-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.2
1:227
Encourage the development of passive and active recreation
facilities. [Added 4-12-1999 ATM by Art. 65]
(9)
Application requirements. The application requirements for the special
permit for a major residential development are as follows:
Preliminary meeting. Prior to filing an application, the applicant
shall meet with the Planning Board in order to promote better
communication and avoid misunderstanding.
(1)
Intent of alternative plans. Applications for a special permit for
major residential development shall include two plans: a
conventional plan and a flexible plan. The intent of this section is to
approve the flexible plan wherever appropriate because the flexible
plan is, in general, more capable than the conventional plan of
meeting the objectives listed in Subsection B, as well as the design
criteria listed in Subsection G(2). The purpose of the conventional
plan is simply to establish the total number of lots or units allowed
on the site, without bonuses, and consequently the number of lots
allowed in the flexible plan, as provided in Subsection D(1).
(2)
Submission materials. Applicants for major residential
development shall file with the Planning Board seven copies of
the following, prepared by an interdisciplinary team, including a
registered land surveyor, a professional engineer and a registered
architect or landscape architect:
Plans. The conventional and flexible plans described above,
conforming to the information requirements for a preliminary
subdivision plan under subdivision regulations of the Planning
Board.27
(a)
Natural conditions. Such plans shall also indicate:
[1] Topography, both existing and proposed.
Existing wetland boundaries, which shall be delineated by
registered professionals qualified under MGL c. 131, § 40,
and/or Chapter 170, Wetlands Protection.
[2]
Any critical areas, scenic views and vistas, as specified in
Subsection F.
[3]
(b)
Sewage disposal.
If septic systems are proposed, then the submission shall
include the results of soil evaluations and percolation tests
at the rate of one every five acres, but in no case fewer
than five per major residential development. Soil
evaluations shall be located to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board so as to indicate the buildability of areas
[1]
(c)
(3)
C.
27.Editor's Note: See Ch. 244, Subdivision of Land.
§ 174-13.2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.2
1:228
proposed either for development or for bonused
reservation under Subsection F.
If alternative sewage treatment systems are proposed,
then the applicant shall meet with the Board of Health
prior to submission to the Planning Board, in order to
establish the submission requirements of the Board of
Health for such a system.
[2]
Comparative analysis. A written statement as to which of the
two plans (conventional or flexible) is preferred by the
applicant. In addition, a brief written comparison of the
impacts of a flexible development plan versus a conventional
development plan. This comparison should discuss the specific
site characteristics which make the preferred plan the best
development option, (in the opinion of the applicant), based
on the design criteria for major residential development in
Subsection G(2).
(d)
Other information. Any additional information necessary to
make the determinations and assessments cited in Subsections
F and G.
(e)
The Planning Board may authorize flexible development within a major
residential development, with reduced requirements for the area and
frontage of individual lots not having frontage on an existing public way,
provided that the following are complied with: [Amended 4-8-1996
ATM by Art. 52]
Number of lots or units. The number of lots or units, excluding any
bonus lots or units allowed under Subsection F, shall not exceed
the number of lots in the conventional plan which shall be in
full conformance with zoning, subdivision regulations and health
codes. The Planning Board shall consider the recommendations
of the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission and the
Department of Public Works of the Town of Southborough in
making said determination.
(1)
(2) General design criteria. Refer to Subsection G(2).
Shape and dimension of lots. Provisions in § 174-8, Schedule of
Use Regulations, governing the shape and dimensions of lots, shall
apply when calculating the number of lots allowed in a
conventional plan, as required by Subsection D(1) above. However,
these provisions shall not apply when creating new lots within
a flexible plan, unless otherwise specified in this section. The
dimensional requirements for flexible lots are specified in
Subsection D(4) below.
(3)
Single-family requirements. The following provisions shall only
apply to detached single-family dwellings on their own individual
lots. Where more than one detached single-family dwelling is on the
(4)
D.
§ 174-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.2
1:229
same lot (for example, single-family condominiums), then they shall
be treated as multifamily dwellings for the purpose of this section,
and they shall be governed by the provisions of Subsection D(5)
below.
Site with individual septic systems on each lot.
Lot area. In order to ensure adequate lot area for
individual septic systems, the minimum lot area shall be
2/3 of the minimum required in § 174-8, Schedule of Use
Regulations, for each zoning district.
[1]
Lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage in all zoning
districts shall be 80 feet, except as follows. Lots located on
the turnaround of a dead-end street shall have a minimum
frontage of 50 feet, provided that a front building line is
designated on the plan for such a lot, and also provided
that the width of the lot at this building line is at least
equal to the minimum frontage requirement.
[2]
Front yard. Front yards shall be staggered to provide a
variety in size of such yards. In all zoning districts, the
minimum average of all front yards shall be 25 feet;
however, no front yard shall be less than 20 feet.
[3]
Side yard. The minimum side yard shall be 20 feet in
the Residence A District and 10 feet in all other districts;
provided, however, that dwellings on abutting lots shall
be no closer than 30 feet which may be accomplished by
staggering or other means.
[4]
Rear yard. In all zoning districts the minimum rear yard
shall be 40 feet or 30 feet if backing up to common open
space.
[5]
Setback lines. The front, side and rear setback lines shall
be shown on the definitive subdivision plan.
[6]
Open space. In all zoning districts, a minimum of 10% of
the overall site area shall be preserved in a natural state,
exclusive of wetlands, and 25% overall shall be dedicated
as common open space.
[7]
Common areas. Refer to Subsection G(2) for design
criteria for common areas.
[8]
(a)
Site with alternative sewage treatment systems. Based upon
the reduced need for land on each lot if individual septic fields
are no longer required and the benefits of consolidating this
land into common preserved open space, the Planning Board
may, at its discretion, approve the following:
(b)
§ 174-13.2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.2
1:230
Lot area. The minimum lot area shall be 1/3 of the
minimum required in § 174-8, Schedule of Use
Regulations, for each zoning district. The reduction in lot
area shall not be used to increase the total number of
lots permitted in the overall site. All the site area saved
through reduction in lot area shall be dedicated as
common land or dedicated to the Town.
[1]
Lot frontage. The minimum lot frontage in all zoning
districts shall be 65 feet, except as follows: Lots located on
the turnaround of a dead-end street shall have a minimum
frontage of 50 feet, provided that a front building line is
designated on the plan for such a lot, and also provided
that the width of the lot at this building line is at least
equal to the minimum frontage requirement.
[2]
Yards. The minimum yard dimensions shall be the same as
for lots with septic systems, as provided under Subsection
D(4)(a) above.
[3]
Setback lines. The front, side and rear setback lines shall
be shown on the definitive subdivision plan.
[4]
Open space. In all zoning districts, a minimum of 20%
of the site area shall be preserved in a natural state,
exclusive of wetlands, and 35% overall shall be dedicated
as common open space.
[5]
Common areas. Refer to Subsection G(2) for design
criteria for common areas.
[6]
Multifamily requirements. The Planning Board may authorize
inclusion of multifamily dwellings within a flexible development,
subject to the following, unless authorized as housing for the
elderly under § 174-9H. Where more than one single-family
detached dwelling is on the same lot, (for example, single-family
condominiums), they shall be treated as multifamily dwellings for
the purpose of this section and governed by the provisions of this
subsection.
Number of dwelling units. The number of dwelling units
allowed shall be governed by the provisions of Subsection D(1).
More than one structure may be allowed on a lot. § 174-8C(2)
shall not apply.
(a)
Types of units. To assure internal diversity and continuity with
surrounding development, single-family dwellings (whether on
their own individual lots or on a shared lot) are required within
a multifamily development. Not more than 2/3 of the dwelling
units on any parcel developed subject to these provisions shall
be in multifamily dwellings containing two or more units.
(Note: Housing for the elderly is not governed by this section.)
(b)
(5)
§ 174-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.2
1:231
Layout of buildings. To maintain the visual scale of the
community, each multifamily dwelling unit shall have its own
exterior entrance; there shall be not more than four dwelling
units in any structure, and the multifamily structures shall be
clustered in groups, with not more than 16 dwelling units in
any group. Buildings within groups shall normally be separated
from each other by not less than twice the required side yard,
and there shall be not less than 1,000 feet separation between
dwellings in any such group and any other multifamily
dwellings on or off the premises, unless the Planning Board
authorizes a reduction of up to 1/3 in such requirements, upon
its determination that doing so serves the objectives of the
bylaw.
(c)
Visual buffers. Visual separation from nearby premises shall be
assured through providing yards of double the usually required
dimension between any multifamily structure or parking area
for six of more cars and the boundaries of the major residential
development, and through having any exterior lighting
shielded and mounted not more than 15 feet high.
(d)
To assure environmental benefit from the compact
development which multifamily development facilitates, the
site area which shall be preserved in a natural state, exclusive
of wetlands, shall be a minimum of 10% and shall increase in
direct proportion to the percentage of multifamily units, up to
a maximum requirement of 20% preserved area. In addition, a
minimum of 35% overall shall be dedicated as common open
space. Where appropriate, open space not to be preserved in
its natural state shall be utilized for recreation to serve the
needs of the Town. [Amended 4-12-1999 ATM by Art. 65]
(e)
Affordable housing. [Amended 4-15-2004 ATM by Art. 45]
Provision of affordable units.
Number of units to be provided. All developments including a
residential component which are subject to this section shall
be required to set aside a minimum of 12.5% of the total
number of dwelling units provided as affordable housing.
(a)
Fractions. If, when applying the percentage to the total
number of units to determine the number of affordable units,
the resulting number of affordable units includes a fraction of
a unit, this fraction, if 1/2 or greater, shall be rounded up to the
next whole number. If the resulting number of affordable units
includes a fraction of a unit less than 1/2, the fraction shall be
rounded down to the next whole number.
(b)
Sale, lease or rental of units to low-income households. Units
set aside for sale, lease or rental to low-income households
(c)
(1)
E.
§ 174-13.2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.2
1:232
shall be restricted for occupancy by qualified households that
meet the definition of "low-income" set forth in this bylaw.
Affordability of rental and ownership units. Affordable rental
and ownership units shall serve low-income households.
(d)
Relationship to the affordable housing inventory. It is intended
that the affordable housing units sewing low-income
households that result from this bylaw be considered as local
initiative units in compliance with the requirements of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development, as required for the ten-percent
statutory requirement under MGL c. 40B. A "low-income
household" is defined as having a total household or family
income between 51% and 80% of the median income for the
Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, as set forth
in regulations promulgated from time to time by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development, or by a
similar federal agency created to replace it, as adopted by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Housing and
Community Development.
(e)
Relationship to public funding programs. Developers may
participate in public subsidy programs and still meet the
requirements of this section. Such participation will be subject
to the approval of the subsidizing agency and to the unit price
limitations of the funding program as well as those required by
this section. In case of conflicting price limitations, the lower
price requirement shall prevail.
(f)
Relationships to other organizations. Subject to the approval
of the Southborough Housing Opportunity Partnership
Committee and the applicable subsidizing agency, developers
may elect to work with a local nonprofit housing provider, such
as the Southborough Housing Authority, to distribute, maintain
or operate the units in accordance with the requirements and
intent of this section.
(g)
Affordability requirements.
Duration of affordability. Affordable units shall be subject to
restrictions that to the extent legally possible shall preserve
the permanent affordability (in perpetuity) of the units as
defined by this bylaw, but in no case shall be fewer than 50
years.
(a)
Maximum rental price. Rents for the affordable units,
excluding utilities (heat, water, electricity), shall not exceed
30% of the targeted annual gross household income, as
determined by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Department of Housing and Community Development. Specific
prices shall be determined by the state or federal funding
(b)
(2)
§ 174-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.2
1:233
source, if applicable, and are subject to approval by the
Southborough Housing Opportunity Partnership Committee.
Maximum sales price. Housing costs, including monthly
housing payments, principal and interest payments, real estate
taxes, and insurance, shall not exceed 30% of the targeted
gross household income. Specific prices shall be determined
by the state or federal funding source, if applicable, and are
subject to approval by the Southborough Housing Opportunity
Partnership Committee.
(c)
Resale prices. Subsequent resale prices shall be determined
based on a percentage of the median income at the time of
resale as determined by the federal Department of Housing
and Urban Development and adopted by the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community
Development. The resale price will be established based on a
discount rate, which is the percentage of the median income
for which the unit was originally sold. The method of resale
price calculation shall be included as part of the deed
restriction. Through agreement between the Southborough
Housing Opportunity Partnership Committee and the
developer or owner, this percentage may be increased or
decreased by up to 5% at the time of resale, in order to assure
that the target income groups' ability to purchase will be kept
in line with the unit's market appreciation and to provide a
proper return on equity to the seller.
(d)
Marketing plan. The affordable units must be rented or sold
using marketing and selection guidelines approved by the
Southborough Housing Opportunity Partnership Committee,
and in accordance with state guidelines.
(e)
Preference for Town residents and persons employed within
the Town. Unless otherwise prohibited by a federal or state
agency under a financing or other subsidy program, not less
than 70% of the affordable units shall be initially offered to, in
order of preference:
To employees of the Town of Southborough for at least five
years;
[1]
Current residents of the Town of Southborough who have
resided in the Town for a minimum of five years and/or
persons who, although not currently residents of the Town,
have previously resided in the Town of Southborough for a
minimum of five years in the last 15 years.
[2]
(f)
(3) Development standards.
§ 174-13.2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.2
1:234
Location of affordable units. Affordable units shall be dispersed
throughout the development so as to ensure a true mix of
market-rate and affordable housing.
(a)
Comparability. Affordable units shall be to the extent possible
externally indistinguishable from market rate units in the same
development. Affordable units should be comparable to market
rate units in terms of location, quality, character, and room
size.
(b)
Unit size. Except as otherwise authorized by the Southborough
Housing Opportunity Partnership Committee, affordable units
shall contain one or more bedrooms. The mix of unit sizes
among the affordable units shall be proportionate to that of the
development as a whole.
(c)
Rights and privileges. The owners or renters of affordable units
shall have all rights, privileges and responsibilities accorded to
market-rate owners or renters, including access to all non-fee
amenities within the development.
(d)
Incentive. To facilitate the objectives of this section, modifications
to the dimensional requirements in the applicable zoning district
shall be permitted for projects subject to the requirements of this
section. The modifications shall be permitted as set forth below.
Density bonus. The minimum lot area per dwelling unit
normally required in the applicable zoning district shall be
reduced by that amount necessary, upon approval, to permit up
to three additional units in the project for each one affordable
unit as required in Subsection E(1) above.
(a)
(4)
Alternative methods of affordability.
This section mandates that affordable units shall be provided
on-site. However, in certain exceptional circumstances the
Planning Board may, at the formal written request of the
developer, consider an alternative method of compliance. In
granting such authorization, the Town must find that the
developer has demonstrated that building the required
affordable units on-site would create a significant hardship,
or that such alternate method of compliance is in the best
interests of the Town. A "significant hardship" shall be defined
as being of such significance that the property cannot
physically accommodate the required affordable units and/or
related requirements, such as height, setbacks, or parking.
Hardship shall not be considered due to financial or marketing
consideration. To have such a request considered, the burden
of proof shall be on the developers, who must make full
disclosure to the Planning Board of all relevant information.
Approval of alternate methods of compliance shall be only for
the methods described below.
(a)
(5)
§ 174-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.2
1:235
Except as set forth below, affordable units provided through
an alternate method shall comply in all other respects with
the requirements of this bylaw. The incentives described in
Subsection E(4) are not available to development proposals in
which the requirements of this section are met using the cash
contribution method of compliance.
(b)
The following alternative methods of compliance, in order of
preference by the Town, may be considered by the Town in
rare, exceptional circumstances:
Off-site location. With authorization by the Planning Board
as described above, affordable units may be constructed
by the developer on an alternate site. The alternate site
must be suitable for residential development and must
be within the Town of Southborough, and must add to
the Town's stock of affordable housing units. Off-site units
shall be comparable in quality, size and type to the marketrate
units being created, and of a number no fewer than
the number of units that would have otherwise been
provided on-site. Affordable off-site units allowed by this
bylaw may be located in an existing structure, provided
that their construction constitutes a net increase in the
number of dwelling units contained in the structure. Offsite
units shall be subject to the same construction
schedule as otherwise required if on-site as set forth in
Subsection E(6)(c).
[1]
Cash contribution. With authorization by the Planning
Board as described above, developers may make a cash
payment to the Town to be used only for the purposes of
providing housing affordable to low-income households as
defined by this bylaw.
For ownership developments, the financial
contribution for each affordable unit shall be equal
to the full purchase price of an affordable unit for a
four-person low-income household as defined by this
bylaw and in accordance with the regulations and
policies of the Department of Housing and Community
Development. In order to include the value of the land,
the financial contribution for each affordable unit shall
also include an amount equal to the current year's
assessed value of the land divided by the total number
of units proposed, multiplied by the total number of
affordable units.
[a]
For rental units, the financial contribution for each
affordable unit shall be equal to the difference
between the average market rental price for the
market-rate units in the subject development and the
[b]
[2]
(c)
§ 174-13.2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.2
1:236
rent affordable to a four-person low-income household
as defined by this bylaw, calculated over a term of
10 years. In order to include the value of the land,
the financial contribution for each affordable unit shall
also include an amount equal to the current year's
assessed value of the land divided by the total number
of units proposed, multiplied by the total number of
affordable units.
Prior to the issuance of a final occupancy permit for
any portion of the project, the contribution shall be
payable in full, or a written agreement approved by
the Planning Board and SHOPC must be recorded and
filed with the Town Treasurer.
[c]
Administration of funds. Funds donated to the Town in
accordance with the provisions outlined in MGL c. 44, § 53A,
shall be restricted solely for the creation of affordable housing,
located in the Town of Southborough, and as defined by this
bylaw. The funds shall be kept in a separate account by the
Town Treasurer. The Town Treasurer shall deposit the funds
in a bank or invest the same in securities as are legal under
the law of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Any interest
earned shall be credited to and become part of the fund. Any
moneys conveyed to the Town in accordance with this
subsection shall be expended only with approval of the
majority of Town Meeting.
(d)
Enforcement.
Legal restrictions. Affordable units shall be rented or sold
subject to deed covenants, contractual agreements, and/or
other mechanisms restricting the use and occupancy, rent
levels and sales prices of such units to assure their
affordability. All restrictive instruments shall be subject to
review and approval by the Southborough Housing
Opportunity Partnership Committee and Town Counsel. All
condominium documents and fees shall be subject to review
and approval by the Southborough Housing Opportunity
Partnership Committee and Town Counsel.
(a)
Timing of commitments. All contractual agreements with the
Town and other documents necessary to ensure compliance
with this subsection shall be executed prior to and as a
condition of the issuance of any approval required to
commence construction.
(b)
Timing of construction. As a condition of the issuance of
approval under this subsection, the Southborough Housing
Opportunity Partnership Committee may set a time schedule
for the construction of both affordable and market-rate units.
(c)
(6)
§ 174-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.2
1:237
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any marketrate
units in a development subject to the requirements of
this subsection until 25% of the affordable units required to
be constructed have been issued a certificate of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to more than 75%
of the market-rate units until 100% of the affordable units
required to be constructed have obtained a certificate of
occupancy.
Severability. In case any paragraph or part of this section should
be for any reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of last resort, every other paragraph or part shall continue in full
force and effect.
(7)
Exempt areas. Development within a Critical Resource District
(§ 174-8.10) shall be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(8)
Bonused development. [Amended 4-15-2004 ATM by Art. 45]
Discretionary bonus. The Planning Board may also authorize up to
an additional ten-percent increase based on the following criteria,
unless the Board explains in its decision why unusual
circumstances cause the Board to act otherwise:
Middle-income units. For units designed for households having
incomes not exceeding 140% of the median family income
for the Boston Region, as estimated by the HUD Regional
Economist:
Bonus: One added lot or unit for each middle-income unit,
provided that the following requirements are met.
Continuing affordability. The units shall be assured of
continuing affordability for middle income households,
for not less than 10 years.
[a]
Local preference. The provisions of Subsection
(E)(2)(f) applicable to affordable units shall also apply
to middle-income units.
[b]
[1]
(a)
On-site preservation of critical areas. For land otherwise
eligible to be credited towards lot area but not so credited and
either restricted under a conservation restriction or deeded to
the Town, if that land is determined by the Planning Board to
be of critical importance for retention in an undeveloped state
such as the following:
[1] Land within 200 feet of existing major roads.
Land across which there are important scenic views from
publicly accessible points.
[2]
[3] Land of special habitat or ecological value and fragility.
(b)
(1)
F.
§ 174-13.2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.2
1:238
Bonus: one added lot or dwelling unit for each lot which
could reasonably be expected to be developed in the
restricted area under a conventional plan in full
conformance with zoning, subdivision regulations, and
health codes. In making this determination, the Planning
Board shall seek the advice of the Conservation
Commission and Board of Health.
[4]
Off-site preservation of critical areas. For land in
Southborough not contiguous with the parcel to be developed,
whether in the same ownership or not, if made part of the
flexible development application and to be preserved under a
conservation restriction or deeded to the Town, if the Planning
Board determines that the land is of critical importance for
retention as provided under Subsection F(2)(b) above, and
that the land being developed is not of critical importance for
retention:
Bonus: one added dwelling unit for each dwelling unit
which could reasonably be expected to have been
developed on the restricted parcel under a conventional
plan in full conformance with zoning, subdivision
regulations and health codes.
[1]
Critical resource bonus. In the case of land within the
Critical Resource District proposed to be restricted, added
dwelling units (which must be outside the district) shall
equal double the number reasonably expected on a
conventional plan for the restricted land.
[2]
(c)
Decision.
Procedure. The procedure for approval shall be as follows:
Approval of flexible plan. The Planning Board shall approve or
approve with conditions a special permit for major residential
development for the flexible plan, provided that the Board
determines that the flexible plan is at least as beneficial to the
Town as the conventional plan, based upon the considerations
established under § 174-9, Special Permit Requirements, and
Article IV of Chapter 244, Subdivision of Land, and the design
criteria listed Subsection G(2) below.
(a)
Approval of conventional plan. Only if the Board determines
that the conventional plan is more beneficial to the Town than
the flexible plan shall the Board approve major residential
development for the conventional plan, provided that it meets
all requirements of this section.
(b)
Denial of both plans. Only if the Board determines that the
flexible plan is not a good-faith design or that the more
(c)
(1)
G.
§ 174-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.2
1:239
beneficial plan does not conform to the requirements of this
section shall the Board disapprove both plans.
General design criteria. The specific design requirements in each
of the prior subsections shall be met. In addition, when evaluating
the plans, the following general criteria shall be considered by
the Planning Board as indicating design appropriate to the natural
landscape and meeting the objectives of major residential
development:
Layout of open and common land.
The maximum number of lots or units shall be contiguous
to the common land.
[1]
Common land shall be arranged to protect valuable
natural environments, such as streams, valleys,
outstanding vegetation or scenic views.
[2]
The common land shall be reasonably contiguous and
coherent.
[3]
If the tract of land abuts adjacent common land or other
permanently protected open space, then the common land
shall be connected with such adjacent common land and
with such permanently protected open space.
[4]
Where appropriate, and not detrimental to the natural
features of the site, open space shall be utilized for
recreation to serve Town needs. [Added 4-12-1999 ATM
by Art. 65]
[5]
(a)
Ownership, maintenance and use restrictions on common land
and facilities.
The ownership and maintenance responsibilities of all
private and/or common areas and facilities (including but
not limited to open space, recreational facilities, roads and
sewer treatment plants, if any) shall be subject to approval
of the Planning Board, and in the case of sewer treatment
plants, subject to the approval of the Board of Health.
[1]
Private roads, if allowed by the Planning Board, shall be
designed to the standards specified in Chapter 244,
Subdivision of Land.
[2]
Open land, if any, unless conveyed to the Town of
Southborough, shall be covered by a recorded restriction
enforceable by the Town of Southborough, provided that
such land shall be kept in open space.
[3]
(b)
(c) Buffer areas and view protection.
(2)
§ 174-13.2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.2
1:240
§ 174-13.3. Lower impact development.28 [Added 4-10-2006 ATM by
Art. 47]
Buffer areas shall be preserved and maintained to
minimize conflict between residential and other uses.
[1]
Buffers of natural vegetation shall be preserved or created
adjacent to wetlands and surface waters.
[2]
[3] Scenic views and vistas shall be protected.
General site layout.
The elements of the site plan (lots, buildings, circulation,
common land, landscaping, etc.) shall be arranged
favorably with existing natural topography, streams and
water bodies.
[1]
(d)
Circulation.
Street appearance and capacity shall be protected by
avoiding development fronting such streets.
[1]
The street system shall provide for safe and convenient
movement of vehicles on and off the site and shall be
designed to contribute to the overall aesthetic quality of
the development.
[2]
The pedestrian circulation system shall be designed to
assure that pedestrians can move safely and easily on the
site and between properties and activities within the site
and neighborhood.
[3]
[4] Private roads, if any: refer to Subsection G(2)(b) above.
(e)
Subdivision approval. The granting of a special permit for a major
residential development shall in no case be construed as an
approval under Chapter 244, Subdivision of Land.
(3)
Subsequent changes. Subsequent to granting the special permit
and approval of a definitive plan of subdivision, the Planning Board
may permit, without initiating a new special permit proceeding,
the relocation of lot lines within the development; change in the
layout of streets; change in the use, ownership and layout of the
common land; or change in any other conditions stated in the
original special permit. The Planning Board shall require a new
special permit if it determines that the proposed changes are
substantial in nature and/or impact public health or safety.
(4)
28.Editor's Note: Former § 174-13.3, Critical Resource District, added 4-14-1986 ATM by Art.
38, was superseded 4-12-1993 ATM by Art. 43. See now § 174-8.10, Critical Resource
District.
§ 174-13.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.3
1:241
Purpose and authority. This bylaw is adopted under authority granted
by the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, the
Home Rule statutes, and pursuant to the Bylaws of the Federal Clean
Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34. Environmental protection is a
significant concern of the Town of Southborough. It is in the public
interest to minimize the impacts associated with land development and
to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges to control
and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, postconstruction
soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion,
and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development
stormwater runoff. Lower impact development (hereinafter LID) site
planning and management of post-development stormwater runoff will
minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure,
safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare
of the public, protect water and aquatic resources, and promote
groundwater recharge to protect surface, groundwater, and drinking
water supplies. The purpose of this bylaw is as follows:
To protect the quality and quantity of surface waters, reservoirs,
and groundwater, to maintain the integrity of aquatic living
resources and ecosystems, and to preserve the physical integrity of
receiving streams and water bodies;
(1)
To encourage a more efficient form of development that consumes
less open land and protects existing topography, wildlife habitats,
and natural features;
(2)
To require that new development, redevelopment and all land
conversion activities maintain the natural hydrologic
characteristics of the land to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion,
siltation, nonpoint source pollution, property damage, and to
maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats;
(3)
To establish decision-making processes surrounding land
development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed
and preserve the health of water resources; and
(4)
(5) To minimize the total amount of disturbance of the land.
A.
Definitions. Terms not defined in this bylaw shall be construed
according to their customary and usual meaning unless the context
indicates a special or technical meaning.
ALTER — Any activity which will measurably change the ability of a
ground surface area to absorb water or will change existing surface
drainage patterns. Alter may be similarly represented as "alteration of
drainage characteristics," and "conducting land disturbance activities."
BIORETENTION AREAS — Shallow depressions filled with engineered
soils, topped with a thick layer of mulch, and planted with dense
vegetation that reduce the overall amount of runoff to be treated by
infiltrating stormwater to the ground.
B.
§ 174-13.3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.3
1:242
DISTURBED AREA — An area, man-made or natural, where the existing
condition has been or is proposed to be altered.
INFILTRATION — The act of conveying surface water into the ground to
recharge groundwater and to reduce stormwater runoff from a project
site.
LOWER IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — An ecosystem-based
approach to land development and stormwater management that
ensures that each development site is designed to protect, or restore,
the natural hydrology of the site.
LID MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural practices
that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads,
discharge volumes, and/or peak flow discharge rates.
LID TECHNIQUES — Engineering measures that compensate for the
reduced infiltration and storage characteristics of developed sites.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT POLICY — The
policy issued by the Department of Environmental Protection, as
amended, that coordinates the requirements prescribed by state
regulations promulgated under the authority of the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and Massachusetts Clean
Waters Act, MGL c. 21, §§ 23 through 56.29 The policy addresses
stormwater impacts through implementation of performance standards
to reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies and control
the quantity of runoff from a site.
MULTIFUNCTIONAL LANDSCAPE FEATURES — Bioretention areas,
swales, and conservation areas that mimic or replicate hydrologic
functions and maintain the ecological/biological integrity of receiving
streams and water bodies.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including
any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped
storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or
man-made or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage
structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or
operated by the Town of Southborough.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any construction or land disturbance of a
parcel of land that is currently in a natural vegetated state and does not
contain significant alterations by man-made activities.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution from many diffuse
sources caused by rainfall or snowmelt moving over and through the
ground. As the runoff moves, it picks up and carries away natural and
human-made pollutants, finally depositing them into water resource
areas.
29.Editor's Note: See the Clean Waters Act in MGL c. 21, §§ 26 through 53.
§ 174-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.3
1:243
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN — A plan that defines the
functional, financial, and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing
operation.
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate,
the commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject
to Town Bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public
corporation or body, the Town of Southborough, and any other legal
entity, its legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT — The conditions that exist at the time that plans
for the development of a tract of land are submitted to the special
permit granting authority. Where phased development or plan approval
occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing
conditions at the time prior to the first plan submission shall establish
pre-development conditions.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit,
well, discrete fissure, or container from which pollutants are or may be
discharged.
POST-DEVELOPMENT — The conditions that reasonably may be
expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land
development activity on a specific site or tract of land. Postdevelopment
refers to the phase of a new development or
redevelopment project after completion, and does not refer to the
construction phase of a project.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration, or improvement
where the existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, or
multifamily residential.
RESOURCE AREA — Any area protected under federal, state, or local
law or regulation, including, without limitation: the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act and the Southborough Wetlands Protection
Bylaw.30
RUNOFF — Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the
ground surface.
SEDIMENTATION — A process of depositing material that has been
suspended and transported in water.
SITE — The parcel of land being developed or a designated planning
area in which the land development project is located.
Applicability. This bylaw shall be applicable to all new development
and redevelopment, including, but not limited to, site plan applications,
subdivision applications, grading applications, land use conversion
C.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Wetlands Protection.
§ 174-13.3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.3
1:244
applications, any activity that will result in an increased amount of
stormwater runoff or pollutants flowing from a parcel of land, or any
activity that will alter the drainage characteristics of a parcel of land,
unless exempt pursuant to Subsection D of this bylaw. After April
10, 2006, the Planning Board shall not approve any application for
development or redevelopment if the land or parcels of land were
held in common ownership (including ownership by related or jointly
controlled persons or entities) and were subdivided or otherwise
modified to avoid compliance. A development shall not be segmented or
phased in a manner to avoid compliance with this bylaw. A LID special
permit shall be required from the Planning Board for the following:
(1) Any activity subject to major plan review (§ 174-10);
(2) Any activity that will result in soil disturbance of one acre or more;
Any residential development or redevelopment of five or more
acres of land proposed pursuant to the Subdivision Control Law,
MGL c. 41, § 81K to 81GG, inclusive, or proposed under a special
permit process pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 9.
(3)
Exemptions.
(1) Any activity that will disturb an area less than one acre.
Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use
as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act regulation, 310 CMR
10.04 and MGL c. 40A, § 3.
(2)
Construction and associated grading of a way that has been
approved by the Planning Board.
(3)
The maintenance, reconstruction or resurfacing of any public way;
and the installation of drainage structures and utilities within or
associated with public ways that have been approved by the
appropriate authorities.
(4)
Emergency repairs to any stormwater management facility or
practice that poses a threat to public health or safety, or as deemed
necessary by the special permit granting authority.
(5)
Any work or projects for which all necessary approvals and permits
have been issued before the effective date of this bylaw.
(6)
Redevelopment projects are presumed to meet the specified LID
requirements described in the LID Bylaw of the Town of
Southborough if the total impervious cover is reduced by 40% from
existing conditions. Where site conditions prevent the reduction in
impervious cover, LID practices shall be implemented to provide
stormwater controls for at least 40% of the site's impervious area.
When a combination of impervious area reduction and
implementation of LID techniques is used for redevelopment
(7)
D.
§ 174-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.3
1:245
projects, the combination of impervious area reduction and the
area controlled by a LID practice shall equal or exceed 40%.
Special permit application and procedure.
The Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority
for the issuance of a LID special permit. Such special permit
applications shall be submitted, considered, and issued only in
accordance with the provisions of this bylaw and MGL c. 40A, § 9.
(1)
To obtain approval for a project subject to the provisions of this
bylaw, the applicant shall submit a LID special permit application
that meets the LID site design principles stated below, a LID
management plan and an operation and maintenance plan that
complies with the requirements set forth herein and in the
regulations adopted pursuant to this bylaw.
Preservation of the site's natural features and environmentally
sensitive areas such as wetlands, native vegetation, mature
trees, slopes, drainageways, permeable soils, floodplains,
woodlands and soils to the greatest extent possible;
(a)
(b) Minimization of grading and clearing;
(c) Clustering of buildings;
Use of stormwater management components that provide
filtration, treatment and infiltration such as vegetated areas
that slow down runoff; maximizing infiltration and reducing
contact with paved surfaces;
(d)
Creation of subwatersheds to treat and manage runoff in
smaller, decentralized, low-tech stormwater management
techniques to treat and recharge stormwater close to the
source;
(e)
Emphasis of simple, nonstructural, low-tech, low-cost methods,
including open drainage systems, disconnection of roof runoff,
and street sweeping;
(f)
Reduction of impervious surfaces wherever possible through
alternative street design, such as omission of curbs and use
of narrower streets, shared driveways and through the use of
shared parking areas;
(g)
(h) Reduction of any heat island effect;
Use of native plant vegetation (invasive species prohibited) in
buffer strips and in rain gardens (small planted depressions
that can trap and filter runoff). Naturalized, noninvasive plant
species may be substituted for native plant vegetation subject
to the Board's approval.
(i)
(2)
E.
§ 174-13.3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.3
1:246
Techniques integrated into every aspect of site design to create
a hydrologically functional lot or site, including the following:
[1] Vegetated open channel systems along roads;
[2] Rain gardens;
[3] Buffer strips;
[4] Use of roof gardens where practicable;
Use of amended soils that will store, filter and infiltrate
runoff;
[5]
[6] Bioretention areas;
Use of rain barrels and other cisterns to provide additional
stormwater storage;
[7]
[8] Use of permeable pavement.
(j)
The Planning Board may waive some of the requirements for a
LID special permit application if it determines that some of the
application requirements are unnecessary because of the size or
character of the development project or because of the natural
conditions at the site. Waivers that are granted at the initial
approval may not be binding if the reasons for which the waiver
was granted are changed or no longer exist.
(3)
The applicant shall make all requests for waivers in writing. The
applicant shall submit supporting technical information and
documentation to demonstrate that some, or all, of the
requirements are unnecessary because of minimal environmental
impact or other reasons why such waiver/s should be granted. The
Planning Board's decision to grant or deny waivers shall be in
writing and shall set forth the reasons for the grant or denial.
(4)
At the time of application, the applicant shall provide in writing
the name of the person who is responsible for the site disturbing
activity which is the subject of the application. Said person shall
ensure that the approved activity takes place in accordance with
the application, plan and special permit requirements.
(5)
Entry. Filing an application for a special permit grants the Board, or
its agent, permission to enter the site to verify the information in the
application and to inspect for compliance with the resulting special
permit.
F.
LID management plan.
The LID management plan shall contain sufficient information for
the Planning Board to evaluate the environmental impact,
effectiveness, and acceptability of the site planning process and
the measures proposed by the applicant to reduce all adverse
(1)
G.
§ 174-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.3
1:247
impacts from stormwater runoff to control and minimize increases
in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil
erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint
source pollution associated with post-development stormwater
runoff, and to minimize the impacts associated with land
development. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria
established in this bylaw and the supporting regulations and must
be prepared, stamped and signed by a professional engineer
registered in Massachusetts, a registered land surveyor, or a
Massachusetts licensed soil evaluator, as appropriate.
The LID management plan shall fully describe the project in
drawings, narrative, and calculations. It shall meet the criteria set
forth in the regulations adopted pursuant to this bylaw.
(2)
Operation and maintenance plan contents. The operation and
maintenance plan (O&M plan) shall be designed to ensure compliance
with the LID special permit, this bylaw and to ensure that the
Massachusetts Surface Water Quality Standards, 314 CMR 4.00, are
met in all seasons and throughout the life of the system. The O&M plan
shall be prepared in accordance with the criteria established in the
regulations adopted pursuant to this bylaw, and shall be stamped and
signed by a professional engineer registered in Massachusetts, and a
registered land surveyor, as appropriate. The O&M plan shall remain
on file with the Planning Board and shall be an ongoing requirement.
H.
Performance standards: LID criteria. The LID application and required
plans shall meet the general performance criteria set forth in the
regulations adopted pursuant to this bylaw.
I.
Findings and conditions of approval.
The Board shall not approve any application for a LID special
permit unless it finds that the following conditions have been met
and the LID techniques listed herein have been employed to the
maximum extent practicable to meet the stated purpose of this
Bylaw.
A separate special permit shall be required from the Planning
Board when an area totaling one acre or more on any parcel
or contiguous parcels in the same ownership will have the
existing vegetation clear-stripped or be filled six inches or
more so as to destroy existing vegetation unless in conjunction
with agricultural activity or unless necessarily incidental to
construction on the premises under a currently valid building
permit or unless within streets which are either public or
designated on an approved subdivision plan. The special
permit shall require that run-off be controlled, erosion
prevented and either a constructed surface or cover vegetation
be provided not later than the first full spring season
immediately following completion of the stripping operation.
(a)
(1)
J.
§ 174-13.3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.3
1:248
Any stripped area that is allowed to remain stripped through
the winter shall have a temporary cover of winter rye or similar
plant material for soil control, except in the case of agricultural
activity when such temporary cover would be infeasible.
Measures shall be employed to minimize adverse impacts on
wildlife habitats and corridors, natural or historic landscape
features, and scenic vistas and views.
(b)
Compliance with all applicable federal, state and local
regulations and guidelines, including but not limited to the
Stormwater Management Handbook as it may be amended,
has been demonstrated.
(c)
The Planning Board may require a cash performance guarantee to
ensure compliance with these requirements and for the operation
and maintenance of all permanent LID measures. With the approval
of the Board upon the recommendation of Town Counsel and the
Town Treasurer, as appropriate, the applicant may substitute an
irrevocable letter of credit or performance bond in lieu of the
cash performance guarantee. Any performance bond or letter of
credit shall be executed and maintained by a financial institution,
surety, or guarantee company qualified to do business in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(2)
Prior to commencement of any land disturbing activity, the
applicant shall record the special permit with the Registry of Deeds
or Registry District of the Land Court, and the applicant shall
submit to the Planning Board written proof of such recording.
(3)
At completion of the project, the owner shall submit as-built record
drawings of all structural stormwater controls and treatment best
management practices required for the site. The as-built drawing
shall show deviations from the approved plans, if any, and shall be
certified by a professional engineer registered in Massachusetts.
(4)
Based upon the nature of the application the Board may impose
requirements or limitations to minimize the impacts, if any, on
abutting properties or uses.
(5)
The site planning process shall be documented and shall include
the following steps:
(a) Identify and map environmental resources;
Delineate potential building envelopes avoiding environmental
resource areas and appropriate buffers; and
(b)
Develop methods to minimize impervious surfaces, and to
protect and preserve open space.
(c)
(6)
All stormwater runoff generated from land development and land
use conversion activities shall not discharge untreated stormwater
(7)
§ 174-13.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.3
1:249
§ 174-13.4. Water resource protection. [Added 4-14-1986 ATM by
Art. 40]
runoff directly to a wetland, local water body, municipal drainage
system, or abutting property, without adequate treatment.
The Planning Board may deny a LID special permit if it determines:
(a) The requirements set forth herein are not met; or
The intent of the application is to circumvent other provisions
of the Town's Zoning Code, rules, or regulations.
(b)
(8)
Enforcement. The Board or its authorized agent and the Town of
Southborough shall have the power and duty to enforce this bylaw,
its regulations, decisions, orders, violation notices, and enforcement
orders issued pursuant to this bylaw, and may pursue all civil and
criminal remedies for such violations.
Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw,
regulation, or permit issued hereunder, shall be subject to fines,
civil action, criminal prosecution, and tax liens, as appropriate and
as lawfully established by the Town of Southborough.
(1)
Tax liens. The Town of Southborough shall require the repayment
of services provided to the responsible party that the responsible
party was obligated to perform as set forth in the operation and
maintenance plan. If repayment is not made within 30 days, the
Town may impose a tax lien on the property of the responsible party
or parties.
(2)
K.
Severability. Any determination that a particular provision or set of
provisions in this bylaw are invalid or unenforceable shall not render
ineffective, unenforceable, or inapplicable the remainder of this bylaw.
L.
Design and operations guidelines. To reduce asks of water
contamination, the following design and operations guidelines shall be
observed wherever germane in all new nonresidential construction.
Safeguards. Provisions shall be made to protect against hazardous
materials discharge or loss through corrosion, accidental damage,
spillage or vandalism through such measures as provision for spill
control in the vicinity of chemical or fuel delivery points, secure
storage areas for hazardous materials and indoor storage
provisions for corrodible or dissolvable materials.
(1)
Disposal. Provisions shall be made to assure that any waste
disposed on the site shall contain no hazardous materials in
concentrations substantially greater than associated with normal
household use.
(2)
Drainage. Floor or lavatory drainage shall be directed to an
impervious retention facility for controlled removal. Provision shall
(3)
A.
§ 174-13.3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.4
1:250
be made for on-site recharge of all stormwater runoff from
impervious surfaces unless, following consultation with the
Conservation Commission, the Building Inspector determines that
either recharge is infeasible because of site conditions or is
undesirable because of uncontrollable risks to water quality from
such recharge. Recharge shall be by surface infiltration through
vegetative surfaces unless otherwise approved by the Building
Inspector following consultation with the Conservation
Commission. Dry wells shall be used only where other methods
are infeasible and shall employ oil, grease and sediment traps.
Drainage from loading and unloading areas for hazardous
materials shall be separately collected for safe disposal.
Uses requiring special permits.
The following shall be allowed only if granted a special permit from
the special permit granting authority:
Waste generation requiring the obtaining of an Environmental
Protection Agency identification number, except for small
quantity generators, as defined under DEQE regulations, 310
CMR 30.351.
(a)
On-site sewage disposal having an estimated sewage flow
greater than 15,000 gallons per day, regardless of location, or
greater than 1,500 gallons per day if within 500 feet of any
surface water body.
(b)
(c) Rendering impervious more than 75% of lot area.
Except for single-family dwellings, on-site sewage disposal
systems having an estimated sewage flow exceeding 120
gallons per day per 10,000 square feet of lot area.
(d)
Discharge to surface water requiring a permit under 314 CMR
3.00 (NPDES permit).
(e)
(1)
Change in activity resulting in crossing any of the thresholds of
B(1)(a) through (d) shall constitute a change of use requiring a
special permit.
(2)
B.
Special permit process.
Authority and procedure. The special permit granting authority
(SPGA) shall be the Board of Appeals. Upon receipt of the special
permit application, the SPGA shall transmit one copy each to the
Planning Board, the Conservation Commission, the Board of Health
and the Building Inspector for their written recommendations.
Failure to respond within 35 days of transmittal shall indicate
approval by said agencies.
(1)
Submittals. In applying for a special permit under this section,
the information listed below shall be submitted unless the Board
(2)
C.
§ 174-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.4
1:251
of Appeals, prior to formal application, determines that certain of
these items are not germane:
A complete list of all chemicals, pesticides, fuels or other
potentially hazardous materials to be used or stored on the
premises in quantities greater than associated with normal
household use, accompanied by a description of the measures
proposed to protect all storage containers or facilities from
vandalism, corrosion and leakage and to provide for control of
spills.
(a)
A description of potentially hazardous wastes to be generated,
including storage and disposal methods as in Subsection
C(2)(a) above.
(b)
For aboveground storage of hazardous materials or wastes,
evidence of qualified professional supervision of design and
installation of such storage facilities or containers.
(c)
For disposal on-site of domestic wastewater with an estimated
sewage flow greater than 15,000 gallons per day, evidence of
qualified professional supervision of design and installation,
including an assessment of nitrate, phosphate and coliform
bacteria impact on groundwater quality.
(d)
Special permit criteria. Special permits under this section shall
be granted only if the SPGA determines that there is adequate
assurance that there will be no violation of the Massachusetts
Surface Water Quality Standards (314 CMR 4.00) and that
groundwater quality resulting from on-site waste disposal, other
operations on-site and natural recharge will not fall below federal
or state standards for drinking water when averaged over the
boundaries of the site or, if existing groundwater quality is already
below those standards, on-site disposal or operations will result
in no further deterioration and only if the SPGA determines that
proposed control and response measures adequately and reliably
mitigate risk to groundwater quality resulting from accident or
system failure. In its decision, the SPGA shall explain any
departures from the recommendations of other Town agencies in
its decision.
(3)
Conditions. Special permits shall be granted only subject to such
conditions as are necessary to assure adequate safeguarding of
water quality, which may include the following, among others:
Monitoring wells to be located downgradient of potential
pollution sources, with periodic sampling to be provided to the
Board of Health at the owner's expense.
(a)
Pollutant source reduction, including limitations on use of
parking area deicing materials and periodic cleaning or
(b)
(4)
§ 174-13.4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.4
1:252
§ 174-13.5. Stormwater and erosion control. [Added 4-10-2006 ATM
by Art. 46]
renovation of pollution control devices, such as catch basin
sumps.
Purpose. Regulation of activities that result in the disturbance of land
and the creation of stormwater runoff is necessary for the protection of
the Town of Southborough to safeguard the health, safety, and welfare
of the general public and protect the natural resources of the Town.
The purpose of this bylaw is to prevent or diminish these impacts
by controlling runoff and preventing soil erosion and sedimentation
resulting from site construction and development. This bylaw is
adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution, the Home Rule statutes, and pursuant to
the bylaws of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
Nothing in this bylaw is intended to replace the requirements of either
the Town of Southborough Wetlands Protection Bylaw,31 or any other
bylaw that has been or may be adopted by the Town of Southborough.
Any activity subject to the provisions of the above-cited bylaws must
comply with the specifications of each applicable bylaw. The objectives
of this bylaw are to:
Establish decision-making processes surrounding land
development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed
and preserve the health of wetland and water resources;
(1)
Require that new development, redevelopment and all land
conversion activities maintain the after-development runoff
characteristics as equal to or less than the pre-development runoff
characteristics to provide recharge and to reduce flooding, stream
bank erosion, siltation, nonpoint source pollution, property
damage, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and
aquatic habitats;
(2)
Establish minimum construction/alteration and post-development
stormwater management standards and design criteria for the
regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality
and for the protection of properties and aquatic resources
downstream from land development and land conversion activities
from damages due to increases in volume, velocity, frequency,
duration, and peak flow rate of stormwater runoff;
(3)
Establish design criteria for measures to minimize nonpoint source
pollution from stormwater runoff which would otherwise degrade
water quality;
(4)
Establish design and application criteria for the construction and
use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to
(5)
A.
31.Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Wetlands Protection.
§ 174-13.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.5
1:253
meet the minimum construction/alteration and post-development
stormwater management standards and to encourage the use of
nonstructural stormwater management, stormwater site design
practices or "low-impact development practices," such as reducing
impervious cover and the preservation of open space and other
natural areas, to the maximum extent practicable;
Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and
maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and
nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that
they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no
threat to public safety;
(6)
Establish provisions to ensure there is an adequate funding
mechanism, including surety, for the proper review, inspection and
long-term maintenance of stormwater facilities implemented as
part of this bylaw; and
(7)
Establish administrative procedures and fees for the submission,
review, approval, or disapproval of stormwater management plans,
and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term
follow up.
(8)
Definitions.
AGRICULTURE — The normal maintenance or improvement of land
in agricultural or aquacultural use, as defined by the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40) and its implementing
regulations (310 CMR 10.00).
ALTER — Any activity that changes the water quality, or the force,
quantity, direction, timing or location of runoff flowing from the area
and will measurably change the ability of a ground surface area to
absorb water. Such changes include: change from distributed runoff
to confined, discrete discharge; change in the volume of runoff from
the area; change in the peak rate of runoff from the area; and change
in the recharge to groundwater on the area. Alter may be similarly
represented as "alteration of drainage characteristics," and
"conducting land disturbance activities."
APPLICANT — Any "person" as defined below requesting a stormwater
and erosion control permit for proposed land-disturbance activity.
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Conservation
Commission (hereinafter "the Commission") and its employees or
agents or other employee of the Town of Southborough shall be in
charge of enforcing the requirements of this bylaw.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Structural, nonstructural,
vegetative and managerial techniques that are recognized to be the
most effective and practical means to reduce erosion and sediment,
prevent or reduce increases in stormwater volumes and flows, reduce
point source and nonpoint source pollution, and promote stormwater
B.
§ 174-13.5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.5
1:254
quality and protection of the environment. "Structural" BMPs are
devices that are engineered and constructed to provide temporary
storage and treatment of stormwater runoff. "Nonstructural" BMPs use
natural measures to reduce pollution levels, do not require extensive
construction efforts, and/or promote pollutant reduction by eliminating
the pollutant source.
BETTER SITE DESIGN — Site design approaches and techniques that
can reduce a site's impact on the watershed through the use of
nonstructural stormwater management practices. Better site design
includes conserving and protecting natural areas and green space,
reducing impervious cover, and using natural features for stormwater
management.
CONSTRUCTION AND WASTE MATERIALS — Excess or discarded
building or construction site materials that may adversely impact water
quality, including but not limited to concrete truck washout, chemicals,
litter and sanitary waste.
DISTURBED AREA — An area, man-made or natural, where the existing
condition has been or is proposed to be altered.
ENVIRONMENTAL SITE MONITOR — A professional engineer, or other
trained professional selected by the Commission and retained by the
holder of a stormwater and erosion control permit to periodically
inspect the work and report to the Commission.
EROSION — A condition in which the earth's surface, including soil
or rock fragment, is detached and moved away by the action of water,
wind, ice, gravity or other natural means.
GENERAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT (GSMP) — A
permit issued for an application that meets a set of predetermined
standards outlined in the regulations to be adopted by the Commission
under this bylaw. By meeting these predetermined standards, the
proposed project will be presumed to meet the requirements and intent
of this bylaw.
HOTSPOT — Land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant
loadings, such as auto salvage yards, auto fueling facilities, fleet
storage yards, commercial parking lots with high intensity use, road
salt storage areas, commercial nurseries and landscaping, outdoor
storage and loading areas of hazardous substances, or marinas.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT POLICY — The
policy issued by the Department of Environmental Protection, and as
amended, that coordinates the requirements prescribed by state
regulations promulgated under the authority of the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and Massachusetts Clean
Waters Act MGL c. 21, §§ 23 through 56.32 The policy addresses
stormwater impacts through implementation of performance standards
32.Editor's Note: See the Clean Waters Act in MGL c. 21, §§ 26 through 53.
§ 174-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.5
1:255
to reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies and control
the quantity of runoff from a site.
NEW DEVELOPMENT — Any construction or land disturbance of a
parcel of land that is currently in a natural vegetated state and does not
contain alteration by man-made activities.
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate,
the commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject
to Town bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public
corporation or body, the Town of Southborough, and any other legal
entity, its legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
POST-DEVELOPMENT — The conditions that reasonably may be
expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land
development activity on a specific site or tract of land. Postdevelopment
refers to the phase of a new development or
redevelopment project after completion, and does not refer to the
construction phase of a project.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT — The conditions that exist at the time that plans
for the land development of a tract of land are submitted to the
Conservation Commission. Where phased development or plan
approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the
existing conditions at the time prior to the first plan submission shall
establish pre-development conditions.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any construction, alteration, or improvement
exceeding land disturbance of 5,000 square feet, where the existing
land use is commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily
residential.
RUNOFF — Rainfall, snowmelt, or irrigation water flowing over the
ground surface.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, whether mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is transported or has been moved from its site of origin by
erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — A process of depositing material that has been
suspended and transported in water.
SLOPE — The vertical rise divided by the horizontal distance and
expressed as a fraction or percentage.
STABILIZED — The elimination of any erosion.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK — Stormwater
Management Handbook, Volume One and Volume Two, prepared by the
Mass. Department of Environmental Protection and the Mass. Office of
Coastal Zone Management dated March 1997, as the same may be from
time to time revised.
§ 174-13.5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.5
1:256
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT (SMP) — A permit issued by
the Conservation Commission, after review of an application, plans,
calculations, and other supporting documents, which is designed to
protect the environment of the Town from the deleterious effects of
uncontrolled and untreated stormwater runoff.
Applicability. This bylaw shall be applicable to all new development
and redevelopment, including, but not limited to, site plan applications,
subdivision applications, grading applications, land use conversion
applications, any activity that will result in an increased amount of
stormwater runoff or pollutants flowing from a parcel of land, or any
activity that will alter the drainage characteristics of a parcel of land,
unless exempt pursuant to Subsection D of this bylaw. After April
10, 2006, the Commission shall not approve any application for
development or redevelopment if the land or parcels of land were
held in common ownership (including ownership by related or jointly
controlled persons or entities) and were subdivided or otherwise
modified to avoid compliance. A development shall not be segmented or
phased in a manner to avoid compliance with this bylaw. A stormwater
and erosion control permit shall be required from the Commission for
the following:
(1) Any activity subject to major site plan review (§ 174-10);
Any activity that will result in soil disturbance of one acre or more,
or more than 50% of the parcel or lot, whichever is less;
(2)
Any residential development or redevelopment of five or more
acres of land proposed pursuant to the Subdivision Control Law,
MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive, or proposed under a special
permit process pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 9;
(3)
Any activity that will increase the amount of impervious surfaces
more than 50% of the area of a parcel or lot; and
(4)
Any activity that will disturb land with 15% or greater slope and
where the land disturbance is greater than or equal to 15,000
square feet within the sloped area.
(5)
C.
Exemptions. The following activities are exempt from the requirements
of this bylaw:
Normal maintenance of Town-owned public land, ways and
appurtenances;
(1)
Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use
as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act regulation, 310 CMR
10.04 and MGL c. 40A, § 3;
(2)
Repair or replacement of septic systems when approved by the
Board of Health for the protection of public health;
(3)
D.
§ 174-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.5
1:257
Normal maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn
areas associated with a single-family dwelling, provided such
maintenance does not include the addition of more than 400 cubic
yards of soil material, or alteration of drainage patterns;
(4)
The construction of fencing that will not alter existing terrain or
drainage patterns;
(5)
Construction and associated grading of a way that has been
approved by the Planning Board;
(6)
The maintenance, reconstruction or resurfacing of any public way;
and the installation of drainage structures or utilities within or
associated with public ways that have been approved by the
appropriate authorities, provided that written notice be filed with
the Conservation Commission 14 days prior to commencement of
activity;
(7)
The removal of earth products undertaken in connection with an
agricultural use if the removal is necessary for or directly related to
planting, cultivating or harvesting or the raising or care of animals;
or
(8)
Activity in accordance with the terms of an existing order of
conditions or determination of applicability issued by the
Commission pursuant to MGL c. 131, § 40, or the Southborough
Wetlands Protection Bylaw, Chapter 170 of the Code of the Town of
Southborough.
(9)
Administration.
The Conservation Commission shall be the permit granting
authority for the issuance of a stormwater and erosion control
permit and shall administer, implement and enforce this bylaw. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Commission may
be delegated in writing by the Commission to its employees or
agents or other municipal employees as appropriate. Such permit
applications shall be submitted, considered, and issued only in
accordance with the provisions of this bylaw and the regulations
adopted pursuant to this bylaw.
(1)
Stormwater regulations. The Commission shall adopt, and
periodically amend, rules and regulations relating to the terms,
conditions, definitions, enforcement, fees, procedures and
administration of this Stormwater and Erosion Control Bylaw.
Failure by the Commission to promulgate such rules and
regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court shall
not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this bylaw.
(2)
Right of entry. Filing an application for a stormwater and erosion
control permit grants the Commission, or its agent, permission to
(3)
E.
§ 174-13.5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.5
1:258
enter the site to verify the information in the application and to
inspect for compliance with permit conditions.
Stormwater management manual. The Commission will utilize the
policy, criteria and information, including specifications and
standards of the latest edition of the Massachusetts Stormwater
Management Policy, for execution of the provisions of this bylaw.
This policy includes a list of acceptable stormwater treatment
practices, including the specific design criteria for each
stormwater practice. The policy may be updated and expanded
periodically, based on improvements in engineering, science,
monitoring, and local maintenance experience. Unless specifically
altered in the stormwater regulations, stormwater management
practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed
to be protective of Massachusetts's water quality standards.
(4)
Application. To obtain approval for a project subject to the
provisions of this bylaw, the applicant shall submit a stormwater
management and erosion control plan and an operation and
maintenance plan prepared, stamped and signed by a professional
engineer registered in Massachusetts, a registered land surveyor,
or a Massachusetts licensed soil evaluator, as appropriate, that
complies with the requirements set forth herein and in the
regulations adopted pursuant to this bylaw. The operation and
maintenance plan (O&M plan) shall be designed to ensure
compliance with the permit, this bylaw, and that the Massachusetts
surface water quality standards, 314 CMR 4.00, are met in all
seasons and throughout the life of the system. The O&M plan
shall remain on file with the Commission, the Planning Board, the
Department of Public Works and the Town Engineer and shall be
an ongoing requirement. The O&M plan shall meet the criteria
set forth in the regulations adopted pursuant to this bylaw. The
plans shall fully describe the project in drawings, narrative, and
calculations.
At the time of application, the applicant shall provide in writing
the name and the 24 hours a day and seven days a week
contact information of the person who is responsible for
erosion and sediment control for the site-disturbing activity
which is the subject of the application. Said person shall
ensure that the approved activity takes place in accordance
with the application, plan and permit requirements.
(a)
(5)
Fees. The Commission shall establish fees to cover expenses incurred
by the Town in reviewing the application and monitoring permit
compliance. The Commission is authorized to retain and charge the
applicant fees to cover the cost of hiring a registered professional
engineer or other professional consultant to advise the Commission
on any or all aspects of the project. The applicant for a stormwater
and erosion control permit may be required to establish and maintain
F.
§ 174-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.5
1:259
an escrow account to cover the costs of said consultants. Applicants
shall pay review fees to the Commission before the review process may
begin.
Surety. The Commission may require a cash performance guaranty
to ensure compliance with these requirements and for the long-term
operation and maintenance of all permanent erosion control and
stormwater management measures. The form of the bond shall be
approved by the Commission upon the recommendation of Town
Counsel and the Town Treasurer, as appropriate. With the approval
of the Commission upon the recommendation of Town Counsel and
the Town Treasurer, as appropriate, the applicant may substitute an
irrevocable letter of credit or performance bond in lieu of the cash
performance guaranty. Any performance bond or letter of credit shall
be executed and maintained by a financial institution, surety, or
guaranty company qualified to do business in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
G.
Waivers.
The Commission may waive strict compliance with some of the
requirements of this bylaw or the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder, if it determines that some of the
application requirements are unnecessary because of the size or
character of the development project or because of the natural
conditions at the site and where such action:
Is allowed by federal, state and local statutes and/or
regulations;
(a)
(b) Is in the public interest; and
(c) Is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this bylaw.
(1)
Any request from an applicant for a waiver of these rules shall be
submitted, in writing, to the Commission at the time of submission
of the application. Such requests shall clearly identify the
provisions of the rule from which relief is sought and be
accompanied by a statement setting forth the reasons why, in the
applicant's opinion, the granting of such a waiver would be in the
public interest or the specific information required to show strict
compliance is irrelevant to the project, and why a waiver would be
consistent with the intent and purpose of this bylaw and the rules
and regulations promulgated hereunder.
(2)
H.
Findings and conditions of approval.
The Commission shall not approve any application for a stormwater
and erosion control permit unless it finds that BMPs will be
employed to meet the following requirements:
(1)
I.
§ 174-13.5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.5
1:260
Compliance with all applicable federal, state and local
regulations and guidelines, including but not limited to the
Stormwater Management Handbook as it may be amended,
has been demonstrated;
(a)
Measures shall be employed to minimize adverse impacts on
wildlife habitats and corridors, natural or historic landscape
features, and scenic vistas and views;
(b)
The duration of exposure of disturbed areas due to removal of
vegetation, soil removal, and/or regrading shall be set forth in
a written time table and approved by the Commission;
(c)
There shall be no net increase in the rate of stormwater runoff
from the site;
(d)
There shall be no net increase in the volume of stormwater
runoff across the boundaries of the site unless provisions have
been made to tie into the public storm drains, where available,
with the approval of the appropriate parties or authorities or,
the Commission has determined that all reasonable provisions
have been made to minimize any changes in stormwater runoff
at the site;
(e)
There shall be no adverse impacts to abutting properties from
any increase in volume of stormwater runoff, including erosion,
silting, flooding, sedimentation or impacts to wetlands,
groundwater levels or wells;
(f)
Where the site is not proposed to be covered with gravel,
hardscape, or a building or structure, a planting plan to ensure
permanent revegetation of the site has been approved;
(g)
Areas to be planted shall be loamed with not less than six
inches compacted depth of good quality loam and seeded with
turf grass seed or other appropriate ground cover in
accordance with good planting practice;
(h)
Dust control shall be used during grading operations if the
grading is to occur within 500 feet of an occupied residence or
place of business, school, playground, park, cemetery, or place
of worship;
(i)
During construction, temporary erosion and sedimentation
control measures will be employed in accordance with the
approved plan;
(j)
During construction, any site access from a paved public way
shall be improved with a gravel apron of 15 feet wide and
at least 24 feet long to prevent unstable material from being
transported onto the street by vehicle tires or by runoff;
(k)
§ 174-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.5
1:261
Until a disturbed area is permanently stabilized, sediment in
runoff water shall be trapped by using a siltation barrier,
siltation fences, and/or sedimentation traps;
(l)
Dust control shall be used during grading operations if the
grading is to occur within 500 feet of the property line of an
occupied residence or place of business. Dust control methods
may consist of grading fine soils on calm days only or
dampening the ground with water;
(m)
Permanent erosion control and vegetative measures shall be in
accordance with the approved plan; and
(n)
Where applicable, homeowner's, facility or condominium
documents shall provide for the long-term operation and
maintenance of all permanent erosion control and stormwater
management measures, including surety.
(o)
Based upon the nature of the application the Commission may
impose reasonable requirements or limitations to minimize the
impacts, if any, on abutting properties or uses.
(2)
Prior to commencement of any land disturbing activity, the
applicant shall record the permit with the Registry of Deeds or
Registry District of the Land Court, and shall submit to the
Commission written proof of such recording.
(3)
At completion of the project, the owner shall submit as-built record
drawings of all structural stormwater controls and treatment best
management practices required for the site. The as-built drawing
shall show deviations from the approved plans, if any, and shall be
certified by a professional engineer registered in Massachusetts.
(4)
Actions by the Commission.
The Commission shall act on each application for a permit within
90 days of the date of filing with the Commission and the Town
Clerk, unless such application has been withdrawn from
consideration.
(1)
The Commission may take any of the following actions as a result
of an application for a stormwater management and erosion control
permit as more specifically defined as part of stormwater
regulations promulgated as a result of this bylaw: approval,
approval with conditions, disapproval, or disapproval without
prejudice.
(2)
A stormwater and erosion control permit may be disapproved if the
Commission determines:
(a) The requirements of this Bylaw are not met; or
(3)
J.
§ 174-13.5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.5
1:262
§ 174-13.6. Commercial large-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems. [Added 4-14-2015 ATM by Art. 26]
The intent of the application is to circumvent other provisions
of the Town's Zoning Code and regulations.
(b)
Appeals of action by the Commission. A decision of the Commission
shall be final. Relief of a decision by the Commission made under
this bylaw shall be reviewable by the Zoning Board of Appeals,
provided that such appeal is filed within 10 business days of the
date the decision was filed with the Town Clerk. The remedies
listed in this bylaw are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law.
(4)
Enforcement. The Commission or its authorized agent and the Town of
Southborough shall have the power and duty to enforce this bylaw, its
regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may
pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw,
regulation, or permit issued hereunder, shall be subject to fines,
civil action, criminal prosecution, and tax liens, as appropriate and
as lawfully established by the Town of Southborough.
(1)
Tax liens. The Town of Southborough shall require the repayment
of services provided to the responsible party that the responsible
party was obligated to perform as set forth in the operation and
maintenance plan. If repayment is not made within 30 days, the
Town may impose a tax lien on the property of the responsible party
or parties.
(2)
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution
or civil action, the Town may utilize the noncriminal disposition
procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, in which case the
Conservation Administrator, Conservation Agent or other
authorized agent of the Town shall be the enforcing person.
(3)
K.
Severability. Any determination that a particular provision or set of
provisions in this bylaw is invalid or unenforceable shall not render
ineffective, unenforceable, or inapplicable the remainder of this bylaw.
L.
Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this bylaw is to provide a permitting process and
standards for the creation of new commercial solar energy systems
by providing standards for the placement, design, construction,
operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such
installations to address public safety and minimize impacts on
residential neighborhoods and scenic, natural and historic
resources.
(1)
A.
§ 174-13.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.6
1:263
The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the
construction, operation, repair and/or decommissioning of a
commercial solar energy system that is structurally mounted on the
ground and has a minimum nameplate capacity of 250 kW.
(2)
Applicability.
Commercial large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems with
250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity shall be erected
or installed in compliance with the provisions of this section and
other applicable sections of the Zoning Bylaw, as well as local,
state and federal law and regulations. Such use shall not create
a nuisance which is discernible from other properties by virtue
of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare and radiation,
unsightliness or other nuisances as determined by the special
permit and site plan review granting authority. The special permit
and site plan approval granting authority is the Planning Board.
(1)
Commercial large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems with
250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity are only allowed
in the Industrial and Industrial Park Districts and shall undergo
special permit and site plan review by the Planning Board prior
to construction, installation or modification as provided in this
section.
(2)
This section also pertains to physical modifications that materially
alter the type, configuration or size of these installations or related
equipment throughout the useful life of the system or where
alterations may impact abutters.
(3)
B.
General requirements
Dimensional requirements. A commercial solar energy system shall
comply with all requirements in the Schedule of Dimensional
Regulations in Addendum No. 2 of the Zoning Code of the Town of
Southborough.
(1)
Structures and panels. All structures and panels and all associated
equipment and fencing, including the commercial solar energy
system, shall be subject to all applicable bylaws and regulations
concerning the bulk and height of structures, lot area, setbacks,
open space, parking and building.
(2)
Visual impact. The visual impact of the commercial solar energy
system, including all accessory structures and appurtenances, shall
be minimized. All accessory structures and appurtenances shall
be architecturally compatible with each other. Structures shall
be shielded from view and/or joined and clustered if practical to
avoid adverse visual impacts as deemed necessary by and in the
sole opinion of the Planning Board. Methods such as the use of
landscaping, natural features and opaque fencing shall be utilized.
(3)
C.
§ 174-13.6 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.6
1:264
Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The
construction and operation of all commercial solar energy systems
shall be consistent with all applicable local regulations and bylaws,
as well as state and federal laws, including but not limited to
all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications
requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of a
commercial solar energy system shall be constructed in accordance
with the State Building Code.
(4)
Design standards.
Lighting. Lighting of the commercial solar energy system,
including all accessory structures and appurtenances, shall not be
permitted unless required by the Planning Board, special permit
and site plan approval decision or required by the State Building
Code.
(1)
Signs and advertising.
Section 174-11, Signs, of the Code of the Town of
Southborough shall not apply to this section. Signage for
commercial solar energy systems shall be limited in size as
determined by the Planning Board.
(a)
Commercial solar energy systems shall not be used for
displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification
of the owner or operator of the commercial solar energy
system and emergency contact information.
(b)
(2)
Utility connections. All utility connections from the commercial
solar energy system shall be underground unless specifically
permitted otherwise by a special permit and site plan approval
decision. Electrical transformers, inverters, switchgear and
metering equipment to enable utility interconnections may be
aboveground if required by the utility provider.
(3)
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation and trees shall be limited to what is necessary for
the construction, operation and maintenance of the commercial
solar energy system or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations and bylaws or the special permit and site plan review
decisions.
(4)
D.
Modifications. All substantive material modifications to the commercial
solar energy system made after issuance of the special permit and site
plan approval decision shall require modification to the special permit
and site plan approval decision.
E.
Abandonment and removal.
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
(1)
F.
§ 174-13.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.6
1:265
§ 174-13.7. As-of-right commercial large-scale ground-mounted
solar energy systems. [Added 4-12-2016 ATM by Art. 27]
the commercial solar energy system shall be considered abandoned
when it fails to operate at 50% capacity for more than one year
without the written consent of the Planning Board. If the owner
or operator of the commercial solar energy system fails to remove
the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section
within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of
decommissioning, the Town may enter the property and physically
remove the installation.
Removal requirements. Any commercial solar energy system which
has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall
be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the
installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued
operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Planning Board
by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations
and plans for removal.
(2)
Before issuance of any building permits for the commercial solar energy
system, such construction and installation shall be secured in
accordance with this bylaw and/or any regulations adopted pursuant to
the commercial solar energy system for this purpose.
G.
Building permit and building inspection. No commercial solar energy
system shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this
section without first obtaining a building permit.
H.
The Planning Board may adopt regulations to implement the purpose of
this bylaw.
I.
Permit continuances. Special permit and site plan approval decisions
shall be valid for a twelve-month period unless renewed or extended by
the Planning Board following an application made by the applicant.
J.
When acting on a special permit application pursuant to this article, the
Planning Board shall conduct its review, hold a public hearing and file
its decision with the Town Clerk as required by MGL c. 40A, § 9.
K.
Approval criteria. In reviewing any application for a special permit
pursuant to this article, the Planning Board shall give due consideration
to promoting the public health, safety, convenience and welfare; shall
encourage the most appropriate use of land and shall permit no
structure or use that is injurious, noxious, offensive or detrimental to
its neighborhood.
L.
Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this bylaw is to provide a permitting process and
standards for the creation of new commercial solar energy systems
by providing standards for the placement, design, construction,
(1)
A.
§ 174-13.6 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.7
1:266
operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such
installations to address public safety and minimize impacts on
residential neighborhoods and scenic, natural and historic
resources.
The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the
construction, operation, repair and/or decommissioning of a
commercial solar energy system that is structurally mounted on the
ground and has a minimum nameplate capacity of 250 kW.
(2)
Applicability.
Commercial large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems with
250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity shall be erected
or installed in compliance with the provisions of this section and
other applicable sections of the Zoning Bylaw, as well as local,
state and federal law and regulations. Such use shall not create
a nuisance which is discernible from other properties by virtue
of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare and radiation,
unsightliness or other nuisances as determined by the site plan
review granting authority. The site plan approval granting
authority is the Planning Board.
(1)
Commercial large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems with
250 kW or larger of rated nameplate capacity identified in the
Industrial and Industrial Park Districts Overlay District shall
undergo site plan review by the Planning Board prior to
construction, installation or modification as provided in this
section.
(2)
This section also pertains to physical modifications that materially
alter the type, configuration or size of these installations or related
equipment throughout the useful life of the system or where
alterations may impact abutters.
(3)
B.
Definitions.
AS-OF-RIGHT SITING — As-of-right siting shall mean that development
may proceed without the need for a special permit. As-of-right solar
installations under this section are subject to site plan review and
regulated by the Building Commissioner.
BUILDING COMMISSIONER — Charged with the enforcement of the
Zoning Bylaw.
BUILDING PERMIT — A construction permit issued by the Building
Commissioner; the building permit evidences that the project is
consistent with the state and federal building codes as well as local
zoning bylaws, including those governing commercial large-scale
ground-mounted solar energy systems.
DESIGNATED LOCATION — The location(s) designated by the Town
of Southborough, in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws
C.
§ 174-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.7
1:267
Chapter 40A, Section 5, where commercial large-scale ground-mounted
solar energy systems may be sited as-of-right. Said location(s) are
shown on a Zoning Map "Southborough Massachusetts Zoning Map"
pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 4. This
map is hereby made a part of this Zoning Bylaw and is on file in the
office of the Southborough Town Clerk.
General requirements.
Dimensional requirements. A commercial solar energy system shall
comply with all requirements in the Schedule of Dimensional
Regulations in Addendum No. 2 of the Zoning Code of the Town of
Southborough.
(1)
Structures and panels. All structures and panels and all associated
equipment and fencing, including the commercial solar energy
system, shall be subject to all applicable bylaws and regulations
concerning the bulk and height of structures, lot area, setbacks,
open space, parking and building.
(2)
Visual impact. The visual impact of the commercial solar energy
system, including all accessory structures and appurtenances, shall
be minimized. All accessory structures and appurtenances shall
be architecturally compatible with each other. Structures shall
be shielded from view and/or joined and clustered if practical to
avoid adverse visual impacts as deemed necessary by and in the
sole discretion of the Planning Board. Methods such as the use of
landscaping, natural features and opaque fencing shall be utilized.
(3)
Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The
construction and operation of all commercial solar energy systems
shall be consistent with all applicable local regulations and bylaws,
as well as state and federal laws, including but not limited to
all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications
requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of a
commercial solar energy system shall be constructed in accordance
with the State Building Code as may be determined by the Building
Commissioner.
(4)
D.
Design standards.
Lighting. Lighting of the commercial solar energy system,
including all accessory structures and appurtenances, shall not be
permitted unless required by the Planning Board, special permit
and site plan approval decision or required by the State Building
Code.
(1)
Signs and advertising.
Section 174-11, Signs, of the Code of the Town of
Southborough shall not apply to this section. Signage for
(a)
(2)
E.
§ 174-13.7 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.7
1:268
commercial solar energy systems shall be limited in size as
determined by the Planning Board.
Commercial solar energy systems shall not be used for
displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification
of the owner or operator of the commercial solar energy
system and emergency contact information.
(b)
Utility connections. All utility connections from the commercial
solar energy system shall be underground unless specifically
permitted otherwise by a special permit and site plan approval
decision. Electrical transformers, inverters, switchgear and
metering equipment to enable utility interconnections may be
aboveground if required by the utility provider.
(3)
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation and trees shall be limited to what is necessary for
the construction, operation and maintenance of the commercial
solar energy system or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations and bylaws or the special permit and site plan review
decisions.
(4)
Modifications. All substantive material modifications to the commercial
solar energy system made after site plan approval shall require
modification to the site plan approval decision.
F.
Abandonment and removal.
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
the commercial solar energy system shall be considered abandoned
when it fails to operate at 50% capacity for more than one year
without the written consent of the Planning Board. If the owner
or operator of the commercial solar energy system fails to remove
the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section
within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of
decommissioning, the Town may enter the property and physically
remove the installation.
(1)
Removal requirements. Any commercial solar energy system which
has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned shall
be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the
installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued
operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Planning Board,
by first class and certified mail, return receipt requested, of the
proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal.
(2)
G.
To the extent permissible by applicable law, before issuance of any
building permits for the commercial solar energy system, such
construction and installation shall be secured in accordance with this
bylaw and/or any regulations adopted pursuant to the commercial solar
energy system for this purpose.
H.
§ 174-13.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.7
1:269
§ 174-13.8. Adaptive reuse of historic buildings. [Added 4-25-2017
ATM by Art. 26]
Building permit and building inspection. No commercial solar energy
system shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this
section without first obtaining a building permit.
I.
The Planning Board may promulgate rules and regulations to
implement the intent and purpose of this bylaw.
J.
Permit continuances. The site plan approval decision shall be valid for
a twelve-month period unless renewed or extended by the Planning
Board following an application made by the applicant.
K.
When acting on a site plan review of the application pursuant to this
article, the Planning Board shall conduct its review, conduct a public
hearing and file its decision with the Town Clerk.
L.
Approval criteria. In reviewing any application for a site plan pursuant
to this article, the Planning Board shall give due consideration to
promoting the public health, safety, convenience and welfare; shall
encourage the most appropriate use of land and shall permit no
structure or use that is injurious, noxious, offensive or detrimental to
its neighborhood.
M.
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Planning Board on a site
plan approval application may appeal said action to the Zoning Board
of Appeals as provided in Article VI of this chapter of the Southborough
Code.
N.
Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this section is to allow for and provide incentives
for the adaptive reuse of historical buildings in a manner that
ensures compatibility with their surroundings and that preserves
their historical nature and appearance. This section is intended to
promote the preservation of historic buildings by allowing historic
buildings to be adapted for a purpose other than that for which
they were originally built, thereby enhancing the community's
appearance and preserving Southborough's architectural legacy
for future generations.
(1)
The incentives of this § 174-13.8 are allowed only by special permit
from the special permit granting authority (SPGA), which shall
be the Planning Board. The incentives include the creation of
alternative uses for historic buildings while maintaining controls to
accomplish the following objectives:
Preserve the exterior features of such historic buildings to
ensure sensitivity and compatibility with the surrounding
neighborhoods; and
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 174-13.7 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.8
1:270
Provide an economic incentive to maintain and rehabilitate
historic buildings.
(b)
Encourage the adaptive reuse of historic buildings where such
reuse will more effectively preserve and enhance the
architectural character of the surrounding neighborhood than
would the redevelopment of the site upon demolition or
significant exterior modification to these historic buildings.
(c)
It is not the intent or requirement of the section that all renovations
to all historic buildings must be applied for and approved under
this section. It is a voluntary choice to be made by the applicant if
the applicant wishes to take advantage of the incentives provided
herein.
(3)
Uses permitted. Any uses permitted in the zoning district in which the
historic building is located shall be permitted by right. The following
uses are only allowed by special permit pursuant to § 174-9 except
as provided herein, and are subject to the site plan approval process
pursuant to § 174-10 except as provided herein.
Residential buildings, including single-family houses with or
without accessory structures:
Accessory apartments. One accessory apartment or separate
rental unit. The accessory apartment shall comply with the
following conditions and requirements:
The habitable floor area of the accessory unit shall not
exceed 35% of the habitable floor area of the entire
dwelling, plus that of any accessory building used for the
accessory dwelling.
[1]
There is no other apartment on the lot on which the
accessory apartment is proposed.
[2]
Not more than the required minimum exterior alterations
will be made to the single-family house and to any
accessory buildings as determined by the SPGA upon
written recommendation of the Historical Commission.
[3]
The number of accessory apartments approved under this
section shall not be subject to § 174-9B(4), which limits the
number of accessory apartments that can be permitted.
[4]
(a)
Customary home occupations: the use of a portion, not
exceeding 35%, of a one-family home, including the accessory
buildings, by persons resident therein, for a gainful occupation
that is clearly incidental and secondary to the use as a
residence and may not employ more than three persons not
resident therein. All other provisions of customary home
occupations, as defined in § 174-2, shall continue to apply.
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 174-13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.8
1:271
The following uses, which are deemed to be outside the normal
definition of customary home occupations, shall comply with
all the requirements of Subsection B(1)(b) above, provided
the residential building is the primary residence of the owner
for voting and property tax purposes and subject to hours of
operation to be specified by the SPGA.
[1] Art gallery.
[2] Florist.
[3] Antique shop.
[4] Bakery without customer seating.
[5] Publisher.
[6] Professional office.
Other similar uses allowed by SPGA on the
recommendation of the Historical Commission.
[7]
(c)
Renting of rooms including bed and breakfast to more than
four persons by a resident family in a one-family house, with
the number of persons above four to be determined by the
SPGA.
(d)
Commercial/municipal buildings:
All uses listed in Subsection B(1) above, but with no limit on
floor area or number of employees.
(a)
(b) Apartments or condominiums.
(c) Child care facility and/or elder care facility.
(d) Medical clinic and ancillary offices and facilities.
Research and development uses, excluding ancillary
manufacturing, assembly, sale or resale (or storage for sale or
resale) of any goods, items, or materials.
(e)
(f) Restaurant/pub.
(g) Educational facilities.
(h) Athletic/recreational uses.
(i) Mail order business.
(2)
Prohibited uses: The following uses, occupations and activities are
expressly prohibited:
Commercial servicing, maintenance, or restoration of motor
vehicles.
(a)
(3)
§ 174-13.8 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.8
1:272
(b) Trucking or warehousing activities.
Sale of articles (except as provided in the Subsections B(1) and
(2) above).
(c)
Other uses, occupations and activities that are prohibited
elsewhere in Chapter 174.
(d)
Multiple or mixed uses:
For residential buildings, there will be no more than two uses,
as identified in Subsection B(1)(c) above, provided that the
uses are compatible with each other and comply with § 174-9,
except as provided herein. Regardless of the number of uses
allowed by the SPGA, there shall be no more than three
persons employed who are not resident therein, and the use of
a portion of a one-family home, including accessory buildings,
shall not exceed 35%.
(a)
For commercial/municipal buildings, there will be no more
than three uses as identified in Subsection B(2) above,
provided that the uses are compatible with each other and
comply with § 174-9 except as provided herein.
(b)
(4)
Controls on dimensions and restoration/renovation.
Controls on dimensions: Changes to the size of the building, or
exterior dimensions of such building shall be subject to dimensional
controls of the Town's Zoning Bylaw, unless modified by special
permit pursuant to § 174-9 and/or § 174-19, or as permitted under
this section. For any reuse of a Historic Building, the following
provisions shall apply:
An increase in the footprint of the building being considered
for reuse will be permitted, provided the proposed increase
expands by no more than 15% of the square footage of the
existing structure's footprint, conforms to existing setback
requirements, does not increase any nonconformity of the
existing structure and is required by one or both of the
following:
Conformity with provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
[1]
A reuse that requires functional or structural changes
necessary for the intended new use, as consistent with
state building codes or as required by the Building
Commissioner.
[2]
(a)
Except for the historic building, accessways, walkways,
required parking and loading spaces, the open area of the
entire site shall not be diminished. Such open area shall be left
in its existing condition or improved so as to be appropriate
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 174-13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.8
1:273
in size, shape, dimension, location and character to assure its
proper functioning as an amenity for the site.
No permanent additional buildings or structures of any type,
and no enclosed storage of any kind, shall be allowed except as
permitted by the SPGA.
(c)
Controls on restoration/renovation:
There shall be no change to the architectural footprint except
as allowed pursuant to Subsection C(1)(a) above.
(a)
External architectural features shall be preserved and/or
restored per the recommendation of the Historical
Commission.
(b)
Exterior restoration shall follow the preservation guidelines
outlined in the Federal Secretary of Interior Standards for
Rehabilitation on file with the Town Clerk's office, and the
applicant must submit a letter of findings from the
Southborough Historical Commission as part of the submission
of the application to the SPGA.
(c)
(2)
Application submission requirements and procedure.
Pre-application review. Prior to submitting a formal application,
the applicant is strongly encouraged to request a pre-application
review to be held at a public meeting of the SPGA. The purpose of
the pre-application review is to simplify the process for applicants
and to commence discussions with the SPGA at the earliest possible
stage of development. At the pre-application review, the applicant
may outline the proposed project for adaptive reuse, seek
preliminary feedback from the SPGA and the Historical
Commission and/or their technical experts, and set a timetable
for submitting a formal application. While no formal filings are
required for the pre-application review, the applicant is encouraged
to prepare sufficient preliminary architectural and/or engineering
drawings to provide the SPGA with clarity regarding the scale
and overall design of the proposed project. Nothing in the preapplication
process should suggest a subsequent grant of a special
permit which must stand separate on later submittals.
(1)
Historical Commission review. The applicant shall submit their
proposal to the Historical Commission for review.
(2)
Formal application submission requirements for the special permit.
Applicants for an adaptive reuse of historic buildings special permit
shall file with the SPGA 17 copies of submission materials, of which
10 sets of the plans should be full size and the balance in 11" x
17" format, and one electronic version of the plans. Submission
materials shall include the following:
(3)
D.
§ 174-13.8 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.8
1:274
A narrative stating the historical significance of the structures
and/or site, and an architectural description of the structures.
(a)
(b) Photographs of all existing elevations.
Interior floor plan(s) showing the proposed uses of interior
space with the gross floor area for each use.
(c)
(d) Proposed outdoor lighting.
(e) Parking - existing and proposed.
If new construction or additions are proposed, a perspective
drawing showing the new construction or additions in relation
to existing structure(s) on the site and on adjacent land.
(f)
A letter of findings from the Historical Commission on whether
the project complies with the dimension and restoration/
renovation controls cited in Subsection C above.
(g)
(h) A plan showing existing and proposed landscaping on the site.
Adequate waste disposal and surface and subsurface
stormwater drainage. Site plans and specifications shall be
submitted with the application and shall be prepared, signed
and stamped by a registered land surveyor, registered
professional engineer or registered architect. At the time of
special permit application filing, the applicant shall submit
copies of all such plans to the Building Commissioner, Board of
Health, and other appropriate authorities as may be directed
by the SPGA. The SPGA shall solicit and consider comments
relative to the proposed project from such boards,
commissions, committees, authorities and individual residents.
(i)
Additional information or supplemental impact statement(s),
as requested by the SPGA, based on the project's scope and the
physical characteristics of the parcel.
(j)
The SPGA, at its discretion, may reasonably modify or waive
the application submission requirements herein to stay
consistent with the intent and purpose of this section of the
Zoning Bylaw.
(k)
Special permit application review procedure:
Once an application for adaptive reuse of historic buildings special
permit has been filed under this section, no structure shall be
erected, enlarged or modified; and no land shall be divided,
subdivided or modified prior to the granting or denial of said
permit.
(1)
The adaptive reuse of historic buildings special permit application
shall be submitted, considered, and issued in accordance with
(2)
E.
§ 174-13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.8
1:275
the provisions herein, with the Zoning Bylaw and with all other
applicable regulations.
Prior to the filing of an application for an adaptive reuse of historic
buildings special permit, the applicant shall submit plans to the
Building Commissioner, who shall advise the applicant as to the
pertinent sections of the Zoning Bylaw.
(3)
Following the Building Commissioner's review, the applicant shall
submit copies of the application to the SPGA.
(4)
Pursuant to M.G.L., c. 40A, § 9, and after due notice, the SPGA shall
hold a public hearing.
(5)
All boards, commissions and departments which have relevant
jurisdiction over this proposed project shall, within 35 days of
receiving a copy of said application, submit a written report
containing recommendations with supporting reasons to the SPGA
and may recommend conditions deemed appropriate for the
proposed use. The SPGA shall not render a decision on any such
application until said recommendations have been received and
considered or until the thirty-five-day period has expired,
whichever is earlier. Failure of such agencies to timely submit their
respective recommendations shall be deemed concurrence thereto.
(6)
Decision and special permit criteria.
The SPGA shall have the authority to approve, disapprove or
approve with conditions an adaptive reuse of historic buildings
special permit. Any disapproval by the SPGA shall include
identification of any modifications to the plan that would make
it acceptable to the SPGA if the applicant subsequently decides
to make a new application. This authority shall not eliminate,
decrease or abrogate the powers of any other Town board,
committee, commission or other authority having legal jurisdiction,
except to the extent that such authority is specifically granted by
this section. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the applicant
to secure any and all other permits, licenses and approvals
necessary to the project.
(1)
The criteria for decision shall be consistent with § 174-9 and shall
include the following:
Preservation: the proposal preserves the historic building's
exterior features to ensure sensitivity and compatibility with
the surrounding neighborhood(s).
(a)
The incentives granted shall be appropriate in degree and type
to the scale and benefits the project will provide.
(b)
Uses permitted: The reuse of buildings and the lot are
consistent with the uses allowed in Subsection B.
(c)
(2)
F.
§ 174-13.8 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-13.8
1:276
Adequate access and parking: There are adequate provisions
for safe access for pedestrians, motor vehicles and emergency
services to the building and to the land on which it is situated.
(d)
The adaptive reuse of historic buildings special permit shall run
with the land.
(3)
Site plan review process. In order to provide a detailed design review
of any reuse of historic buildings for which an adaptive reuse of historic
buildings special permit is being sought, there shall be a site plan
review by the Planning Board as described in § 174-10.
G.
§ 174-13.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-13.8
1:277

ARTICLE IV
Dimensional Regulations
§ 174-14. Compliance required.
§ 174-15. Applicability.
The requirements of the following Schedule of Dimensional Regulations,
including the footnotes thereto, apply to each district and to specific uses
or structures within certain districts as indicated in said schedule.33 The
height limitations of said schedule do not apply to antennas, chimneys, silos,
skylights, tanks, towers, ventilators and similar building features extending
not more than 20 feet above the height permitted in the district in which
they are located and not used for human occupancy.
§ 174-16. Residence C Districts.
Any lot lawfully in existence on March 16, 1966, located in a Residence
C District and conforming to the requirements for said districts then in
effect, may be built upon for a one-family house and the uses and buildings
accessory thereto, or the one-family use of such lot may be added to,
expanded or structurally altered, provided that all said uses, buildings,
expansion or alterations conform to the requirements of the bylaw for
Residence C Districts in effect on March 16, 1966.
§ 174-17. Previously recorded lots.
As provided by MGL c. 40A, § 6, certain previously recorded lots may be
built upon during the period of time specified or forever, even though such
lots do not meet the dimensional requirements of this chapter.
Any building or structure or use of a building, structure or land
hereafter located, erected, commenced, expanded, altered or relocated,
the lot on which it is to be located and the location of said building,
structure or use on said lot shall comply with the requirements of
this Article IV and of other applicable sections hereof. No lot shall be
reduced in size, altered or subdivided and no part thereof conveyed
or transferred if said lot or the buildings or structures thereon and
the uses thereof already are or will be caused thereby to be not in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
A.
If land is subdivided, transferred or conveyed in violation of this
section, in addition to other remedies provided by law, no zoning,
special, building or occupancy permit or variance shall be granted for
either the land subdivided or conveyed or for the remainder of the
original parcel until both meet the requirements of this section.
B.
33.Editor's Note: This reference to the Schedule of Dimensional Regulations was superseded
4-12-1993 ATM by Art. 43.
§ 174-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-17
1:279
Any lot which was in ownership separate from adjoining land at the
time the dimensional requirements of this chapter were adopted and
has not been since consolidated, altered or combined with other lots
may be built upon for a one-family residence, provided that such a lot
has at least 5,000 square feet in area and 50 feet in frontage.
A.
The use of lots shown on a plan endorsed by the Planning Board as
not requiring approval under the Subdivision Control Law34 shall be
governed by the provisions of the Zoning Bylaw in effect at the time
of submission of such a plan for a period of three years from the date
of Planning Board endorsement, even if such endorsement is delayed
pending disposition of a court appeal.
B.
If a definitive subdivision plan or a preliminary plan followed within
seven months by a definitive plan is submitted for Planning Board
approval and written notice of such submission is given to the Town
Clerk, the land shown on such plan shall be governed by the provisions
of the Zoning Bylaw in effect at the time of first submission while the
plan is being processed and for eight years from the date of Planning
Board endorsement of plan approval (seven years for plans submitted
and approved prior to January 1, 1976), even if said endorsement is
delayed pending the disposition of a court appeal.
C.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 244, Subdivision of Land.
§ 174-17 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-17
1:280
ARTICLE V
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
§ 174-18. Exemptions.
Any structure lawfully erected and existing and any use lawfully being
made of land or buildings which do not conform to this chapter, as adopted
or as amended, may be continued to the same extent and for the same
purpose but shall not be expanded or altered, except in conformance with
this chapter. This exemption shall include buildings, structures and uses
authorized by a building or special permit issued prior to the publication of
the first hearing notice for an amendment to this chapter which would make
them nonconforming, provided that the construction or use under such a
permit is commenced within six months after the permit is issued and, in
case of construction, is continued to completion in a reasonably expeditious
manner.
§ 174-19. Extensions or alterations. [Amended 4-10-2000 ATM by
Art. 55]
Nonconforming structures or uses shall not be extended or altered,
except to make them conforming, unless the Board of Appeals
authorizes such extension or alteration by special permit upon making
findings as provided in § 174-9E.
A.
Single-family and two-family residential structures. In the following
circumstances, alterations, reconstruction, extension or structural
change to a single-family or two-family residential structure shall not
be considered an increase in the nonconforming nature of the structure
and shall be permitted as of right: [Amended 10-7-2013 STM by Art.
9]
Alteration to a structure which complies with all current setbacks,
lot coverage and building height requirements but is located on a
lot with insufficient area, where the alteration will also comply with
all of said current requirements;
(1)
Alteration to a structure which complies with all current setbacks,
lot coverage and building height requirements but is located on a
lot with insufficient frontage, where the alteration will also comply
with all of said current requirements;
(2)
Alteration to a structure which encroaches upon one or more
required setbacks, where the alteration will comply with all current
setbacks, open lot coverage and building height requirements. The
provisions of this Subsection B(3) shall apply regardless of whether
the lot complies with current area and frontage requirements.
(3)
B.
§ 174-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-20
1:281
§ 174-20. Restoration.
No structure damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than
75% of its assessed valuation shall be repaired or rebuilt, except in
conformity with this chapter; provided, however, that the provisions of this
section shall not apply to a dwelling or to a garage or other accessory
structure incidental to the use of such dwelling for human habitation which
was in conformity with the existing law at the time said structure was
erected.
§ 174-21. Abandonment. [Amended 4-14-1986 ATM by Art. 41]
A nonconforming use, including a nonaccessory sign, if discontinued for a
period of two or more years or abandoned shall not be reestablished, and
any future use of the structure or premises shall conform to this chapter.
§ 174-22. Reversion.
Once changed to a conforming use, no structure or land shall be permitted
to revert to a nonconforming use.
§ 174-23. Reconstruction.
Structures damaged by fire or other accident or natural catastrophe to an
extent of less than 75% of the assessed valuation preceding such damage
may be rebuilt or restored to the same dimensions and in the same location
as before the damage, but shall not be enlarged, altered or relocated except
upon the issuance of a special permit as provided in § 174-19.
§ 174-20 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-23
1:282
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 174-24. Enforcement; procedures; violations and penalties.
[Amended 9-29-2009 STM by Art. 5]
§ 174-25. Board of Appeals.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Building Inspector, as Zoning
Enforcement Officer, as provided for in MGL c. 40A, § 7. No structure
shall be erected, altered, demolished or moved and no land or structure
shall be changed in use until and unless a permit has been issued.
Any person violating any provisions of this bylaw, any conditions under
which a permit is issued, or any decision rendered by the Board of
Appeals or the Planning Board shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$300 for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
A.
Any violation which is subject to a specific penalty herein may be
penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
A noncriminal disposition under this provision shall not preclude
further judicial proceedings regarding continuing violation of the
Southborough Zoning Code beyond the date of said noncriminal
disposition or the use of any other remedy provided for violation
pursuant to MGL c. 40A. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may give
to the person violating this bylaw a written notice to appear before
the Clerk of the Westborough District Court at any time during normal
business hours not later than 21 days after the date of such notice. Such
notice shall be in triplicate and shall contain the name and address,
if known, of the violator, the specific offense charged, and the time
and place for his required appearance. Such notice shall be signed by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer, and shall be signed by the violator
whenever practicable in acknowledgement that such notice has been
received.
B.
The Board of Selectmen shall appoint a Board of Appeals of five
members, who shall serve five-year terms, such that the term of one
member shall end each year. The Board of Selectmen shall also appoint
two associate members of the Board of Appeals, who shall be
designated by the Chairman of the Board of Appeals to act when a
member is absent or unable to participate for any reason. The Board
of Appeals shall adopt and file with the Town Clerk rules consistent
with the requirements of the General Laws, Chapter 40A, and with
this chapter. The Board of Appeals shall act on the following classes
of matters, and no zoning or building permit shall be issued that is
inconsistent with a decision of the Board of Appeals or on any matter
within the jurisdiction of or before the Board of Appeals until it has filed
its decision thereon:
A.
§ 174-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-25
1:283
Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any order, decision or failure
to act, believed to be in violation of the State Zoning Act or this
chapter, including the action of the Board of Selectmen relative to
a zoning permit or a site plan, may appeal such action or failure to
act to the Board of Appeals, as provided by MGL c. 40A, §§ 8, 14
and 15, and the Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or
in part, any such action or decision. The Board of Appeals shall to
that end have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is
taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
(1)
Special permits. Unless otherwise designated by this chapter, the
Board of Appeals shall be the special permit granting authority
and shall hear and decide requests for special permits as provided
in §§ 174-8B, 174-9 and other sections of this chapter and in
accordance with MGL c. 40A, §§ 9, 11, 14, et al. Uses accessory
to activities necessary for permitted scientific research and
development may be authorized by special permit, whether or
not on the same parcel as the principal use, provided that the
Board of Appeals finds that such accessory use meets the general
requirements of § 174-9.
(2)
Variances. The Board of Appeals shall have the power to grant,
upon appeal or upon petition, variances from the terms of this
chapter, not including use variances, where the Board finds that,
due to circumstances relating to soil conditions, topography or
shape of land or structures and especially affecting such land or
structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which
they are located, literal enforcement of this chapter would involve
substantial hardship to the appellant or petitioner and that the
desired relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the
public good and without nullifying or substantially derogating from
the intent or purpose of this chapter. The Board of Appeals may
impose conditions, limitations and safeguards not based on the
continued ownership by the applicant, petitioner or any owner.
If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within
one year from the date of grant thereof, they shall lapse, and
a new petition, notice and hearing will be required for their
reestablishment. [Amended 10-18-2016 STM by Art. 6]
(3)
Comprehensive permits. The Board of Appeals may issue
comprehensive permits for publicly subsidized housing, as
provided in MGL c. 40B, § 21.
(4)
Zoning Board of Appeals: Meetings; Hearings; Quorum. [Amended
5-22-2018 STM by Art. 1]
[Subsection A was passed by the Special Town Meeting on 5/22/18;
disapproved by the Office of the Attorney General on 12/21/18.]
A.
The Board will hold public hearings on all applications submitted
to it. A quorum shall consist of four members or their alternates.
B.
B.
§ 174-25 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-25
1:284
No member shall appear or represent any person in any matter
pending before the Board. No member shall hear or decide an
appeal in which he or she is directly or indirectly interested in a
personal or financial sense.
The hearings will proceed as follows:
The Chairman will call the meeting to order and read the
notice of hearing as it appeared in the paper.
(1)
The applicant or his representative shall present the case to
the Board.
(2)
The abutters to the property present at the hearing shall be
heard and duly recorded.
(3)
Any other interested parties present at the hearing shall be
heard.
(4)
Town representatives shall be heard (Planning Board,
Selectmen, other boards, etc.).
(5)
The Chairman shall inform those present at the hearing as to
the time requirements, under MGL c. 40A, § 21,35 for appealing
the decision of the Board.
(6)
C.
Hearings before the Board:
(1) All hearings of the Board shall be open to the public.
The transcript of each hearing shall state the members of the
Board present and other persons who speak at the hearing and
shall contain a summary of the evidence given.
(2)
The transcript shall be signed by the Secretary or Acting
Secretary.
Zoning Board of Appeals: Conduct
A. Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) members are municipal
employees covered by the conflict of interest law
(Chapter 268A of the General Laws).
B. In addition to complying with the requirements of Mass
General Law Chapter 268A, members and alternates
are required to file any necessary Conflict of Interest
(COI) Forms with the Town Clerk and Board of
Selectmen before a case related to such a conflict is
heard.
(3)
D.
35.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40A, § 17, Judicial Review.
§ 174-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 174-26
1:285
§ 174-26. Amendments.
This chapter or any part thereof may be amended or repealed at a Town
Meeting duly called after an advertised public hearing is held on the
proposed amendment by the Planning Board and it submits a report thereon
or 20 days elapse without such report being submitted.
§ 174-27. When effective.
This chapter and any amendments thereto shall take effect as provided by
law upon adoption by a Town Meeting, provided that it is subsequently
approved by the Attorney General and published or 90 days elapse without
action by the Attorney General.
§ 174-28. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter or in the administration thereof is declared
invalid or void by a court of competent jurisdiction, this shall not invalidate
or void any other section or provision hereof.
§ 174-26 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 174-28
1:286
Division 2, Selectmen's Regulations
Chapter 181
FEES
Chapter 195
PEDESTRIANS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 117. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 207.
§ 195-1. Crossing ways and roads.
Pedestrians shall obey the direction of police officers directing traffic, and
whenever there is an officer directing traffic, a traffic control signal or a
marked crosswalk within 300 feet of a pedestrian, no such pedestrian shall
cross a way or roadway except within the limits of a marked crosswalk
and as hereinafter provided in these regulations. For the purpose of these
regulations, a marked crosswalk shall only be construed to be that area of a
roadway reserved for pedestrian crossing located between two solid white
reflectorized twelve-inch pavement markings in rural areas or markings not
less than six inches wide in urban areas, said markings or lines being no
less than six feet apart.
§ 195-2. Use of traffic control devices.
At a traffic control signal location where pedestrian indications are
provided but which are shown only upon actuation by means of a
pedestrian push button, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway unless or
until the pedestrian control signal push button has been actuated, and
then cross only on the proper pedestrian signal indication. At traffic
control signal locations where no pedestrian indication is provided,
pedestrians shall cross only on the green indication. If necessary, the
green indication shall be actuated by the pedestrian by means of a push
button.
A.
At a traffic control signal location, pedestrians shall yield the rightof-
way to vehicles of a funeral or other procession or to authorized
emergency vehicles while in performance of emergency duties
regardless of the signal indication given, and they shall not attempt
to cross the roadway until such vehicles or procession has passed, at
which time pedestrians shall then cross the roadway only as provided
in these regulations.
B.
§ 174-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-3
1:287
§ 195-3. Obedience to signals.
Traffic control signal color indications and legends shall have the commands
ascribed to them in this section and no other meanings, and every
pedestrian shall comply therewith, except when otherwise directed by an
officer.
§ 195-4. Crossing and walking along roadways.
The word "walk." Whenever the single word "walk" is illuminated,
pedestrians facing such indication may proceed across the roadway and
in the direction of such signal only.
A.
Red alone or "don't walk," Whenever the words "don't walk" or any
indication other than red and yellow shown together are illuminated
in a traffic control signal where pedestrian indications are provided,
pedestrians approaching or facing such indication shall wait on the
sidewalk, the edge of the roadway or in the pedestrian refuge area
of a traffic island and shall not enter upon or cross a roadway until
the proper indication is illuminated in the traffic control signal, but
any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "walk"
indication shall proceed or return to the nearest sidewalk or safety
island on the yellow indication, the red indication or when the words
"don't walk" are illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes.
B.
Green alone. At traffic control signal locations where no pedestrian
indication is given or provided, pedestrians facing the signal may
proceed across the roadway within any marked crosswalk in the
direction of the green indication.
C.
Yellow alone, red alone or flashing "don't walk." Pedestrians
approaching or facing a yellow illuminated indication, a red illuminated
indication or a flashing "don't walk" illuminated indication shall not
start to cross a roadway.
D.
Flashing red, yellow or green. At any traffic control signal location
where a flashing red, flashing yellow or flashing green indication is
being given facing a crosswalk, pedestrians shall actuate, where
provided, the pedestrian signal indication and shall cross the roadway
only on the red, yellow or "walk" indication when such indication is in
operation. If no pedestrian signal is provided, pedestrians shall cross
within crosswalks with due care.
E.
No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a sidewalk or safety island and walk
or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield the right-of-way.
A.
Pedestrians shall, at all times, attempt to cross a roadway using the
right half of crosswalks.
B.
§ 195-3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 195-4
1:288
§ 195-5. Crossing where there is no signal.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway. At a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overpass has been
provided, pedestrians shall cross the roadway only by the proper use of the
tunnel or overpass.
§ 195-6. Responsibilities of operators of vehicles.
The provisions of these regulations shall in no way abrogate the provisions
of MGL c. 90, §§ 14 and 14A, which provide "Precautions for Safety of
Other Travelers" and for the "Protection of Blind Persons Crossing Ways."
Furthermore, notwithstanding the provisions of these regulations, every
operator of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon the roadway and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper precautions which may become
necessary for safe operation.
§ 195-7. Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
employment or business from the operator or occupant of any vehicle
without the written permission of the board or officer having control of such
roadway or highway.
§ 195-8. Enforcement.
These pedestrian control regulations shall be enforced by all officers of the
Town of Southborough on and after March 12, 1974.
Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway whenever the sidewalk is
open to pedestrian use.
C.
Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the
roadway, on its unfinished shoulder, facing traffic which may approach
from the opposite direction.
D.
Persons alighting from the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the
curb or the edge of the roadway shall proceed immediately to the
sidewalk or the edge of the roadway adjacent to the vehicle and shall
cross the roadway only as authorized by these regulations.
E.
It shall be unlawful for any person to actuate a pedestrian control signal
or to enter a marked crosswalk unless a crossing of the roadway is
intended.
F.
§ 195-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 195-9
1:289
§ 195-9. Exemptions.
The provisions of these rules and regulations governing the use of ways by
pedestrians shall not apply to pedestrians actually engaged in work upon a
roadway closed to travel or under construction or repair, to municipal, state,
federal or public service corporation employees while in the performance of
their duties, to officers engaged in the performance of their public duties or
to pedestrians acting in an emergency when such emergency necessitates
departure from any part of these rules and regulations.
§ 195-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this Article which deal with the
proper use of ways by pedestrians shall be punished as provided in MGL c.
90, § 18A.
§ 195-11. Repealer.
All existing rules and regulations governing the operation of vehicles or
the use of ways by pedestrians which are inconsistent herewith are hereby
expressly repealed. This repeal shall not, however, affect any punishment
or penalty imposed or any complaint or prosecution pending at the time
of passage hereof for any offense committed under any of said rules and
regulations hereby repealed.
§ 195-12. Validity.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these rules and
regulations is for any reason unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portion of these rules and regulations. The
Board of Selectmen of the Town of Southborough hereby declare that
they would have passed these rules and regulations and each section,
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that
any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases is
declared unconstitutional.
Chapter 207
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 195-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 195-12
1:290
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 207-1. Terms defined.
For the purpose of these regulations, the words and phrases used herein
shall have the following meanings, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUS STOP — An area in the roadway set aside for the boarding of or
alighting from and the parking of buses.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections
or at any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines on the road surface or by other marking or signs.
CURB MARKING, OFFICIAL — That portion of a curbing, the painting of
which has been authorized by the Board of Selectmen and which has the
written approval of the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.36
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Vehicles of the Fire Department (Fire Patrol),
police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state and
municipal departments or public service corporations when the latter are
responding to an emergency in relation to the Police or Fire Department.
FUNERAL — Any procession of mourners, properly identified as such,
accompanying the remains of a human body.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the extension of the lateral
curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of intersecting ways as
defined in MGL c. 90, § 1, including divided ways. The rules and regulations
herein contained governing and restricting the movement of vehicles at and
near intersecting ways shall apply at any place along any way at which
drivers are to be controlled by traffic control signals, whether or not such
place is an "intersection" as herein defined.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width
to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles.
OFFICER — Any officer of the Southborough Police Department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for the
violation of traffic regulations.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals or while
making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being
made to move such vehicle.
36.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-1
1:291
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by
human muscular power, except bicycles or tricycles, as defined in MGL c.
90, § 18A.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
RAILROAD CROSSING — Any intersection of ways with a railroad right-ofway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and
intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
ROTARY TRAFFIC — The counterclockwise operation of a vehicle around an
object or structure.
SAFETY ZONE — Any area or space set aside within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which has been indicated by signs, lines or
markings, having the written approval of the Department of Public Works,
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.37
SERVICE ZONE — An area in the roadway set aside for the accommodation
of commercial and transient vehicular traffic.
STREET MARKING, OFFICIAL — Any painted line, legend, marking or
marker of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports
to direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the Selectmen
and which has the written approval of the Department of Public Works,
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.38
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every
way open to the use of the public for purposes of travel.
TAXICAB STAND — An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are
authorized and required to park while waiting to be engaged.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars
or other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street or
highway for the purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL AREA — Any area along any way, other than an
intersecting way, at which drivers are to be controlled by traffic control
signals.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights, which
conforms to the standards as prescribed by the Department of Public Works
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,39 whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic may be alternately directed to stop
and to proceed.
37.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
38.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
39.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 207-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 207-1
1:292
TRAFFIC ISLAND — Any area or space set aside within a roadway which is
not intended for use by vehicular traffic.
TRAFFIC SIGNALS, OFFICIAL — All signals conforming to the standards
as prescribed by the Department of Public Works of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts,40 not inconsistent with these rules and orders, placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the
purpose of directing or warning traffic.
TRAFFIC SIGNS, OFFICIAL — All signs, markings and devices, other than
signals, not inconsistent with these rules and orders, which conform to
the standards prescribed by the Department of Public Works of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts41 and are placed or erected by authority
of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose of guiding,
directing, warning or regulating traffic.
U-TURN — The turning of a vehicle by means of a continuous turn whereby
the direction of such vehicle is reversed.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including bicycles when the
provisions of these rules are applicable to them, except other devices moved
by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and
devices which derive their power for operation from stationary overhead
wires.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL — Any vehicle being used in the transportation of
goods, wares or merchandise for commercial purposes.
VEHICLE, HEAVY COMMERCIAL — Any commercial vehicle of 2 1/2 tons'
capacity or over.
40.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
41.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 207-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-1
1:293

ARTICLE II
Authority and Duties of Police
§ 207-2. Authority to direct traffic.
It shall be the duty of officers designated by the Chief of Police to enforce
the provisions of these regulations. Such officers are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic, either in person or by means of a visible or audible signal,
in conformance with the provisions of these regulations, provided that, in
the event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic or safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of these regulations.
§ 207-3. Temporary street closings.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to close temporarily any street
or highway in an impending or existing emergency or for any lawful
assemblage, demonstration or procession.
§ 207-4. Temporary parking prohibitions.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to prohibit, temporarily, parking
on any street or highway or part thereof in an impending or existing
emergency or for a lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession.
Vehicles parked in places where parking is prohibited temporarily may be
moved by or under the direction of an officer.
§ 207-5. Exceptions.
The provisions of these regulations shall not apply to drivers actually
engaged in work upon a street or highway closed to travel or under
construction or repair, to officers when engaged in the performance of
public duties nor to drivers of emergency vehicles while operating in an
emergency and in performance of public duties when the nature of the work
of any of these necessitate a departure from any part of these regulations.
These exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from
the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
§ 207-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-5
1:295

ARTICLE III
Traffic Signs, Signals, Markings and Zones
§ 207-6. Bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones.
The location of all bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones shall be
specified by the Selectmen, and in the case of taxicab stands, the Chief of
Police, with the approval of the Selectmen, shall designate who may use
them as such.
§ 207-7. Interference prohibited.
Any person who willfully defaces, injures, moves, obstructs or interferes
with any official traffic sign, signal or marking shall be liable to a penalty
not exceeding $20 for each and every offense.
§ 207-8. Obedience required.
No driver of any vehicle or of any streetcar shall disobey the instructions
of any official traffic control signal, sign, marking, marker or legend unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 207-9. Placing of signs and signals; time of effect.
§ 207-10. Unofficial signs prohibited.
No person or corporation shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of
any street any unofficial device, sign, signal, curb marking or street marking
The Superintendent of Streets is hereby authorized and, as to those
signs and signals required hereunder, it shall be his duty to place
and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained all official traffic
signs, signals, markings and safety zones. All signs, signals, markings
and safety zones shall conform to the standards as prescribed by the
Department of Public Works of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.42
A.
Sections 207-3 and 207-4 of Article II and §§ 207-14, 207-15, 207-18
and 207-19 to 207-21, inclusive, of Article V relating to parking and
§§ 207-30 and 207-33 of Article VII concerning turning movements and
§ 207-42 of Article VII pertaining to exclusion shall be effective only
during such time as official signs are erected and maintained in each
block designating the provisions of such sections and located so as to
be easily visible to approaching drivers.
B.
Sections relating to one-way streets shall be effective only during such
time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected and maintained
at the entrance and each of the exits for each one-way street, so that at
least one sign will be clearly visible for a distance of at least 75 feet to
drivers approaching such an exit.
C.
42.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 207-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-10
1:297
which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic
device, sign, signal, curb marking or street marking or which attempts to
direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view any official sign,
signal, marking or device. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to
remove every such prohibited sign, signal, marking or device, or cause it to
be removed, without notice.
§ 207-11. Experimental regulations.
For the purpose of trial, the Board of Selectmen may make temporary rules
regulating traffic or test under actual conditions traffic signs, markings or
other devices. No such experimental rules relating to traffic shall remain in
effect for a period longer than 30 days.
§ 207-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 207-11
1:298
ARTICLE IV
Zone of Quiet
§ 207-12. Establishment authorized.
The Chief of Police may temporarily establish a zone of quiet upon any
street where a person is seriously ill. Said temporary zone of quiet shall
embrace all territory within a radius of 200 feet of the building occupied by
the sick person. Said temporary zones of quiet shall be designated by the
Chief of Police by causing to be placed at a conspicuous place in the street
a sign or marker bearing the words ZONE OF QUIET.
§ 207-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-12
1:299

ARTICLE V
Stopping, Standing and Parking
§ 207-13. General prohibitions.
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name
to stand or park in any street, way, highway, road or parkway under the
control of the Town of Southborough in violation of any of the traffic rules
or orders adopted by the Board of Selectmen and, in particular, in any of
the following places, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic sign
or signal:
Within an intersection, except within those intersections where the
installation of parking meters has been specifically approved by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Works.43
A.
B. Upon any sidewalk.
C. Upon any crosswalk.
D. Upon the roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district.
Upon the roadway where parking is permitted, unless both wheels on
the right side of the vehicle are within 12 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway, except upon those streets which are designated as oneway
streets. On such one-way streets, vehicles shall be parked in the
direction in which said vehicle is moving and with both wheels within
12 inches of the curb. This shall not apply to streets or parts of streets
where angle parking is required by these regulations.
E.
Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear
and unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic.
F.
G. Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
H. In front of any private road or driveway.
Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of an intersecting way,
except alleys.
I.
Within 15 feet of the wall of a fire station or directly across the street
from such fire station, provided that signs are erected acquainting the
driver of such restriction.
J.
Alongside or opposite any street, excavation or obstruction when such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
K.
Within 25 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing when there are
no gates at such crossing, or otherwise, within five feet from the gate.
L.
M. On a bridge and the approach thereto.
43.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 207-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-14
1:301
§ 207-14. Service zones.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in any service zone for a
period of time longer than 30 minutes and except while actually engaged in
loading or unloading.
§ 207-15. Diagonal parking.
§ 207-16. Parking of vehicles for sale restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street or highway any
vehicle displayed for sale.
§ 207-17. All-night parking prohibited.
No person shall allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name,
other than one acting in an emergency, to be parked on any street for a
period of time longer than one-hour between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00
a.m. of any day.
§ 207-18. Restricted parking.
Parking is prohibited, restricted or limited as to time, space and streets
in accordance with a schedule of streets designated as Schedule I, hereto
appended, to which reference is made, and which Schedule I is specifically
incorporated in this section.45 No operator shall park a vehicle in the
designated prohibited locations or in the restricted locations for a period
longer than is designated in Schedule I, except as otherwise provided in this
Schedule I or where there is a time limit as to parking.
§ 207-19. Parking prohibited in safety zones.
No person shall park a vehicle within 20 feet of either end of a safety zone
which is located within 30 feet of the curb or edge of the roadway.
The Selectmen shall determine the streets upon which diagonal parking
will be permitted and shall cause said streets to be designated by signs
and the surfaces thereof to be marked as directed by the Chief of Police.
A.
Diagonal parking is permitted upon certain sections of a number of
streets as designated in Schedule I, hereto appended, to which
reference is made, and which Schedule I, relative to diagonal parking,
is herewith specifically incorporated in this section.44 Where such
diagonal parking is permitted, vehicles shall be parked with one wheel
within 12 inches of the curb and at the angle to the curb indicated by
official marks and signs. The vehicle shall be parked so that all four
wheels thereof shall be placed wholly within the area indicated for
parking and headed to the curb.
B.
44.Editor's Note: Schedule I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
45.Editor's Note: Schedule I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 207-14 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 207-20
1:302
§ 207-20. Bus stops.
§ 207-21. Taxicab stands.
A. No person shall stop or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop.
No person shall park a bus upon any street within a business district at
any place other than a bus stop when a nearby bus stop is available for
use.
B.
No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab upon any street
within a business district in any taxicab stand.
A.
No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business district
at any place other than the taxicab stand or stands designated for the
use of his taxicab or taxicabs.
B.
§ 207-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-21
1:303

ARTICLE VI
One-Way Streets
§ 207-22. Designation.
The streets or portions thereof designated in Schedule II, hereto appended
and specifically incorporated in this section, are declared to be one-way
streets, and all vehicular traffic shall move on those streets or portions
thereof in the direction designated in said Schedule II.46
§ 207-23. Rotary traffic.
Within the area set forth below, vehicular traffic shall move only in a rotary
counterclockwise direction, except when otherwise directed by an officer:
(Reserved)
46.Editor's Note: Schedule II is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 207-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-23
1:305

ARTICLE VII
Operation of Vehicles
§ 207-24. Overtaking of other vehicles.
The driver of a vehicle may not overtake any other vehicle proceeding in the
same direction unless there is sufficient clear space ahead on the right side
of the roadway to permit the overtaking to be completed without impeding
the safe operation of any vehicle ahead.
§ 207-25. Allowing overtaking by other vehicles.
The driver of a vehicle, when about to be overtaken and passed by another
vehicle approaching from the rear, shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver
of the overtaking vehicle and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
§ 207-26. Obstructing traffic.
§ 207-27. Following too closely.
The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is
reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of such vehicle and
the traffic upon and condition of the street or highway.
§ 207-28. Clinging to moving vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon a bicycle, motorcycle,
coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to or attach himself or
his vehicle to any moving vehicle or streetcar upon any roadway.
§ 207-29. Safety in maneuvering.
The driver of any vehicle, before starting, stopping, turning from a direct
line or backing, shall first see that such movement can be made in safety. If
such movement cannot be made in safety or if it interferes unduly with the
normal movement of other traffic, said driver shall wait for a more favorable
opportunity to make such movement. If the operation of another vehicle
No person shall drive in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily
the normal movement of traffic upon any street or highway. Officers are
hereby authorized to require any driver to proceed to the side of the
roadway and wait until such traffic as has been delayed has passed.
A.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk and on the right half of the roadway to accommodate the
vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of such vehicles
or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to
proceed.
B.
§ 207-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-29
1:307
should be affected by a stopping or turning movement, the driver of such
other vehicle shall be given a plainly visible signal, as required by statute
law.
§ 207-30. Left turns prohibited.
(Reserved)
§ 207-31. Emerging from alley or private driveway.
The operator of a vehicle emerging from an alley, a driveway or a garage
shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto
the sidewalk area extending across the alleyway or driveway.
§ 207-32. Obedience to traffic control signals.
Colors and arrow indications in traffic control signals shall have the
commands ascribed to them in this section, and no other meanings, and
every driver of a vehicle, railway car or other conveyance shall comply
therewith, except when otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful
traffic-regulating sign other than a stop sign, signal or device or except
as provided in § 207-40B of these rules and regulations. In no case shall
a driver enter or proceed through an intersection without due regard to
the safety of other persons within the intersection, regardless of what
indications may be given by traffic control signals.
Flashing green. A flashing green lens shall indicate an intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk in use or subject to use by entering or crossing
traffic. Drivers may proceed only with caution and shall be prepared to
comply with a change in the signal to a red and/or yellow indication.
A.
Flashing red. When a red lens is illuminated in a traffic control signal by
rapid intermittent flashes, and its use has been specifically authorized
by the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts,47
drivers shall stop before entering the nearer line of crosswalk of the
street intersection, or at a stop line when marked, and the right to
proceed shall then be governed by provisions of MGL c. 89, § 8.
B.
Flashing yellow. A flashing yellow lens shall indicate the presence of a
hazard, and drivers may proceed only with caution.
C.
Green. While the green lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal
may proceed through the intersection but shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersection
at the time such signal was exhibited. Drivers of vehicles making a right
or left turn shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians crossing with the
light.
D.
E. Red.
47.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 207-29 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 207-32
1:308
§ 207-33. U-turns prohibited.
No operator shall back or turn a vehicle so as to proceed in the direction
opposite to that in which said vehicle is headed or traveling on the following
streets:
(Reserved)
§ 207-34. Stop signs.
Traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line or, if none, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering
the intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to
proceed is shown, except as allowed by MGL c. 89, § 8.
(1)
No driver of a vehicle facing a circular red signal indication shall
make a right turn where official traffic signs are installed and
maintained prohibiting such turn at the following intersections:
(a) Routes 30 and 85 (all approaches) (Permit 1891).
(b) Northbound Route 85 at its intersection with Southville Road.
(c) Westbound Southville Road at its intersection with Route 85.
(2)
Right, left and vertical green arrows. When a right green arrow is
illuminated, drivers facing said signal may turn right. When a left green
arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal may turn left. When a
vertical green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing said signal may go
straight ahead. When a green arrow is exhibited together with red or
yellow lens, drivers may enter the intersection to make the movement
permitted by the arrow but shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles and
pedestrians proceeding from another direction on a green indication.
F.
Yellow. While the yellow lens is illuminated, waiting drivers shall not
proceed, and any drivers approaching the intersection or a marked stop
line shall stop at such point, unless so close to the intersection that a
stop cannot be made in safety; provided, however, that if a green arrow
is illuminated at the same time, drivers may enter the intersection to
make the movement permitted by such arrow.
G.
Every driver of a vehicle, railway car or other conveyance approaching
an intersection of ways where there exists facing him an official sign
bearing the word "stop" or a flashing red signal indication, said signs or
signals having, apart from these rules and orders, the written approval
of the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth of Massachusetts,48
and such approval being in effect, shall, before proceeding through the
intersection, bring such vehicle, railway car or other conveyance to a
complete stop at such point as may be clearly marked by a sign or line
A.
48.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 207-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-34
1:309
§ 207-35. Operation at underpasses, overpasses and intersections
with islands.
At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have been
separated and where the ways are connected by ramps and at any
intersection of ways in which there are traffic islands, drivers of vehicles
shall proceed only as indicated by official signs, signals or markings.
§ 207-36. Driving upon roads under construction or repair.
No operator shall enter upon a road surface of any street or highway,
or section thereof, when, by reason of construction, surface treatment,
maintenance or the like, or because of some unprotected hazard, such road
surface is closed to travel, and one or more signs, lights or signals have
been erected to indicate that all or part of the road surface of the street
or highway is not to be used or when so advised by an officer, watchman,
member of a street or highway crew or employees of the Town, either by
signals or audibly.
§ 207-37. Driving upon sidewalks restricted.
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive upon any sidewalk, except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 207-38. Driving through safety zones.
It shall be unlawful for the driver of a vehicle, except on signal from a police
officer, to drive the same over or through a safety zone.
§ 207-39. Identification of funerals.
A funeral, composed entirely or partly of a procession of vehicles, shall
be identified as such by means of black pennants bearing a purple symbol
attached to both the first and last vehicles, or other suitable means.
or, if a point is not so marked, then at the nearer line of crosswalk
of said intersection. In the case of a line of two or more vehicles
approaching such stop sign or flashing red signal indication, the drivers
of the second and third vehicles in any group shall not be required
to stop more than once before proceeding through the intersection.
This section shall not apply when the traffic is otherwise directed by
an officer or by a lawful traffic regulating sign, signal or device or as
provided in § 207-40C of this article.
In accordance with the foregoing, the streets listed in Schedule III of
these rules and orders are hereby declared to constitute isolated stop
streets or flashing red signal intersections, as the case may be, and said
Schedule III is hereby specifically incorporated in this section.49
B.
49.Editor's Note: Schedule III is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 207-34 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 207-40
1:310
§ 207-40. Rights and duties of drivers in funerals and other
processions.
§ 207-41. Unlawful riding.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any portion of a vehicle
not designated or intended for the use of passengers when the vehicle is
in motion. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty or within truck bodies in space intended for
merchandise.
§ 207-42. Truck exclusions.
It shall be the duty of each driver in a funeral or other procession to
keep as near to the right edge of the roadway as is feasible and to follow
the vehicle ahead as closely as practicable and safe.
A.
At an intersection where a traffic control signal is operating, the driver
of the first vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one
required to stop for a red and/or yellow indication.
B.
At an intersection where a lawful stop sign exists, the driver of the first
vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one required
to stop before proceeding through the intersection.
C.
The use and operation of heavy commercial vehicles, having a carrying
capacity of more than 2 1/2 tons, are hereby restricted on the streets,
or parts thereof, named in Schedule IV,50 and in the manner outlined
and during the period of time set forth.
A.
Exemptions. Subsection A of this section shall not apply to heavy
commercial vehicles going to or coming from places upon said streets
for the purpose of making deliveries of goods, materials or merchandise
to, or similar collections from, abutting land or buildings or adjoining
streets or ways to which access cannot otherwise be gained or to
vehicles used in connection with the construction, maintenance and
repair of said streets or public utilities therein or to federal, state,
municipal or public service corporation owned vehicles.
B.
50.Editor's Note: Schedule IV is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 207-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-42
1:311

ARTICLE VIII
Accident Reports
§ 207-43. Responsibilities of driver to make reports.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in the injury or
death of any person or in which there is damage in excess of $200 to any
one vehicle or other property shall, within five days, report such accident to
the Southborough Police Department and to the Registry of Motor Vehicles
in conformance with the requirements of MGL c. 90, § 26.
§ 207-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-43
1:313

ARTICLE IX
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 207-44. Violations and penalties.
§ 207-45. Severability; repealer.
§ 207-46. Effect of regulations.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of these rules and
orders is for any reason unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of these rules and orders. The Selectmen
Any person violating any provision of any rule, regulation or order
regulating the parking of motor vehicles made by anybody authorized
to make the same shall be dealt with as provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A,
or any Acts in amendment thereof or in addition thereto, and any
person violating any of the rules and regulations applicable to state
highways made by the Department of Public Works, Commonwealth
of Massachusetts,51 under authority of MGL c. 85, § 2, and Acts in
amendment thereof and in addition thereto, shall be subject to the
penalty provided in said rules and regulations.
A.
Any person convicted of a violation of any other rule, regulation or
order made hereunder, except as otherwise provided, shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $20 for each offense.
B.
These rules are adopted with the intent that each of them shall have
force and effect separately and independently of every other, except
insofar as by express reference or necessary implication any rule or any
part of a rule is made dependent upon another rule or part hereof.
A.
All official signs, lights, markings, signal systems or devices erected
or installed under prior rules or regulations and necessary to the
enforcement of these regulations shall be deemed to have been lawfully
erected or installed hereunder, provided that the same were erected
or installed with the permission and approval of the Department of
Public Works of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,52 and insofar
as the same are necessary as aforesaid for the enforcement of these
regulations, they shall be deemed continuing hereunder, but in all
other respects, all prior rules, orders and regulations made by the
Board of Selectmen for the regulation of vehicles are hereby expressly
repealed. This repeal, however, shall not affect any punishment or
penalty imposed or any complaint or prosecution pending at the time
of the passage hereof for any offense committed under said prior rules,
orders or regulations hereby repealed, nor shall said repeal be effective
unless and until these rules and regulations have been approved and
published as required by law.
B.
51.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
52.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 207-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-46
1:315
hereby declare that it would have passed these regulations and each
section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or
phrases is declared unconstitutional.
§ 207-47. Prima facie responsibility.
If any vehicle is found upon any street or highway in violation of any
provisions of these rules and orders and the identity of the driver cannot
be determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violations.
§ 207-46 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 207-47
1:316
Division 3, Board of Health Legislation
Chapter 223
SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 207-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 207-47
1:317

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 223-1. Terms defined.
The words, terms and phrases listed below, for the purpose of this chapter,
shall be defined and interpreted in the following way:
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Town of Southborough Board of Health.
BUILDING SEWER — The pipe which begins 10 feet outside the inner face
of the building wall and extends to a public sewer, septic tank or other place
of sewage disposal.
CELLAR WALL — The inside of the cellar wall above the footing and below
the ground surface.
CESSPOOL — A covered pit with open-jointed lining in its bottom portion
into which raw sewage is discharged, the liquid portion of the sewage being
disposed of by seepage or leaching into the surrounding porous soil and the
solids or sludge being retained in the pit to undergo partial decomposition
before occasional or intermittent removal.
COVER MATERIAL — The earth materials placed on top of the leaching
facilities to bring the area to finish grade.
DEEP OBSERVATION HOLE — An open pit dug to a minimum of 10 feet
to permit the examination of the soil and to determine the groundwater
elevation.
DESIGNER — A person registered by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
as a professional engineer.
DISPOSAL WORKS INSTALLER — Any person, firm, contractor or
corporation licensed by the Town of Southborough who installs, alters,
constructs or repairs individual sewage disposal systems.
DISTRIBUTION BOX — A watertight structure which receives settled
sewage and distributes it in substantially equal portions to two or more lines
leading to the leaching area.
DISTRIBUTION LINE — The pipe used for the dispersion of sewage into
leaching trenches or leaching fields.
DOSING TANK — A watertight structure placed between a septic tank and
distribution box and equipped with a siphon or pump designed to discharge
settled sewage intermittently to a leaching facility and to provide a rest
period between such discharges.
FILL — The earth materials placed beneath and around the leaching facility.
GREASE TRAP — A watertight structure in which grease is separate from
sewage.
GRAY WATER — Sanitary sewage, excluding waste discharges from a water
closet, i.e., any water-carried putrescible waste resulting from the
§ 223-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-1
1:319
discharge of laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks, showers, dishwashers
or any other sources.
GROUNDWATER ELEVATION — The elevation at which water is observed
weeping or flowing from the walls of or standing in a deep observation hole.
H-20 LOADING — Standard H-20 truck loadings as specified by the
American Association of State Highway Officials.
HUMUS TOILET — A self-contained toilet from which no liquid or solid
waste materials are regularly discharged and from which a humus-like end
product is produced.
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Material having a percolation rate greater than
30 minutes per inch for uses up to 2,000 gallons per day and 20 minutes per
inch for uses over 2,000 gallons per day.
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A subsurface sewage disposal
system owned and operated by a person as defined in this section.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any water-carried or liquid waste resulting from
any process of industry, manufacture, trade or business or from the
development or recovery of any natural resources.
INVERT — The lowest portion of the internal cross section of a pipe.
LEACHING FACILITY — An approved structure used for the dispersion
of sewage effluent into the soil. These include leaching pits, galleries,
chambers, trenches and fields, as described by Articles XI through XV.
LOT — An area of land in one ownership with definite boundaries.
MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION — The height of the groundwater
table when it is at its maximum level of elevation. This level is usually
reached during the months of December through April, and allowances
should be made, therefore, at other times of the year.
MEAN HIGH WATER — The average of the (tidal) high waters reached over
a nineteen-year period.
MULTIPLE COMPARTMENT TANKS — A septic tank containing more than
one settling compartment in series and requiring the approval of the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
MULTIPLE USE — When more than one dwelling unit is placed on one lot,
each such dwelling unit shall be served by a separate subsurface disposal
system. Publicly financed housing projects for the elderly and dwelling
units for no more than two related families are exempt from this provision,
provided that it can be shown that the system has adequate capacity.
OPEN DRAIN — Any ditch used for the conveyance of water.
OWNER — Every person who, alone, jointly or severally with others, has
legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit or has care, charge or control of
any dwelling or dwelling unit as agent, executor, executrix, administrator,
administratrix, trustee, lessee or guardian of the estate of the holder of
the legal title. Each such person thus representing the holder of the legal
§ 223-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-1
1:320
title is bound to comply with the provisions of these minimum standards as
if he were the "owner." "Owner" also means every person who operates a
rooming house.
PERCOLATION TEST — A means of determining the suitability of the soil
for the subsurface disposal of sewage.
PERSON — Every individual, partnership, corporation, firm, associate or
group, including a city, town, county, the commonwealth or other
governmental unit, owning property or carrying on an activity regulated by
this chapter.
PRIVY — A structure used for the disposal of excreta without water
transport. It consists of a shelter built above a pit or vault in the ground into
which excrement is deposited.
RESERVE AREA — An additional area, of at least equal capacity as the
original sewage disposal area, suitable for the subsurface disposal and upon
which no permanent structures will be constructed.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Any water-carried putrescible waste resulting from
the discharge of water closets, laundry tubs, washing machines, sinks,
showers, dishwashers or any other source.
SANITARY SEWER — A pipe which carries sewage without storm-, surface
or ground waters.
SCUM — A mass of solids floating at the surface of the septic tank.
SEPTAGE — The material removed from any part of an individual sewage
disposal system.
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of
sewage from a building sewer and which is designed and constructed so
as to permit the retention of sludge and scum, the digestion of the organic
matter and the discharge of the liquid portion to a leaching facility.
SEWAGE — Sanitary sewage.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL AREA — The area used for the subsurface dispersion
of the liquid portion of sewage.
SUBSURFACE DRAIN — Any underground conduit used for the conveyance
of water, including curtain drain.
WATERCOURSE — Any natural or man-made stream, pond, lake, wetland,
coastal wetland, swamp or other body of water, and shall include wet
meadows, marshes, swamps, bogs and areas where groundwater, floating or
standing water or ice provide a significant part of the supporting substrate
for a plant community for at least five months of the year. "Swamp" shall
also mean areas where groundwater is at or near the surface of the ground
for a significant part of the growing season or where runoff water from
surface drainage frequently collects above the soil surface.
§ 223-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-1
1:321

ARTICLE II
General Requirements
§ 223-2. Disposal works construction permit.
No individual sewage disposal system or other means of sewage disposal
shall be located, constructed, altered, repaired or installed where a common
sanitary sewer is accessible adjoining the property and where permission
to enter such sewer can be obtained from the authority having jurisdiction
over it (see § 223-15) or, if a common sanitary sewer is not accessible,
until a permit for its location, construction, alteration, repair or installation
shall have been issued by the Board of Health. A permit shall not be
issued when the total volume for sewage to be disposed of on any lot is in
excess of 15,000 gallons per day, or where sewage treatment facilities are
proposed on the lot to be served, until the plans for such a system have
been approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality
Engineering in accordance with MGL c. 111, § 17. Where sewage flow on
a lot exceeds 15,000 gallons per day, the Department of Environmental
Quality Engineering may require additional treatment of the waste prior to
its disposal to the ground.
§ 223-3. Disposal works installer's permit.
No person or firm shall engage in the construction, alteration, installation
or repair of any individual disposal system without first obtaining a disposal
works installers permit from the Board of Health. Such permits shall expire
at the end of the year in which they are issued, unless earlier revoked for
cause by the Board of Health.
§ 223-4. Septage handler's permit.
No person or firm shall engage in the pumping or transport of the contents
of any part of an individual sewage disposal system without first obtaining
a septage handler's permit from the Board of Health in accordance with
MGL c. 111, § 31A. The application for such permit shall state the site and
method of the disposal, and such site and method of disposal must have
been approved by the Department of Environmental Quality Engineering
regardless of the stated volume of material disposed of at that site. Such
permits shall be contingent upon compliance with § 223-141 and shall
expire at the end of the year in which they are issued, unless revoked earlier
for cause. A list of permits issued shall be submitted to the appropriate
regional office of the Department of Environmental Quality Engineering at
the beginning of each calendar year.
§ 223-5. Application for construction permit.
An application for a disposal works construction permit shall be submitted
to the Board of Health and must be accompanied by a plan of the proposed
sewage disposal facilities. Such permit shall be invalidated if conditions
other than those set forth in the application are found prior to or during the
§ 223-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-5
1:323
actual construction of the individual sewage disposal system. In any event,
a permit so granted shall expire one-year from the date of issue, unless
construction of the system of individual sewage disposal is begun before the
expiration date or unless this chapter has been revised.
§ 223-6. Plan of sewage disposal system.
All of the following information will appear on a single plan with a maximum
size of 24 inches by 36 inches and using a scale of one inch equals 20 feet.
A different scale will require prior approval of the Southborough Board of
Health.
The lot completely dimensioned and the names of all abutters: a North
arrow and bench mark within 100 feet of the proposed system; the
name and address of the applicant and the design engineer; the
location, dimensions and all offsets of the proposed system and future
expansion areas; the estimated daily flow; the design calculations; and
the total leaching area provided for in square feet of sidewall area only
(trenches and seepage pits).
A.
The existing and proposed contours and elevations with a minimum
of two-foot intervals and the location, elevation and dated soil log of
all deep observation holes and percolation tests; note on the plans
percolation tests performed after overnight soak, if performed.
B.
The maximum groundwater elevation and determination data in the
area of the sewage disposal system; the location of any streams, surface
and subsurface drains, driveways and wetlands within 150 feet of the
sewage disposal system; if a well is to serve the lot, the proposed well
location with offsets and all known sewage disposal systems within 150
feet of the proposed well; the water service; and all known sources
of water supply (wells and reservoirs) within 200 feet of the proposed
sewage disposal system.
C.
A profile of the entire system with the following elevations shown:
(1) Invert elevation at the building foundation.
(2) Invert elevations of the inlet and outlet of the septic tank.
(3) Septic tank dimensions.
(4) Invert elevations of the inlet and outlet of the distribution box.
(5) Elevation of the basement floor.
(6) Elevation of the top of the foundation.
(7) Number of outlets in the proposed distribution box.
Invert elevations of both the beginning and end of all trenches
when used.
(8)
(9) Invert elevation of pipe at the seepage pit when used.
D.
§ 223-5 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-6
1:324
§ 223-7. Compliance required.
The use of an individual sewage disposal system shall be in compliance with
the terms of the permit issued therefor and shall not exceed the design
capacity of the system. Design capacity shall not be reduced for seasonal
use.
§ 223-8. Exception to construction permit requirement.
No building permit, foundation permit, special building permit or plumbing
permit shall be issued until a disposal works construction permit has first
been obtained, unless the Board of Health determines that the existing
sewage disposal system is adequate for proposed alteration or addition to
an existing dwelling.
§ 223-9. Foundation certification.
No construction of a sewage disposal system or the superstructure may
commence until two copies of a foundation certification plan from the
Elevation of the bottom of the trench or seepage pit and water table
elevations.
(10)
All existing and proposed structures and a typical cross section of
leaching areas (trenches and seepage pits).
E.
The following notes shall be a part of the submitted plans:
All construction is to conform to the requirements of the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality Engineering,
Title 5, and the Town of Southborough Rules and Regulations.
(1)
Any alteration to the approved system must be submitted to the
Board of Health prior to construction for the Board's approval.
(2)
The pipe from the building to the septic tank shall be four-inch
cast iron, ductile iron or Schedule 40 PVC and shall be straight
for its entire length or have bends with manholes. The pipe from
the septic tank to the distribution box shall be four-inch cast iron,
ductile iron or Schedule 40 PVC only. The pipe from the distribution
box to the beginning of the leaching area shall be four-inch castiron,
ductile iron or Schedule 40 PVC only.
(3)
After construction, this system will be inspected and certified by
a registered engineer and the Board of Health. A certificate of
compliance from the engineer will be required, indicating that the
system has been located and constructed in compliance with the
terms of the permit, prior to the final approval of the Board of
Health.
(4)
The Board of Health reserves the right to require any additional
information which it feels is necessary for the plan.
(5)
F.
§ 223-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-9
1:325
designer have been submitted and approved by the Board of Health. Said
foundation certification shall show foundation offsets to the side line and
the street line and the top of foundation elevation.
§ 223-10. Certificate of compliance.
A new sewage disposal system and alteration or repair to an existing
individual system shall not be placed in service, nor shall any new dwellings
or buildings or additions thereto which must rely on a new individual
sewage disposal system for sewage disposal be occupied, until the Board
of Health has issued a certificate of compliance. Prior to the Board of
Health's issuing said certificate of compliance the designer or registered
professional engineer will certify, in writing, that the sewage disposal
system has been located, constructed, altered or repaired in compliance
with the terms of the permit, the requirements of the Board of Health
and the requirements of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Title 5. The
certification from the designer or registered professional engineer will show
all proposed and existing elevations as shown on the profile of the approved
plans.
§ 223-11. Construction permit fee.
A fee for the issuance of a construction permit may be charged by the Board
of Health at the time an application is made for the permit.
§ 223-12. Inspection of installation.
The Board of Health will inspect the installation of all individual sewage
disposal systems and may, at any stage of construction, require necessary
modifications if conditions are encountered that were not originally
observed. When construction of the sewage disposal system has been
completed, except for backfilling, the installer shall provide a reasonable
period of notification when requesting an inspection, and the inspection
shall be performed in a reasonable period of time by the Board of Health
or its agent. The responsibility of notifying the designer or the registered
professional engineer for their inspecting shall not be the duty of the Board
of Health or its agent.
§ 223-13. Inspection of excavation when installation is in fill.
When an individual sewage disposal system is built in fill, the excavation
shall be inspected by the Board of Health or its agent and the design
engineer after the topsoil and subsoil have been removed and prior to the
placement of any gravel. No construction of the sewage disposal system
shall commence until a certificate from the design engineer stating that the
fill used within the disposal area meets the requirements of § 223-17 of this
chapter is received and approved by the Board of Health or its agent.
§ 223-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-14
1:326
§ 223-14. Discharge into watercourse.
Sanitary sewage, gray water, the effluent from any sewage or waste
treatment plant or other polluting water shall not be discharged into or
allowed to flow by means of pipes, drains, etc., into any lake, pond, stream,
tidal water, watercourse or open or covered drain tributary thereon, unless
approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Quality
Engineering.
§ 223-15. Connection to common sanitary sewer.
Individual sewage disposal systems or other means of sewage disposal shall
not be approved where a common sanitary sewer is accessible adjoining the
property and where permission to enter such a sewer can be obtained from
the authority having jurisdiction over it. The Board of Health may require
the owner or occupant of an existing building or buildings, whenever a
common sanitary sewer is accessible in an abutting way, to cause such
building or buildings to be connected with the common sanitary sewer in a
manner and within a period of time satisfactory to the Board of Health.
§ 223-16. Volume of sanitary sewage.
Each unit of the disposal system shall be designed to treat adequately the
estimated volume of sanitary sewage to be discharged from the premises
to be served. The volume of such flow should be based on the estimated
maximum expected daily quantities of sewage, as determined from the table
below. No cooling water, groundwater, discharge of roof drains or other
uncontaminated water shall be discharged to the sanitary sewage disposal
system.
Sewage
Flow
Estimates1,
2
Type of Establishment
Gallons
(per day)
Boarding school, college (per person) 65
Nursing home and rest home (per person) 100
School, without cafeteria, gymnasium or showers (per
person) 10
School, with cafeteria, but not gymnasium or showers
(per person) 15
School, with cafeteria, gymnasium and showers (per
person) 20
Swimming pool (per person) 10
§ 223-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-16
1:327
Type of Establishment
Gallons
(per day)
Camp, resident, with washroom and toilets (per
person) 25
Camp, resident, with mess hall (per person) 10
Camp, day, with washroom and toilets (per person) 10
Camp, day, with mess hall (per person) 3
Campground, with showers and toilets (per site) 75
Gymnasium (per spectator) 3
Gymnasium (per participant) 25
Theater, auditorium (per person) 3
Public park, with toilet wastes only (per person) 5
Public park, with bathhouse, showers and flush toilets
(per person) 10
Factory or industrial plant, without cafeteria (per
person) 15
Factory or industrial plant, with cafeteria (per person) 20
Work or construction camp (per person) 50
Single- and multiple-dwelling units, motel, hotel,
boardinghouse (per bedroom) 100
Tennis club (per court) 250
Bowling alley (per alley) 100
Country club, with dining room (per seat) 10
Country club, with snack bar or lunch room (per seat) 10
Country club, with locker and showers (per locker) 20
Church (per seat) 3
Church vestry/kitchen (per person, at capacity) 5
Trailer dump station (per site or per trailer) 50
Mobile home park (per site) 200
Office building (per 1,000 square feet) 75
Dry goods store (per 100 square feet) 5
Drive-in (per stall) 5
Non-single-family automatic clothes washer (per
washing machine) 400
Hospital (per bed) 200
Service station, excluding thruway (per island) 300
Skating rink 3,000 plus 5 per
seat
§ 223-16 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-16
1:328
Type of Establishment
Gallons
(per day)
Restaurant, food-service establishment, lounge,
tavern (per seat or chair) 35
Restaurant, thruway service area (per seat or chair) 150
Restaurant, kitchen flow (per seat or chair) 15
Barbershop beauty salon (per seat or chair) 100
Note: Laundromat wastes are considered industrial
wastes and must be approved by the Department of
Environmental Quality Engineering.
NOTES:
1 Estimated sewage flows other than those listed here should be
considered in relation to actual meter readings or established flows from
known or similar installations. Generally, estimated sewage flows will be
based on 200% of average water meter readings in order to assimilate
daily flows.
2 See Section 3.4F for single-family residential requirements.
§ 223-17. System requirements.
Except as provided in Article XVIII, an individual sewage disposal system
shall consist of a septic tank discharging its effluent to a suitable subsurface
sewage disposal area as hereinafter described. Where buildings are served
by more than one system, each system shall consist of a septic tank
discharging its effluent to a suitable subsurface sewage disposal area.
Separate systems for laundry wastes are not recommended.
§ 223-18. Accumulation of surface water.
An individual disposal system shall be located in an area where no surface
water will accumulate. Provisions shall be made to minimize the flow of
surface water over the area.
§ 223-19. Cover material.
Earth materials used to cover subsurface sewage disposal facilities shall be
free from large stones, frozen clumps of earth, masonry, stumps or waste
construction materials. Machinery which may crush or disturb alignment of
pipe in the disposal system shall not be allowed on any part of the disposal
system.
§ 223-20. Construction in fill.
Where an individual sewage disposal system has been constructed, wholly
or partly, in fill, the fill shall be properly placed and compacted to minimize
settlement or it shall be allowed to settle for a minimum of 12 months,
§ 223-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-20
1:329
whichever occurs first. The fill material shall be clean coarse washed sand
or other clean granular material essentially free from clay fines, dust,
organic matter, large stones, masonry, stumps, frozen clumps of earth,
wood, tree branches and waste construction material and shall have a
percolation rate of less that two minutes per inch before and after
placement. Before the fill is put in place, all trees, brush and stumps shall
be removed from the area to be filled. Topsoil, peat and other impervious
materials shall be removed from all areas beneath the leaching facility for
a distance of 25 feet in all direction therefrom when the leaching facility is
above natural ground elevation; or impervious materials shall be removed
for 10 feet in all directions therefrom when the leaching facility is below the
natural ground elevation. No sewage disposal system shall be constructed
in fill placed upon impervious material, unless the requirements of § 223-31
have been met. All fill is to be certified by the designer or a registered
professional engineer that it meets the requirements of this section.
§ 223-21. Multiple use.
The use of a subsurface disposal system by more than one lot is prohibited.
§ 223-22. Maintenance.
Every owner or agent of premises in which there are any private sewers,
individual sewage disposal systems or other means of sewage disposal shall
keep the sewers and disposal systems in proper operational condition and
shall have such works cleaned or repaired at such time as ordered by the
Board of Health. If the owner or agent of the premises fails to comply with
such order, the Board of Health may cause the works to be cleaned or
repaired and all expenses incurred to be paid by the owner. Sewage disposal
works shall be maintained in a manner that will not create objectionable
conditions or cause the works to become a source of pollution to any of the
waters of the commonwealth.
§ 223-23. Discharge to ground surface.
No sanitary sewage shall be allowed to discharge or spill onto the surface
of the ground or to flow into any gutter, street, roadway or public place, nor
shall such material discharge into any private property.
§ 223-24. Flow measurement.
Meters, dosing counters or other flow measuring devices shall be installed
to record accurately the flow of sewage when required by the Board of
Health or the Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
§ 223-25. Reserve area.
A reserve area of at least equal capacity, suitable for subsurface sewage
disposal and upon which no permanent structure will be constructed, must
be provided for all sewage disposal systems.
§ 223-20 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-25
1:330
ARTICLE III
Location
§ 223-26. General requirements.
The location and installation of each individual sewage disposal system or
other means of disposal shall be such that, with responsible maintenance,
it will function in a satisfactory manner and will not create a nuisance or
discharge into any watercourse of the commonwealth. In determining a
suitable location for the system, consideration shall be given to the size
and the shape of the lot, slope, natural and adjusted drainage, existing and
known future water supplies, depth to groundwater, presence of impervious
material, soil classifications and reserve area. No disposal works
construction permit, as described in § 223-2, shall be issued until a
representative of the approving authority has:
§ 223-27. Site examination.
The site examination shall be made to determine if the size of the lot is
compatible with the proposed sewage disposal system and should be made
with regard to the distances outlined in § 223-32 and the requirements of
§ 223-6.
§ 223-28. Deep observation holes.
A. Performed a site examination.
B. Witnessed deep observation holes.
C. Witnessed percolation tests.
D. Approved the proposed sewage disposal plan.
The purpose of the deep observation hole is to determine the character
of the soil in the leaching area and specifically to determine the
groundwater elevation and the presence of impervious material. On
any lot, in the area to be used for leaching, except as noted below,
there will be at least two observation holes, plus any additional number
which, in the opinion of the approving authority, will be necessary to
determine the consistency (or lack thereof) of the character of the soil.
The observation holes shall be examined to a depth of at least four
feet below the bottom of the proposed leaching facility but in no case
shall be lower than 10 feet, unless this depth is unattainable because
of bedrock, etc. The groundwater elevation should be determined when
the groundwater is at its maximum elevation.
A.
Exception. In cases where three or more contiguous single-family uses
are being examined at the same time by the same engineer, the
requirement of two deep observation holes per lot is reduced to one
deep observation hole per lot, provided that the character of the soils
remains consistent in the opinion of the approving authority. The deep
B.
§ 223-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-28
1:331
§ 223-29. Percolation test.
The purpose of the percolation test is to determine the suitability of the soil
at the leaching elevation and to a depth of four feet below this elevation. In
cases where the soil varies with depth as indicated by the deep observation
holes, percolation tests at various elevations may be required by the
approving authority.
observation holes shall be conducted in the area to be used for leaching
on each lot.
At least two percolation tests shall be performed at the site of each
disposal area in the soil to be used for leaching. Additional tests will be
required where the soil structure varies or where large disposal areas
are required. Percolation tests can be performed at any time of the year.
A.
Percolation tests, as prescribed in this section, shall be performed, at
no expense to the approving authority, by a registered professional
engineer. All percolation tests shall be performed in the presence of
a representative of the approving authority. The cost of labor and
equipment necessary to dig observation holes and the provision of
water for the performance of percolation tests shall not be at the
expense of the approving authority.
B.
Percolation tests shall not be made in holes that have remained open
to the atmosphere for more than three days, nor shall they be made in
frozen soil. Percolation tests may be performed when the elevation of
the soil to be tested is below the frozen soil layer.
C.
Percolation tests shall not be made in filled ground unless the
requirements of § 223-20 have been made.
D.
The minimum leaching area to be installed shall be determined from
the following table, with the estimated sewage flow as determined in
accordance with § 223-16. The slowest percolation rate obtained shall
govern leaching area requirements.
Leaching Area Requirements1, 4, 6, 7, 8
Sidewall Area2, 9
Percolation Rate
(minutes per
inch)
Square Feet
Per Gallon
Gallons Per
Square Foot
Bottom
Area3
0.0 to 10.0 1.0 1.00
15.0 1.5 0.67
20.0 2.0 0.50
25.0 2.5 0.40
30.0 3.0 0.33
E.
§ 223-28 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-29
1:332
§ 223-30. Percolation test procedures.
Leaching Area Requirements1, 4, 6, 7, 8
Sidewall Area2, 9
Percolation Rate
(minutes per
inch)
Square Feet
Per Gallon
Gallons Per
Square Foot
Bottom
Area3
Over 30.05 Unsuitable
NOTES:
1 Leaching fields: see Article XV.
2 Sidewall area is the pervious vertical interface of the excavation for
the leaching facility below the invert elevation of the inlet, or the
lowest invert elevation of the distribution line.
3 Bottom area will not be considered as part of the leaching facility
without prior approval of the Board of Health.
4 Systems for more than 2,000 gallons per day shall not be installed
where the percolation rate is slower than 20 minutes per inch.
5 Soil with a percolation rate over 30 minutes per inch is considered
impervious and, therefore, unsuitable for the subsurface disposal of
sewage.
6 Garbage grinders are not allowed.
7 Sewage systems to be constructed in fill must be designed according
to the percolation rate of the underlying original soil.
8 See Illustrations A and B (on file in the Town offices).
9 Minimum allowable square footage by the Southborough Board of
Health is 450 square feet of sidewall area only.
Prepare test hole into the proposed leaching strate, within the disposal
area, of 12 inches in diameter with vertical sides, 18 inches deep.
A.
Establish a fixed point at the top of the test hole from which all
measurements can be taken.
B.
Scratch the bottom and sides of the test hole to remove any smeared
soil surfaces. Either add two inches of coarse sand to protect the
bottom from scouring or insert a board or other impervious object in
the hole so that water may be poured down or on it during the filling
operation.
C.
Carefully fill the hole with clear water to a minimum depth of 12 inches
and maintain the water level by adding water as necessary for the
D.
§ 223-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-30
1:333
§ 223-31. Required depth for pervious material.
Subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be located in an area where there
is at least a four-foot depth of naturally occurring pervious soil below the
entire area of the leaching facility. The naturally occurring pervious soil
shall have a percolation rate less than or equal to 30 minutes per inch, or
20 minutes per inch for systems over 2,000 gallons per day, and the fourfoot
stratum must be free of impervious material, such as layers of clay, silt,
subsoil or loam.
§ 223-32. Required distances.
No disposal facility shall be closer than the distances stated to the
components listed in the following table. The distance shall be increased
where required by conditions peculiar to a location.
purpose of soil saturation, but in no case less than 15 minutes after first
filling the hole.
After saturation, if the water level drops to a depth of nine inches in less
than 30 minutes, measure the length of time in minutes for it to drop
from a depth of nine inches to a depth of six inches. If the rate is erratic
in the opinion of the approving authority, the hole shall be refilled and
soaked until the drop per increment of time is steady. The time for the
level to drop from a depth of nine inches to a depth of six inches divided
by three will be the percolation rate in minutes per inch.
E.
If the initial three-inch drop requires more than 30 minutes (rate equal
to more than 10 minutes per inch), the soil shall be saturated by filling
the hole to the top and maintaining it full for at least four hours. The soil
shall then be permitted to swell overnight so that the soil conditions will
approach those which exist during the wettest season of the year. After
the overnight swelling period, the test shall be made again by filling the
hole to a twelve-inch depth and maintaining that level for 15 minutes,
letting the level drop to nine inches, then timing the drop between nine
inches and six inches. The time elapsed between nine inches and six
inches, divided by three shall be the percolation rate.
F.
In certain soils, particularly coarse sand, the soil is so pervious as to
make the percolation test as described above difficult, impractical and
meaningless. Therefore, at the discretion of the approving authority,
the test, as described above, may be waived, and a rate of two minutes
per inch can be assumed, provided that at least 24 gallons of water is
added to the percolation hole within 15 minutes and it is impossible to
obtain a liquid depth of nine inches or the percolation rate is faster than
30 seconds per inch.
G.
§ 223-30 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-32
1:334
Distances1, 2
Component
Septic Tank
(feet)
Leaching
Facility
(feet)
Building
Sewer
(feet)
Privy
(feet)
Well or suction line 50 1001 —3 1001
Water supply line
(pressure)
—4 —4 —4 —4
Property line 10 10 — 30
Cellar wall or inground
swimming
pool
10 20 — 30
Surface water
supplies (reservoirs
or tributaries to
reservoirs),
including open and
subsurface drains
502, 5 1001, 2, 5 —5 1001, 2, 5
Watercourses 252, 5 502, 5 — 502, 5
Subsurface drains 25 25 — 25
Leaching catch
basin or dry well
— 25 — —
Downhill slope
(measured from the
top of the leaching
facility)
150 times the
slope
(expressed as
a fraction)
(See
Illustrations A,
B, C, on file in
Town offices.)
NOTES:
1 One hundred feet is a minimum acceptable distance, and no variance shall
be grated for a lesser distance, except with prior written approval of the
Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
2 All distances shall be measured from the average of the mean annual flood
elevation in inland areas and from mean high water in coastal areas.
3 Ten feet if constructed of durable corrosion-resistant material with water
tight joints or 50 feet if any other type of pipe is used.
4 It is suggested that the disposal facilities be installed at least 10 feet from
the 18 inches below water supply lines. Wherever sewer lines must cross
water supply lines, both pipes shall be constructed of Class 150 pressure
pipe and should be pressure tested to assure watertightness.
§ 223-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-32
1:335
NOTES:
5 The applicant should be aware of his obligation to comply with the
requirements of the Wetlands Protection Act. MGL c. 131, § 40.
§ 223-32 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-32
1:336
ARTICLE IV
Building Sewers in Unsewered Areas
§ 223-33. Size.
The building sewer shall be of such size as required by the approving
authority to serve the connected fixtures. In no case shall the building sewer
be less than four inches in diameter.
§ 223-34. Materials.
The building sewer shall be constructed of east iron. Schedule to PVC,
vitrified clay, asbestos cement or other material acceptable to the approving
authority.
§ 223-35. Joints.
All pipe joints of the building sewer shall be made watertight and protected
against damage from roots. Poured-type joints shall be properly wiped on
the inside to present no obstruction to flow.
§ 223-36. Base.
The building sewer shall be laid on a firm base.
§ 223-37. Grade.
The building sewer shall be designed to provide a minimum velocity of
sewage flow of two feet per second when flowing full. This requirement is
met when a four-inch building sewer is laid at a slope of not less than 0.01
(1/8 inch per foot). A slope of 0.02 (1/4 inch per foot) is desirable.
§ 223-38. Alignment.
The building sewer shall be laid on a continuous grade and as nearly as
possible in a straight line.
§ 223-39. Manholes.
Manholes, with metal frames and covers at grade, shall be provided at
the junction of two or more sewers and at intervals no greater than 300
feet, except that manholes will not be necessary where building sewers join
lateral sewers if a long radius bend is provided. All gravity sewer manholes
shall have an open channel depth equal to or greater than the diameter
of the inlet sewer, and the change of direction in each manhole shall not
exceed 90° (change of direction of flow and imaginary extension of the
original direction of flow).
§ 223-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-40
1:337
§ 223-40. Ventilation.
The building sewer shall be vented through the vent stack or main vent of
the building served by it, and no trap shall be installed in the building sewer
or building drain.
§ 223-40 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-40
1:338
ARTICLE V
Grease Traps
§ 223-41. Installation.
Grease traps must be provided at installations such as restaurants, nursing
homes, schools, hospitals or other installations from which large quantities
of grease can be expected to discharge.
§ 223-42. Location.
Grease traps shall be installed in a separate building sewer serving that
part of the plumbing system into which the grease will be discharged. The
discharge from the grease trap must flow to a properly designed septic tank
or building sewer prior to the septic tank.
§ 223-43. Capacities.
Grease traps shall have a minimum depth of four feet and a minimum
capacity of 1,000 gallons and shall have sufficient capacity to provide at
least a twenty-four-hour detention period for the kitchen flow. Kitchen flow
shall be calculated in accordance with § 223-16.
§ 223-44. Construction.
Grease traps shall be watertight and constructed of sound and durable
materials not subject to excessive corrosion, decay or frost damage or to
cracking or buckling due to settlement or backfilling Tanks and covers shall
be designed and constructed so as to withstand normal structural loadings.
A tank installed in groundwater shall be weighted to prevent the tank from
floating when it is emptied.
§ 223-45. Depth of tees.
The inlet tee shall extend to the mid depth of the tank. The outlet tee shall
extend to within 12 inches of the bottom of the tank. Tees shall be cast iron
or Schedule 40 PVC and properly supported by a hanger, strap or other
device.
§ 223-46. Baffles.
Baffles may be provided as necessary to maximize the separation of grease
from the sewage. Baffles may not be considered as a substitute for inlet and
outlet tees.
§ 223-47. Base.
Grease traps shall be installed on a level, stable base that will not settle.
§ 223-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-48
1:339
§ 223-48. Materials.
Grease traps may be constructed of poured reinforced concrete or
prefabricated material acceptable to the approving authority.
§ 223-49. Access manholes.
Grease traps shall be provided with a minimum twenty-four-inch diameter
manhole frame and cover to grade over the inlet and outlet.
§ 223-50. Accessibility.
Grease traps shall be located on the lot so as to be accessible for servicing
and cleaning.
§ 223-51. Invert elevation.
The invert elevation of the inlet of a grease trap shall be at least two inches
above the invert elevation of the outlet. Inlet and outlet shall be located
at the center line of the tank and at least 12 inches above the maximum
groundwater elevation.
§ 223-52. Backfill.
Backfill around the grease trap shall be placed in such a manner as to
prevent damage to the tank.
§ 223-53. Cleaning.
Grease traps shall be inspected monthly and shall be cleaned when the level
of grease is 25% of the effective depth of the trap, at least every three
months.
§ 223-48 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-53
1:340
ARTICLE VI
Septic Tanks
§ 223-54. Capacity.
A septic tank shall have an effective liquid capacity of not less than 150% of
the design flow estimated, but in no case less than 1,000 gallons.
§ 223-55. Garbage grinders.
Garbage grinders are not allowed.
§ 223-56. Liquid depth.
The liquid depth of the tank shall be a minimum of four feet. The tank may
be oval, circular, rectangular or square in plan provided that the distance
between outlet and inlet of the tank is at least equal to the liquid depth of
the tank.
§ 223-57. Multicompartment tanks.
Multicompartment tanks with transverse baffles may be used, provided
that:
§ 223-58. Tanks in series.
Tanks in series may be approved, provided that the capacity of the first tank
is at least equal to the required capacity pursuant to § 223-54 and provided
that the number of tanks does not exceed two.
§ 223-59. Parallel tanks.
Septic tanks shall not be installed in such a manner that the sewage flow
from a single sewer is divided, with one portion being discharged to one
tank and the remaining portion being discharged to a second tank.
§ 223-60. Construction.
Septic tanks shall be watertight and constructed of sound and durable
material not subject to excessive corrosion, decay or frost damage or to
cracking and buckling due to settlement or backfilling. Tanks and covers
shall be designed and constructed so as to withstand anticipated loadings.
Any tank installed in a location where there is high groundwater shall be
weighted to prevent the tank from floating when it is emptied.
A. The number of compartments does not exceed two.
B. The total capacity is not less than 2,000 gallons.
The capacity of the first compartment is at least equal to the capacity
of the second compartment.
C.
§ 223-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-61
1:341
§ 223-61. Tees.
Inlet and outlet shall be of cast iron. Schedule 40 PVC or cast-in-place
concrete and shall extend a minimum of six inches above the flow line of
the septic tank and be on the center line of the septic tank located directly
under the cleanout manhole. There shall be an air space of at least three
inches between the tops of the tees and the inside of the tank cover, and
the tops of the tees shall be left open to provide ventilation, or separate
ventilation shall be provided.
§ 223-62. Depth of tees.
The inlet tee (baffles are not acceptable) shall extend a minimum of 10
inches below the flow line. The outlet shall be provided with a fee extending
below the flow line in accordance with the following table:
Liquid Depth in Tank
(feet)
Depth of Outlet Tee Below Low
Line
(inches)
4 14
5 19
6 24
7 29
8 34
§ 223-63. Base.
Septic tanks shall be installed on a level, stable base that will not settle.
§ 223-64. Materials.
Septic tanks may be constructed of poured reinforced concrete, precast
reinforced concrete or prefabricated materials acceptable to the approving
authority.
§ 223-65. Access manholes.
At least one twenty-four-inch manhole with readily removable cover of
durable material shall be provided for each compartment. Inlet and outlet
tees shall be made accessible for cleaning by providing manholes over the
tees. Manhole covers for septic tanks serving single-family dwellings shall
not be more than 12 inches below finished grade and may, at the discretion
of the approving authority, be required to be brought to finished grade.
Septic tanks serving other establishments with flows under 2,000 gallons
per day shall be provided with at least one twenty-four-inch diameter
manhole located over the inlet tee and a metal frame and cover to finished
grade. Septic systems designed for flows in excess of 2,000 gallons per
day shall be provided with at least two twenty-four-inch diameter manholes
§ 223-61 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-65
1:342
(over inlet and outlet tees), with metal frames and covers at finished grade.
Distance between access manholes shall not exceed 18 feet on center.
§ 223-66. Accessibility.
Septic tanks shall be located on the lot so as to be accessible for servicing
and cleaning.
§ 223-67. Invert elevation.
The invert elevation of the inlet of a septic tank shall be at least two inches
above the invert elevation of the outlet.
§ 223-68. Backfill.
Backfill around the septic tank shall be placed in such a manner as to
prevent damage to the tank.
§ 223-69. Cleaning.
Septic tanks should be inspected and cleaned annually.
§ 223-70. Invert elevation of outlet.
The invert elevation of the septic tank outlet shall be at least one foot above
the maximum groundwater elevation.
§ 223-71. Pumping to septic tank.
Pumping of sewage to a septic tank shall not be allowed without the written
approval of the Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
§ 223-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-71
1:343

ARTICLE VII
Dosing Tanks
§ 223-72. When required.
A dosing tank shall be provided for a leaching chamber and leaching field
system where the volume of waste to be disposed of is an excess of 2,000
gallons per day.
§ 223-73. Alternation.
Dosing shall alternate when the total volume of waste to be disposed
of exceeds 5,000 gallons per day. Alternating siphons and pumps shall
discharge to separate disposal areas of equal size.
§ 223-74. Capacity.
Dosing tanks shall have the capacity to discharge a volume adequate to
cover the dosed leaching area to a depth of at least one inch in not over 15
minutes.
§ 223-75. Construction.
Dosing tanks shall be constructed of concrete or other material as approved
by the Department of Environmental Quality Engineering and shall conform
to § 223-60 of this chapter and shall be cast without joints and shall be
watertight if installed below groundwater level.
§ 223-76. Base.
Dosing tanks shall be constructed on a level, stable base that will not settle.
§ 223-77. Ventilation.
Dosing tanks shall be constructed in a manner that will permit venting
through the building sewer or other suitable outlet.
§ 223-78. Invert elevation of inlet.
The invert elevation of the inlet shall be at least one foot above maximum
groundwater elevation, and the tank shall be waterproof and watertight.
§ 223-79. Manholes.
To provide access and to facilitate repair or adjustment of the siphons or
pumps, dosing tanks should be provided with manholes at least 24 inches in
diameter, with metal frames and covers to grade over each pump or siphon.
§ 223-80. Inspection.
Annual inspections are recommended to determine if the pumps or siphons
are in working order.
§ 223-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-80
1:345

ARTICLE VIII
Siphons
§ 223-81. Construction.
Siphons shall be constructed of cast iron or other material approved by the
Department of Environmental Quality Engineering and shall be installed in
strict conformance with manufacturers' specifications.
§ 223-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-81
1:347

ARTICLE IX
Pumps
§ 223-82. Location.
Pumps shall not be installed prior to a septic tank without approval of the
Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
§ 223-83. Number.
At least two pumps shall be installed, except in cases where repairs to
systems under 1,000 gallons per day are being made or for single-family
residences.
§ 223-84. Installation.
All pumps shall be installed in strict conformance with the manufacturer's
specifications. Pumps for settled sewage shall be capable of passing at least
one-and-one-fourth-inch solids.
§ 223-85. Controls.
§ 223-86. Alarms.
All pumps shall be equipped with an alarm powered by a circuit separate
from the pump power.
§ 223-87. Standby power.
Standby power shall be provided at apartment houses, condominiums,
elderly housing and all other premises which are not vacated during power
failure. An empty emergency overflow tank with a twenty-four-hour storage
capacity may be substituted where such tank can be placed above
groundwater.
Pump control shall be moistureproof and shall operate in the following
sequence:
(1) Pumps off.
(2) Lead pump on.
(3) Alarm and lag pump on.
A.
Pumps must alternate and, in cases where the flow is in excess of 5,000
gallons per day, they must service separate disposal areas.
B.
§ 223-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-87
1:349

ARTICLE X
Distribution Boxes
§ 223-88. When required.
A distribution box shall be installed between a septic tank and a leaching
facility to provide equal distribution.
§ 223-89. Inlet tee cutoff.
Where the distribution system is dosed or the slope of the inlet pipe is
greater than 0.08, the distribution box shall be provided with an inlet tee
cutoff one inch above the outlet invert.
§ 223-90. Outlet elevation.
The invert elevation of all outlets shall be the same and shall be at least two
inches below the inlet. Outlet pipes shall be level for at least two feet.
§ 223-91. Sump.
The distribution box shall be provided with a sump extending six inches
below the bottom of the outlet pipe.
§ 223-92. Construction.
Distribution boxes shall be constructed of concrete or other durable
material. They shall be watertight and designed to accommodate the
necessary distribution laterals.
§ 223-93. Number of outlets.
There shall be at least one four-inch outlet for every pair of four-inch
distribution laterals and at least one six-inch outlet for every two pairs of
four-inch distribution laterals.
§ 223-94. Base.
Distribution boxes shall be installed on a level, stable base that will not
settle.
§ 223-95. Ventilation.
The distribution box shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide
ventilation of the disposal field, either through a special vent or back
through the building sewer.
§ 223-96. Manholes.
Distribution boxes shall be provided with readily removable covers of
durable material. Systems designed for over 20,000 gallons per day shall
§ 223-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-96
1:351
have a minimum eighteen-inch manhole over each distribution box, with
metal frame and cover to finished grade.
§ 223-96 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-96
1:352
ARTICLE XI
Leaching Pits
§ 223-97. Use preferred.
Leaching pits are preferred where their installation is possible.
§ 223-98. Determination of area.
The leaching area required shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of Article III. The leaching area shall be considered as the
sidewall areas of the excavation below the invert of the inlet. Impervious
area of the sidewall below the inlet shall not be considered as available
leaching area.
§ 223-99. Spacing.
When more than one leaching pit is installed, they shall be designed such
that they will function in parallel, and the distance between excavation
sidewalls shall be no less than twice the effective width of the pit, whichever
is greater.
§ 223-100. Construction above groundwater level.
Leaching pits shall not be constructed in areas where the maximum
groundwater elevation is less than four feet below the bottom of the
excavation.
§ 223-101. Manholes.
There shall be a minimum of one inspection manhole per pit. For systems
designed for over 20,000 gallons per day, the manholes shall be at least 18
inches in diameter, with metal frames and covers to finished grade.
§ 223-102. Construction.
The lining of the pit shall be constructed of brick perforated concrete
or interlocking concrete blocks laid dry with open joints on a manner to
prevent displacement. At least 12 inches, and not more than 48 inches,
of 3/4 inch to 1 1/2-inch stone shall be placed around the liner. The liner
shall be built to allow the liquid to pass easily through openings to the
surrounding stone. The cover shall be constructed of reinforced concrete or
other approved material.
§ 223-103. Stone standards.
The stone shall consist of washed stone ranging from 3/4 inch to 1 1/2 inch
in size and shall be free of iron, fines and dust in place. The stone shall be
covered with at least a two-inch layer of washed stone, ranging from 1/8
inch to 1/2 inch in size, and shall be free of iron, fines and dust in place.
§ 223-97 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-103
1:353
All stone must have less than 2% material finer than a No. 200 sieve as
determined by the AASHTO Test Methods T-11 and T-27 (latest edition).
§ 223-104. Reserve area.
A reserve area sufficient to replace the capacity of the original leaching area
must be provided. The area between the leaching pits may not be used for
part of the reserve area.
§ 223-105. Impervious material.
Excavations through impervious material may be allowed if at least four feet
of naturally occurring pervious material, as demonstrated by a percolation
test, remains beneath the lowest point of excavation. All construction after
excavation through impervious material shall be in accordance with
§ 223-20.
§ 223-106. Surface drainage.
The grade above and adjacent to a leaching pit system shall slope at least
2% to prevent accumulation of surface water.
§ 223-107. Cover material.
The minimum depth of cover material over the stone shall be 12 inches.
Earth materials used to cover leaching pit systems shall be free of large
stones, frozen clumps of earth, masonry or waste construction material.
Machinery which may crush or disturb the alignment of pipe in the disposal
system shall not be allowed on any part of the disposal system.
§ 223-108. Sloping ground.
When pits are built at different elevations, construction shall be such as to
prevent the sewage from upper pits from flowing into lower pits.
§ 223-109. Method of excavation.
Excavation may be made by machinery, provided that the soil at the bottom
of the disposal system is not compacted. The bottom of each system shall be
level.
§ 223-110. Systems under areas of traffic.
When leaching pit systems are constructed under areas subject to vehicular
traffic, the pits shall be capable of withstanding H-20 wheel loads.
§ 223-111. Frozen conditions.
No pits shall be constructed in frozen soil. Pits may be constructed in cases
where the construction elevation is below the depth of the frost line.
§ 223-103 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-111
1:354
ARTICLE XII
Leaching Galleries
§ 223-112. Special permission required.
Leaching galleries may only be used with special permission from the
Southborough Board of Health.
§ 223-112 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-112
1:355

ARTICLE XIII
Leaching Chambers
§ 223-113. Special permission required.
Leaching chambers may only be used with special permission from the
Southborough Board of Health.
§ 223-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-113
1:357

ARTICLE XIV
Leaching Trenches
§ 223-114. Determination of area.
The leaching area required shall be determined in accordance with the
provisions of Article III. The leaching area shall be considered as the
sidewall area of the excavation below the invert of the inlet. Impervious
area of the sidewall below the inlet shall not be considered as available
leaching area.
§ 223-115. Construction above groundwater level.
Leaching trenches shall not be constructed in areas where maximum
groundwater elevation is less than four feet below the bottom of the trench.
§ 223-116. Spacing.
When more than one leaching trench is installed, the distance between
excavation sidewalls shall be no less than twice the effective width or twice
the effective depth of the trench, whichever is greater. In no case shall the
distance between the excavation sidewalls be less than four feet.
§ 223-117. Width.
The minimum width of the leaching trench bottom shall be 24 inches.
§ 223-118. Length.
The maximum length of each leaching trench shall be 100 feet.
§ 223-119. Construction.
Distribution lines shall have a minimum diameter of four inches and shall
be laid true to line and grade. The distribution pipe shall consist of vitrified
clay pipe laid with an adequate number of open joints. All distribution pipes
from the distribution box to the leaching trench shall be unperforated and
shall be laid with tight joints. The depth to the crown of the pipe forming
the distribution lines shall be not less than 12 inches from finished grade.
The distribution pipe shall have a minimum slope of 0.005.
§ 223-120. Stone standards.
The stone shall consist of washed stone, ranging from 3/4 inches to 1 1/
2 inches in size, and shall be free of iron, fines and dust in place. It shall
extend the full width of the trench and shall not be less than 12 inches
minimum and 30 inches maximum beneath the bottom of the distribution
pipes. The stone shall be covered with at least a two-inch layer of washed
stone, ranging from 1/8 to 1/2 inch in size, and shall be free of iron, fines
and dust in place. All stone must have less than 0.2% material finer than
§ 223-114 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-120
1:359
a No. 200 sieve, as determined by the AASHTO Test Method T-11 and T-27
(latest edition).
§ 223-121. Reserve area.
A reserve area sufficient to replace the capacity of the original leaching
area must be provided. The area between leaching trenches shall not be
considered, for design purposes, as part of the reserve area.
§ 223-122. Impervious material.
Excavations into or fill upon impervious material shall not be allowed.
Excavations through impervious material may be allowed if at least four feet
of naturally occurring pervious material, as demonstrated by a percolation
test, remains beneath the lowest point of excavation. All construction after
excavation through impervious material shall be in accordance with
§ 223-20.
§ 223-123. Surface drainage.
The grade above and adjacent to a leaching trench shall slope at least 2%
to prevent the accumulation of surface water.
§ 223-124. Cover material.
The minimum depth of cover material shall be 12 inches. Earth materials
used to cover leaching trench systems shall be free of large stones, frozen
clumps of earth, masonry, stumps or waste construction material.
Machinery which may crush or disturb the alignment of pipe in the disposal
system shall not be allowed on any part of the disposal area.
§ 223-125. Sloping ground.
When trenches are built at different elevations, construction shall be such
as to prevent sewage from upper trenches from flowing into lower trenches.
§ 223-126. Manner of excavation.
Excavation may be made by machinery, provided that the soil at the bottom
of the disposal trench is not compacted. The bottom of each trench shall be
level.
§ 223-127. Location.
When leaching trench systems are constructed under areas subject to
vehicular traffic, the trenches shall be capable of withstanding H-20 wheel
loads.
§ 223-120 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-128
1:360
§ 223-128. Frozen conditions.
No trench shall be constructed in frozen soil. Trenches may be installed in
cases where the construction elevation is below the depth of the frost line.
§ 223-129. Ventilation.
Leaching trench systems designed to be dosed must be vented at the
downstream end of the system.
§ 223-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-129
1:361

ARTICLE XV
Leaching Fields
§ 223-130. Special permission required.
Leaching fields may be used only with special permission of the
Southborough Board of Health.
§ 223-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-130
1:363

ARTICLE XVI
Privies and Chemical Toilets
§ 223-131. Approval required.
A privy or chemical toilet shall not be constructed or continued in use
unless the Board of Health has approved, in writing, its construction or
continued use based upon a determination by the Board of Health that the
privy or chemical toilet will not endanger the health of any person or cause
a nuisance.
§ 223-132. Location.
Privies shall be located in accordance with the requirements of Article III of
this chapter. No variance from any of the percolation rate requirements or
leaching area loading rates outlined in this chapter shall be allowed for the
disposal of gray water from a lot to be served by a privy or chemical toilet,
but a reduction not to exceed 40% of the design flow for subsurface sewage
disposal may be allowed for the reduced water usage.
§ 223-133. Construction.
Privies shall be constructed with self-closing seat covers and fly-tight vaults
and with a screened vent from the vault to the atmosphere.
§ 223-134. Maintenance.
When a privy vault becomes filled to within two feet of the surface of the
ground, it shall either be cleaned and the contents disposed of in a sanitary
manner approved by the Board of Health or it shall be covered with a
minimum of two feet of clean compacted earth.
§ 223-131 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-134
1:365

ARTICLE XVII
Humus Toilets
§ 223-135. Approval required.
A humus toilet shall not be constructed or continued in use unless the Board
of Health has approved, in writing, its construction or continued use based
upon determination by the Board of Health that the toilet will not endanger
the health of any person or cause a nuisance and that the end product will
be disposed of in a sanitary manner.
§ 223-136. Location.
Humus toilets shall only be located where a full-sized, properly functioning
subsurface disposal system is available or can be constructed on the lot
to be served in compliance with this chapter or where a common sanitary
sewer is accessible in and abutting way and where permission to enter such
a sewer can be obtained from the authority having jurisdiction over it. No
variance from any of the percolation rate requirements or leaching area
loading rates outlined in this chapter shall be allowed for the disposal of
gray water from a lot to be served by a humus toilet, but a reduction not
to exceed 40% of the design flow for subsurface sewage disposal may be
allowed for the reduced water usage.
§ 223-137. Maintenance.
The end product from a humus toilet may be disposed of by burial in a
manner and location approved by the Board of Health, and it shall be
covered with a minimum of two feet of compacted earth.
§ 223-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-137
1:367

ARTICLE XVIII
Miscellaneous Disposal
§ 223-138. Approval required.
The use of any disposal facility other than those described herein is
prohibited unless approved in writing by the Department of Environmental
Quality Engineering. It is the intent of this chapter that the Department
shall approve innovative disposal systems if it can be demonstrated that
their impact on the environment and hazard to the public health is not
greater than that of other approved systems. No variances to this Article
shall be granted.
§ 223-139. Connection with sewage disposal systems.
No rainwater leader, cooling-water drain, cellar drain or other drain, other
than one for sanitary sewage, shall discharge into or be connected with any
sewage disposal system.
§ 223-140. Leaching catch basins.
No leaching catch basins or dry wells designed for the collection of surface
drainage shall be allowed within 25 feet of any leaching facility of a
subsurface sewage disposal system.
§ 223-138 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-140
1:369

ARTICLE XIX
Transportation and Disposal of Privy, Cesspool and Septic Tank
Contents
§ 223-141. Permits required.
No person shall engage in the pumping or transportation of the contents of
privies, cesspools, septic tanks or other offensive substances without first
obtaining a permit from the Board of Health in accordance with MGL c. 111,
§ 31A, and § 223-4 of this chapter.
§ 223-142. Inspection and approval of equipment.
No person shall use equipment to remove or transport the contents of
privies, cesspools or septic tanks or other offensive substances unless such
equipment has first been inspected and approved by the Board of Health.
§ 223-143. Disposal.
Disposal of the substances listed in § 223-141 of this chapter shall be by
discharge to a sanitary sewer or to works designed for the purpose. If
disposal is by discharge into a sanitary sewer, it shall be in a manner and
at such times as may be acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction over
the sewer. If disposal is by works designed for the purpose, the area shall
be in a location approved in writing by the Board of Health. The location
and method of disposal must be approved in writing by the Department of
Environmental Quality Engineering.
§ 223-144. Manner of transportation.
The contents of privies, cesspools and septic tanks shall be transported in a
manner that will not create a nuisance or health hazard.
§ 223-145. Intercommunity disposal.
The contents of privies, chemical toilets, septic tanks, holding tanks or
other sewage waste receptacles originating in any City or Town may be
disposed of in a sanitary manner in any other City or Town, subject to the
written approval of the Boards of Health of the municipalities in which
Mobile tank. Mobile tanks shall be securely mounted on trucks. They
shall be watertight and provided with a leakproof cover and tight
discharge valves.
A.
Venting of mobile tanks. Mobile tanks shall be provided with a vent
constructed in a manner that will permit the escape of gas, but not the
liquid contents of the truck.
B.
C. Hose, Suction or pressure hose shall be in good repair.
Pumps. Pumps shall be maintained in a condition that will prevent the
leakage of the sewage.
D.
§ 223-141 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-145
1:371
the wastes originate and the disposal works are located and the written
approval of the authority having control of the receiving sewer of the
disposal site. If disposal is into a sewer tributary to the Metropolitan District
Commission Sewerage System, written approval of the Commission shall
also be obtained.
§ 223-146. Fees.
A fee for the issuance of a permit for the pumping or transportation of the
contents of privies, cesspools or septic tanks or other offensive substances
may be charged by the Board of Health at any time an application is made
for the permit.
§ 223-145 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-146
1:372
ARTICLE XX
Enforcement
§ 223-147. Variances.
§ 223-148. Conditions of variance.
Variances may be granted only as follows: The Board of Health may
vary the application of any provisions of this chapter, except where
expressly forbidden elsewhere in this chapter, with respect to any
particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do
manifest injustice and the applicant has proved that the same degree of
environmental protection required under this chapter can be achieved
without strict application of the particular provision.
A.
Every request for a variance shall be made in writing and shall state
the specific variance sought and the reasons therefor. No variance shall
be granted for a new sewage disposal system, nor for an enlargement
to an existing system which increases the capacity to accommodate
additional flows, except after the applicant has notified all abutters by
certified mail at his own expense at least 10 days before the Board of
Health meeting at which the variance request will be on the agenda.
The notification shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons
therefor. Variance may be issued for the repair of an existing sewage
disposal system without the requirement of notification of all abutters
by the applicant.
B.
Any variance granted by the Board of Health shall be in writing. Any
denial of a variance shall also be in writing and shall contain a brief
statement of the reasons for the denial. A copy of each variance shall
be conspicuously posted for 30 days following its issuance and shall be
available to the public at all reasonable hours in the office of the City
or Town Clerk or the office of the Board of Health while it is in effect.
Notice of the grant of each variance shall be filed with the Department
of Environmental Quality Engineering, which shall approve, disapprove
or modify the variance within 30 days from receipt thereof. If the
Department fails to comment within 30 days, its approval will be
presumed. No work shall be done under the variance until the
Department approves it or 30 days elapse without its comment, unless
the Board of Health or the Department certifies, in writing, that an
emergency exists.
C.
Any variance or other modification authorized to be made by this
chapter may be made subject to such qualification, revocation,
suspension or expiration as the Board of Health or Department of
Environmental Quality Engineering expresses in its grant.
A.
A variance or other modification authorized to be made by this chapter
may otherwise be revoked, modified or suspended, in whole or in part,
only after the holder thereof has been notified in writing and has been
B.
§ 223-147 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-148
1:373
§ 223-149. Enforcement authority.
The provisions of Title 1 of the Environmental Code shall govern the
enforcement of this chapter as supplemented by the following sections.
§ 223-150. Service and content of orders.
§ 223-151. Hearings.
given an opportunity to be heard, in conformity with the requirements
of Title 1 of the Environmental Code for orders and hearings.
If an examination, as provided for in Title 1, reveals failure to comply
with the provisions of this chapter, the Board of Health or Department
of Environmental Quality Engineering shall order the persons
responsible to comply with the violated provision.
A.
Every order authorized by this chapter shall be in writing. Orders
issued under the provisions of Subsection A above shall be served on
the designated person:
(1) Personally, by any person authorized to serve civil process;
(2) By leaving a copy of the order at his last and usual place of abode;
By sending him a copy of the order by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, if he is within the Commonwealth; or
(3)
If his last and usual place of abode is unknown or outside the
Commonwealth, by posting a copy of the order in a conspicuous
place on or about the affected premises.
(4)
B.
Subject of the emergency provision of Title 1, any order issued under
the provisions of this chapter shall:
Include a statement of the violation or defect and may suggest
action which, if taken, will effect compliance with this chapter;
(1)
(2) Allot a reasonable time for any action it requires; and
Inform the person to whom it is directed of his right to a hearing
and of his responsibility to request the hearing and to whom the
request shall be made.
(3)
C.
Procedure for requesting and holding hearing. Unless otherwise
specified in this chapter, the person or persons to whom any order
has been served pursuant to any section of this chapter may request
a hearing before the agency that issued the order by filing with said
agency, within seven days after the day the order was served, a written
petition requesting a hearing on the matter. Upon receipt of such
petition, the agency shall set a time and place for such a hearing and
shall inform the petitioner thereof in writing. The hearing shall be
commenced not later that 45 days after the day on which the order was
A.
§ 223-148 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-151
1:374
§ 223-152. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Board of Health or Department
of Environmental Quality Engineering may seek relief therefrom within 30
days in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this
commonwealth.
§ 223-153. Violations and penalties.
served. The agency, upon application of the petitioner, may postpone
the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such forty-five-day
period if, in the judgment of the agency, the petitioner has submitted a
good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
Hearing of petitioner. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show cause why the order should be
modified or withdrawn.
B.
Procedure by agency after the hearing. After the hearing, the Board
of Health or Department of Environmental Quality Engineering shall
sustain, modify or withdraw the order and shall inform the petitioner,
in writing, of its decision. If the Board of Health or Department of
Environmental Quality Engineering sustains or modifies the order, it
shall be carried out within the time period allotted in the original order
or in the modification.
C.
Public record. Every notice, order or other record prepared by the
Board of Health or Department of Environmental Quality Engineering
in connection with the hearing shall be entered as a matter of public
record in the office of the Clerk of the City or Town or in the office of the
Board of Health or Department of Environmental Quality Engineering.
D.
Hearing petition not submitted or sustaining of order. If a written
petition for a hearing is not filed with the Board of Health or the
Department of Environmental Quality Engineering within seven days
after the day an order has been served or if, after a hearing, the order
has been sustained in any part, each day's failure to comply with the
order as issued or modified shall constitute an additional offense.
E.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter for which
penalty is not otherwise provided in any of the General Laws or in any
other provision of this chapter or Title 1 of the Environmental Code
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $10 nor more than $500.
A.
Any person who shall fail to comply with any order issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less
than $10 nor more than $500. Each day's failure to comply with an
order shall constitute a separate violation.
B.
§ 223-151 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 223-154
1:375
§ 223-154. Severability.
Each section of this chapter shall be construed as separate to the end that
if any section or sentence, clause or phrase thereof shall be held invalid
for any reason, the remainder of that section and all other sections shall
continue in full force.
§ 223-154 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 223-154
1:376
Chapter 225
ILLICIT DISCHARGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 62.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 170.
Zoning — See Ch. 174.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
§ 225-1. Purpose.
§ 225-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this bylaw, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Board of Health (hereafter
the Board), its employees or agents designated to enforce this bylaw.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — An activity, procedure, restraint,
or structural improvement that helps to reduce the quantity or improve the
quality of stormwater runoff.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended.
Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause of
impairment of water quality and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers,
wetlands and groundwater; contamination of drinking water supplies;
alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding.
Regulation of illicit connections and discharges to the Town of
Southborough municipal storm drain system is necessary for the
protection of the Town's water bodies and groundwater, and to
safeguard the public health, safety, welfare and the environment.
A.
The objectives of this bylaw are:
To prevent illicit discharge of pollutants from entering
Southborough's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4);
(1)
To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the
MS4;
(2)
(3) To require the removal of all such illicit connections;
To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating
to stormwater discharges; and
(4)
To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this bylaw through inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement.
(5)
B.
§ 223-154 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-2
1:377
DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS — The addition from any source of any
pollutant or combination of pollutants into the municipal storm drain system
or into the waters of the United States or commonwealth from any source.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance,
which allows an illicit discharge into the municipal storm drain system,
including without limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and
any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether
said connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the
effective date of this bylaw.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm
drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as
exempted in § 225-7. The term does not include a discharge in compliance
with an NPDES Stormwater Discharge Permit or a Surface Water Discharge
Permit, or resulting from fire fighting activities exempted pursuant to
§ 225-8 of this bylaw.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances designed or used
for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road with a drainage
system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility,
retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the
storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Southborough.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by United States
Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the state that authorizes
the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States.
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge to the municipal storm
drain system not composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON — Any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership,
corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate, the
commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject to
Town bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or
body, the Town of Southborough, and any other legal entity, its legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial
or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter
whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that is or may be
introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the
commonwealth. Pollutants shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
B. Oil and other automotive fluids;
C. Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
§ 225-2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 225-2
1:378
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water which, during manufacturing or
processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production
or use of any material, intermediate product, finished product, or waste
product.
RECHARGE — The replenishment of underground water reserves.
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water
runoff and drainage.
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00
that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.
TOXIC OR HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE — Any material, which
because of its quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable,
reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately
or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present
or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment.
Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical,
petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and
alkali, and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C
and c. 21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or man-made channel through which water
flows or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
WASTEWATER — Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any
raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste
product.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction
of the commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes,
ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and
groundwater.
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnances, accumulations and floatables;
D.
E. Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
Hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens;
F.
G. Dissolved and particulate metals;
H. Animal wastes;
I. Rock, sand, salt, soils;
J. Construction wastes and residues; and
K. Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
§ 225-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-3
1:379
§ 225-3. Applicability.
This bylaw shall apply to flows entering the municipally owned storm
drainage system.
§ 225-4. Authority.
This bylaw is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule
Procedures Act, and pursuant to the regulations of the Federal Clean Water
Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
§ 225-5. Administration.
The Board of Health shall administer, implement and enforce this bylaw. Any
powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Board may be delegated in
writing by the Board to employees or agents of the Board or the Town of
Southborough.
§ 225-6. Regulations.
The Board shall promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes
of this bylaw. Failure by the Board to promulgate such rules and regulations
shall not have the effect of suspending or invalidating this bylaw.
§ 225-7. Prohibited activities.
§ 225-8. Exemptions.
Discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting activities are exempt. The
following non-stormwater discharges or flows are also exempt from the
prohibition of non-stormwaters, provided that the source will not damage or
threaten public health and the environment:
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow
to be discharged any pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), into a watercourse, into
a wetland resource area, or into the waters of the commonwealth.
A.
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or
continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain system,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable
law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
B.
Obstruction of municipal storm drain system. No person shall obstruct
or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the
municipal storm drain system without prior written approval from the
Board.
C.
A. Waterline flushing and flow from potable water sources;
§ 225-3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 225-8
1:380
§ 225-9. Emergency suspension of storm drainage system access.
The Board may suspend municipal storm drain system access to any person
or property without prior written notice when such suspension is necessary
to stop an actual or threatened discharge of pollutants that presents
imminent risk of harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the
environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an emergency
suspension order, the Board of Health and Health Agent may take all
reasonable steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety,
welfare or the environment.
Springs, natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands, diverted
stream flow and rising groundwater;
B.
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR
35.2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
C.
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including
active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, sump
pumps or air conditioning condensation;
D.
E. Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
F. Water from noncommercial car washing;
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool or hot tub water (less
than one ppm chlorine), provided the pool or hot tub is drained in such
a way as not to cause a nuisance;
G.
Discharge from street sweeping, discharge of sand and deicers used for
public safety purposes;
H.
Emergency repairs to the municipal storm drain system, and any
stormwater management structure or practice that poses a threat to
public health or safety, or as deemed necessary by the Board;
I.
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the Board prior to
the time of the test;
J.
Nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or a
surface water discharge permit, waiver, or waste discharge order
administered under the authority of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or the Department of Environmental Protection,
provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements
of the permit, waiver, or order and applicable laws and regulations; and
K.
Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from the
Board as necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or the
environment.
L.
§ 225-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-10
1:381
§ 225-10. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon
as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation has information of or
suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in or
which may result in discharge of pollutants into the municipal drainage
system, a wetland resource area or the waters of the Commonwealth, the
person shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment, and cleanup
of the release. In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials,
the person shall immediately notify the Southborough Fire and Police
Departments and the Board of Health and Health Agent. In the event
of a release of nonhazardous material, the reporting person shall notify
the Board of Health and Health Agent no later than the next business
day. The reporting person shall provide to the Board of Health written
confirmation of all telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications within
three business days thereafter. If the discharge of prohibited materials is
from a commercial or industrial facility, the facility owner or operator of the
facility shall retain on-site a written record of the discharge and the actions
taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least
three years.
§ 225-11. Enforcement.
The Board or an authorized agent of the Board shall enforce this bylaw,
regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may
pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such violations.
Orders. The Board or an authorized agent of the Board may issue a
written order to enforce the provisions of this bylaw or the regulations
thereunder, which may include: (a) elimination of illicit connections or
discharges to the MS4; (b) performance of monitoring, analyses, and
reporting; (c) that unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall
cease and desist; and (d) remediation of contamination in connection
therewith.
If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation
of contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline
by which such abatement or remediation must be completed. Said
order shall further advise that, should the violator or property
owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the specified
deadline, the Town may, at its option, undertake such work, and
expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(1)
Within 30 days after completing all measures necessary to abate
the violation or to perform remediation, the violator and the
property owner will be notified of the costs incurred by the Town,
including administrative costs. The violator or property owner may
file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with
the Board within 30 days of receipt of the notification of the costs
incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of
(2)
A.
§ 225-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 225-11
1:382
§ 225-12. Severability.
The provisions of this bylaw are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause, of this bylaw or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
bylaw.
§ 225-13. Transitional provisions.
Residential property owners shall have 120 days from the effective date of
the bylaw to comply with its provisions, provided good cause is shown for
the failure to comply with the bylaw during that period.
Chapter 226
STABLES
the time in which to file a protest or within 30 days following a
decision of the Board affirming or reducing the costs, or from a
final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall
become a special assessment against the property owner and shall
constitute a lien on the owner's property for the amount of said
costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the
statutory rate provided in MGL c. 59, § 57, after the 31st day at
which the costs first become due.
Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw,
regulation, or permit issued hereunder, shall be subject to fines, civil
action, criminal prosecution, and tax liens, as appropriate and as
lawfully established by the Town of Southborough.
B.
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the town may utilize the noncriminal disposition procedure
set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, in which case the Health Agent or other
authorized agent of the town shall be the enforcing person.
C.
Entry to perform duties under this bylaw. To the extent permitted by
state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the
property, the Board, its agents, officers, and employees may enter upon
privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties
under this bylaw and regulations and may make or cause to be made
such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Board deems reasonably
necessary.
D.
E. Appeals. Further relief shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this bylaw are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
F.
§ 225-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-1
1:383
§ 226-1. Stable license required.
No person shall erect, occupy or use for a stable any building or portion
thereof or any other facility in the Town of Southborough until a license
authorizing such use is granted by the Board of Health.
§ 226-2. Restriction on keeping horses.
No person shall maintain a horse or horses anywhere in the Town of
Southborough except in a stable for which a license has been issued by the
Board of Health.
§ 226-3. Location requirements.
No stable or manure storage area shall be constructed closer than 150 feet
to any dwelling not occupied by the owner or operator of the stable, closer
than 100 feet to any well used as a source of drinking water or closer than
25 feet to a water line, sewage system, standing water or watercourse.
§ 226-4. Minimum standards.
All stables for which a license is issued by the Board of Health shall meet
the following minimum standards:
All stables must be operated in such a way that they do not become a
nuisance to abutters or the public.
A.
All stalls and floors shall be kept clean and dry, be free from
accumulated manure, have ample bedding and be treated to control
odor and prevent the attraction and breeding of flies.
B.
Manure shall not be allowed to accumulate for more than two weeks
between May 1 and November 1, and in no case shall the total quantity
exceed two cords without a variance from the Board of Health.
C.
Manure shall be handled and treated as necessary to prevent the
escape of odors and the attraction and breeding of flies.
D.
E. All stables must be adequately ventilated and drained.
F. Grain must be kept in rodentproof containers.
No more animals than the number specified in the license shall be kept
in the stable.
G.
All animals maintained under the terms of this license must be kept
under control at all times.
H.
No person shall remove or carry any manure through any public way,
except in a covered container or vehicle and in such a manner that no
manure shall be dropped on the street.
I.
§ 226-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 226-5
1:384
§ 226-5. License application.
Application for a stable license shall be in writing and upon a form provided
by the Board of Health. Each application shall include the following:
§ 226-6. License renewal.
License for stables in the Town of Southborough shall expire two years from
the date of issue or upon transfer of the property. Application for renewal
must be made on a form provided by the Board of Health. Said renewal
application shall show any changes in the items requested in § 226-5.
§ 226-7. Variances.
The Board of Health may grant a variance from any provisions of this
chapter. When a variance is granted, the conditions of it and the specific
bases for it must be listed on the stable license. Any change in these bases
may result in revocation of the permit.
§ 226-8. Existing stables.
Any stable operating satisfactorily prior to the effective date of this chapter
is hereby granted a variance from the requirements of § 226-3.
§ 226-9. Transfer of property.
Variances under §§ 226-7 and 226-8 will continue upon the transfer of
property, provided that the basis for the granting of the license are
unchanged and provided that the license is unexpired and an application is
made to renew the license within six months of the property transfer.
A plot plan, drawn roughly to scale, showing the lot or parcel where the
building to be used as a stable is to be located. Said plot plan shall show
the following:
(1) The general contour and drainage of the plot.
The location of all sewage disposal systems, wells, brooks, swamps
and the structures located on the plot or within 200 feet of the
proposed stable.
(2)
(3) The areas to be used for storage and handling of manure.
The location of roads, easements (such as water, drainage and
conservation easements) and lot lines.
(4)
A.
B. The number and type of animal to be kept in the proposed stable.
C. A plan for storing and removing manure.
A floor plan of the proposed stable, showing dimensions and location of
stalls and facilities for storage and handling of feed materials.
D.
§ 226-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 226-10
1:385
§ 226-10. Revocation of licenses.
Any stable license may be revoked at any time when the Board of Health
finds such revocation necessary to protect the public health. If a holder of
a stable license violates any of the rules or regulations set forth herein, the
stable license shall be subject to immediate revocation.
§ 226-11. Violations and penalties.
Punishment for violation of any section of this chapter shall be as prescribed
in Chapter 3, Section 157, of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts,53 and any amendments or additions thereto or any other
applicable statute.
§ 226-12. Severability.
So far as this Board of Health may provide, each section and subsection of
this chapter shall be construed as separate to the end that if any section,
subsection, item, sentence, clause or phrase shall be held invalid for any
reason, the remainder of this chapter shall continue in full force and effect.
§ 226-13. Repealer.
All previous rules and regulations relating to stables in the Town of
Southborough are hereby repealed.
§ 226-14. Adoption of rules and regulations.
This chapter was adopted by a vote of the Board of Health, Town of
Southborough, Massachusetts, at its regularly scheduled meeting on
December 12, 1972, and is to be in full force and effect on and after January
1, 1973, and shall, before said effective date, be published in a newspaper
circulated in the Town, and a copy thereof shall be deposited in the office of
the Town Clerk.
§ 226-15. License fee.
A fee of $2 will be charged for each license issued.
Chapter 228
WATER SUPPLY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Swimming pools — See Ch. 155.
Water — See Ch. 162.
Zoning — See Ch. 174.
Illicit discharge — See Ch. 225.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 244.
53.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 111, § 157.
§ 226-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 226-15
1:386
§ 228-1. Authority.
The Board of Health of the Town of Southborough, acting under the
authority of MGL c. 3, § 3154 and amendments and additions thereto, and
by any other power thereto enabling, and acting thereunder, have, in the
interest of, and for the preservation of the public health, duly made and
adopted the following rules and regulations.
§ 228-2. Definitions.
As used in these rules and regulations, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY — Any water system serving or intended to serve
water for human consumption or for domestic uses or purposes on one lot.
The system shall include all of the sources, treatment works and distribution
lines to the point where distribution takes place within the building.
SEMIPUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — Any water system serving or intended
to serve water for human consumption or for domestic uses or purposes
including a multiple dwelling, or to restaurants, dairies, schools,
institutions, motels, mobile home parks, bottling plants, campgrounds,
recreational camps for children, state forests, parks and beaches.
WATER SYSTEMS — Includes pipes, valves, fittings tanks, pumps, motors,
switches, controls and appurtenances installed or used for the purpose of
storage, distribution, filtration, treatment or purification of water for any
use whether or not inside a building.
WELL — Includes any pit, pipe excavation, spring, casing, drill hole or other
source of water to be used for any purpose of supplying potable water in the
Town of Southborough and shall include dug wells, driven or tubular wells,
drilled wells (artesian or otherwise) and springs, gravel packed, gravel
walled wells, gravel developed and wash borings and as further described in
United States Environmental Protection Agency Manual of Individual Water
Supply Systems.
§ 228-3. Permits required.
No private or semipublic water supply shall be installed, altered or
repaired until a permit has been obtained from the Board of Health or
its agent. The fee for this permit shall be set by the Board from time to
time. A permit so granted shall expire two years from the date of issue
unless construction is begun.
A.
A plot plan shall be submitted with the application for a well permit
to the Board of Health indicating the proposed location of the well, all
buildings, boundary lines and septic systems (within 200 feet).
B.
54.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 111, § 31.
§ 226-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-4
1:387
§ 228-4. General requirements.
§ 228-5. Well specifications.
No occupancy of the facilities which the well is to serve may be
permitted until the well is installed, completed and has been
demonstrated to supply water of the quality and quantity specified
herein.
A.
The well contractor shall observe sanitary measures and precautions
in the performance of his work in order to prevent pollution or
contamination of the well.
B.
Well drillers must be registered with the Massachusetts Water
Resources Commission.
C.
Wells shall be located at least 15 feet from any public or private way or
street and 10 feet from lot lines, and 50 feet from any part of the septic
system and 100 feet from any leaching area or any other such greater
distance as may be required by the Board of Health. The well must also
be a minimum of five feet from any building or projection thereof.
D.
The owners of a semipublic water supply shall possess and display an
unrevoked permit from the Board of Health which signifies the status
of sanitary protection, maintenance, operation and improvements
recommended.
E.
Pump houses or pump rooms shall be kept in sanitary condition at all
times. Also the size of the room should be no larger than necessary
to house the pumping and the electrical equipment involved in the
water system. Lawnmowers, snowblowers or other gas driven engines
shall not be stored in the pump room. Insecticides, herbicides and/or
fertilizers and the like shall not be stored in the pump room.
F.
Pump house, pump or pipe pits and wells shall be designated and
constructed so as to prevent flooding and otherwise to prevent the
entrance of pollution or contaminants.
G.
Pump houses, pump rooms and pitless adapters shall be installed in
accordance with the Individual Water System Manual.
H.
No person shall install or enter into a contract for installing or making
additions, modification, or alterations to any semipublic water supply
before submitting complete plans, specifications and descriptions to the
Board of Health and receive from them written approval. Private and
semipublic water supply systems shall be approved by the Board of
Health before occupancy is permitted.
I.
There shall be a minimum yield of 200 gallons per bedroom per day at
20 pounds per square inch at the highest fixture serviced. A bedroom
shall include undeveloped area that could be made into a bedroom.
A.
§ 228-4 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 228-5
1:388
§ 228-6. Water quality and quantity.
System capacity for semipublic water supplies must be adequate to
meet the projected needs.
Pressure tanks for individual home installations shall be diaphragm
type and have a minimum capacity of 36 gallons.
B.
Quantity tests shall be performed by competent pump or well drilling
contractors and a well shall produce a supply for each dwelling unit
served by an on-site well as follows:
Well Drawing Depth
(feet)
Gallons Per Minute Per 4 Hours
(minimum)
0 to 150 5 to 6
150 to 200 4
200 to 300 3
300 and over 2
C.
Auxiliary power must be available to maintain a water supply for
multiple dwellings. The wall of a dug well shall extend at least four
inches above the floor or the original ground surface.
D.
A pitless adapter shall be provided such that the permanent watertight
casing of the well shall terminate a minimum of 12 inches above
finished grade and/or the elevation of one-hundred-year flood.
E.
Well must be curbed and covered to prevent entrance or contamination
and to divert surface drainage away from the well.
F.
Pipes and equipment.
All service pipes and connections shall be of nontoxic material and
meet the specifications approved by the New England Water Works
Association.
(1)
The installation of pipes shall be such that they are protected from
crushing, freezing and/or attack by rodents.
(2)
Dissimilar metals should be discouraged in the water system. The
use of nonconductive plastic inserts between pipes and fittings or
the installation of sacrificial anodes is helpful in minimizing electric
corrosion problems.
(3)
Electrical service grounds shall not be attached to the water
piping. All electrical service and controls of well must be permitted,
inspected and approved according to Town and state regulations.
(4)
G.
Sanitary protection shall be incorporated into the construction of the
well and final finishing at grade shall include cement platform large
A.
§ 228-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6
1:389
enough to extend at least two feet in all directions from the well casing
itself.
All newly completed wells shall be disinfected in accordance with
instructions from United States Environmental Protection Agency
Manual of Individual Water Supply Systems.
B.
Before approval, well log and pump test data shall be submitted to
the Board of Health in the form attached to these regulations. It shall
include a log of the well, showing depth and type of over-burden,
depth of casing installed below ground surface, diameter of casing and
diameter of the hole in the rock, static water level, and the pumping
rate which can be sustained for four hours. The well (after pump
testing) shall recover to within 85% of the original static water level
within a twenty-four-hour period. The results of all testing shall be
submitted to the Board of Health for approval and the well contractor
shall be responsible for all data submitted.
C.
A chemical, physical and bacteriological analysis of the water,
conducted by a Massachusetts certified laboratory, shall be required.
Water which does not meet the accepted standards of agencies of the
state or federal government for potable water supplies shall be grounds
for the rejection of the well. One sample shall be taken from a tap in
the dwelling before occupancy. Acceptance of water quality shall also
be based on its conformance to the normal characteristics of ground
water in the area.
D.
A bacteriological test to indicate a zero per 100 milliliters coliform
density shall be required. A total bacteria count shall also be
determined at 35° C.
E.
Chemical and physical analyses shall be required.
Toxicity tests may also be required. Analyses shall be performed
for at least pH, color, odor, iron, turbidity, manganese, ammonia
nitrogen, nitrite nitrogen, alkalinity, nitrate nitrogen, total
hardness, sodium, chlorides and copper. Concentrations shall not
exceed the following:
(a) Color, 15 units.
(b) Turbidity, five sensation units.
(c) Manganese, 0.05 milligram per liter.
(d) Nitrate nitrogen, 10 milligrams per liter.
(e) Chloride, 250 milligrams per liter.
(f) Iron, 30 milligrams per liter.
(g) Copper, 1.0 milligrams per liter.
(1)
F.
§ 228-6 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 228-6
1:390
§ 228-7. Prohibitions.
§ 228-8. Variances.
Sodium content shall be reported to the homeowner if greater than
20 milligrams per liter. Other parameters will be evaluated on a
case-by-case basis by the Board of Health to establish the water's
suitability as a domestic water supply.
(2)
Where applicable, water quality of semipublic water supplies shall
comply with effective regulations of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
G.
Water conditioning. Permanent disinfection of a polluted supply is
prohibited. If the natural water quality does not meet the physical and
chemical criteria as listed in Subsection F, water conditioning shall
be required. Water softener or other treatment backwash shall not be
discharged into the septic system. Treatment units shall be installed
with the capability of bypassing such units if necessary or desired.
H.
Surface water supplies for private or semipublic water supplies shall be
prohibited.
A.
B. Cisterns shall be prohibited.
C. Cross connections shall be prohibited.
Other cross connections for whatever purpose shall not be allowed
without a written permit from Massachusetts Department of Public
Health.
D.
Wells used for drinking water and domestic water supply shall not be
used to provide water for ground water heat pump systems or for water
cooling or air conditioning systems. Any wells used for such heating or
cooling systems shall be approved by the Board of Health only after
the applicant has submitted sufficient evidence to the satisfaction of
the Board of Health that such use will not disrupt any other water
supply and that the yield of such well is sufficient to provide a sufficient
quantity of water to satisfy the manufacturer's recommendations for
proper equipment operation.
E.
The Board of Health may vary the application of any provision of these
regulations with respect to any particular case, when in its opinion,
the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, provided that the
decision of the Board of Health shall not conflict with the spirit of these
minimum standards. Any variance granted by the Board of Health shall
be in writing.
A.
Any variance or other modification authorized to be made by these
regulations may be subject to such qualification, revocation, suspension
or expiration as the Board of Health expresses its grant. A variance or
modification authorized to be made by these regulations may otherwise
B.
§ 228-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-8
1:391
§ 228-9. Enforcement.
§ 228-10. Adoption; when effective.
These rules and regulations were adopted by vote of the Board of Health,
Town of Southborough, Massachusetts, and are to be in full force and effect
on and after June 28, 1982, and shall, before said date, be published in this
Town and a copy thereof shall be deposited in the office of the Town Clerk.
Division 4, Miscellaneous
Chapter 234
FEES
be revoked, modified or suspended, in whole or in part, only after
the holder thereof has been notified in writing and has been given an
opportunity to be heard.
The provisions of Article 1 of the State Environmental Code shall
govern the enforcement of these regulations.
A.
Orders; service and content.
If an examination as provided for in § 228-5C and/or D reveals
failure to comply with the provisions of these regulations, the
Board of Health may order the person or company responsible to
comply with the violated provision.
(1)
The inspection and these regulations cannot be construed as a
guarantee by the Town of Southborough, or its agents, that the
water system will function satisfactorily.
(2)
The Board of Health may require a restriction to be recorded in
the registry of deeds in cases which, in the opinion of the Board
of Health, the water analyses show marginal compliance with the
criteria of these regulations.
(3)
B.
§ 228-8 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 228-10
1:392
ARTICLE I
Police User Detail Fees
[Adopted 4-10-2007 ATM by Art. 36]
§ 234-1. Issuance of bills; due date; interest on unpaid portions.
Bills for police detail user fees, as determined by the Police Chief or the
Chief’s duly authorized designee, shall be issued immediately after the
detail service is rendered. The due date for payment of any such fee shall
be the date of such bill. If the bill, or any portion thereof, remains unpaid
after 30 days interest, from the due date, at the rate of 14% per annum,
computed from the first day after the thirty-day billing period, shall be paid
on so much of the balance of such fee that remains unpaid.
§ 234-2. Provision of copies required.
A copy of this bylaw provision will be given to each individual or entity to
whom the police detail service is furnished.
§ 234-3. Statutory authority.
This provision is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in MGL c. 40,
§ 21E.
§ 234-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-3
1:393

ARTICLE II
Construction Permits; Planning Board Plans
[Fees for plumbing and gas permits, electrical permits, building
permits and Planning Board plans are promulgated from time to
time. The most recent fee amounts are on file in the Town offices.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 234-3
1:395
Chapter 244
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Earth removal — See Ch. 85.
Numbering of property — See Ch. 124.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 170.
Zoning — See Ch. 174.
Sewage disposal — See Ch. 223.
§ 234-3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 234-3
1:396
ARTICLE I
Authority
§ 244-1. Authority; when effective.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of
Southborough by MGL c. 41, § 81Q and other sections, said Board has on
August 18, 1986, adopted these amended Rules and Regulations Governing
the Subdivision of Land in the Town of Southborough, Massachusetts,
originally adopted in January, 1960. These amended rules and regulations
shall take effect upon recording in the registry of deeds and filing with the
Recorder of the Land Court.
§ 244-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-1
1:397

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 244-2. Definitions.
Words and terms used herein shall have the meanings assigned to them in
the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41 and in the Southborough Zoning
Bylaw.55 In addition, unless the context unequivocally indicates otherwise,
the meaning of the following words and terms shall be as defined herein:
APPLICANT — A person (as hereinafter defined) who applies for the
approval of a plan of a subdivision or a person who applies under § 244-3.
"Applicant" shall include an owner or his agent or representative or his
assigns.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Southborough.
DEVELOPER — A person (as hereinafter defined) to whom approval of a
plan of a subdivision has been granted under Article III of these rules and
regulations.
GENERAL LAWS (ABBREVIATED MGL) — The General Laws of
Massachusetts. In case of a rearrangement of the General Laws, any
citation of particular sections of the General Laws shall be applicable to the
corresponding sections in the new codification.
LOT — An area of land in one common ownership, with definite boundaries
ascertainable of record and used, or set aside and available for use, as the
site of one or more buildings and buildings accessory thereto.
MUNICIPAL SERVICES — Sewers, water drains, water pipes, gas pipes,
electrical lines, telephone lines, fire alarm system, guardrails, shade trees,
street signs, boundary markers and their respective appurtenances.
OWNER — As applied to real estate, the person holding the ultimate fee
simple title to a parcel, tract or lot of land, as shown by the record in the
appropriate land registration office, registry of deeds or registry of probate.
PERSON — An individual or two or more individuals or a group of
association of individuals, a partnership or a corporation having common or
undivided interests in a tract of land.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A plan of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision
of land drawn on tracing paper, or a print thereof, showing the subdivision
name, boundaries, North point, date, scale, legend and title "Preliminary
Plan"; the names of the record owner and the applicant and the name of
the designer, engineer or surveyor; the names of all abutters, as determined
from the most recent local tax list; the existing and proposed lines of
streets, ways, easements and any public areas within the subdivision in
a general manner; the proposed system of drainage, including adjacent
existing natural waterways in a general manner; the approximate boundary
lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and dimensions; the names,
55.Editor's Note: See Ch. 174, Zoning.
§ 244-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-2
1:399
approximate location and widths of adjacent streets; the topography of the
land in a general manner. A "preliminary plan" is not recordable.
PLAN OR DEFINITIVE PLAN — The complete plans of a subdivision, as
submitted with all required exhibits and the completed application and
fees to the Board for approval and endorsement, to be recorded upon
such endorsement in the registry of deeds or filed with the Land Court, as
distinguished from a preliminary plan.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or way which is designed and
prepared or used for vehicular travel: may also be referred to as the
"traveled way" or "pavement."
STREET OR WAY — A strip of land dedicated to use as a public
thoroughfare, including a public way laid out and accepted by a public
authority or which the Town Clerk certifies is used and maintained as a
public way, or a way laid out on a definitive subdivision plan theretofore
approved and endorsed under the Subdivision Control Law, or a way in
existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in
Southborough and having in the opinion of the Planning Board adequate
width, construction and grades for the needs of the existing and future
buildings and uses abutting thereon or to be served thereby.
STREET, COLLECTOR — A street which carries or can be expected to carry
vehicular traffic originating in another street or streets, or streets expected
to carry at least 2,000 vehicles average daily traffic.
STREET, LOCAL RESIDENTIAL — A street expected to serve more than
eight but fewer than 50 dwelling units, no nonresidentially zoned land, and
to carry no significant through traffic.
STREET, MAJOR COMMERCIAL COLLECTOR OR ARTERIAL — A street
expected to have an estimated average daily traffic volume in excess of
5,000 trips.
STREET, MAJOR RESIDENTIAL OR MINOR COMMERCIAL COLLECTOR
— A street expected to serve more than 200 dwelling units and/or
nonresidentially zoned land and to have an estimated daily traffic volume of
fewer than 5,000 trips.
STREET, MINOR RESIDENTIAL — A relatively short street expected to have
no through traffic and to serve no more than eight dwelling units and no
nonresidentially zoned land.
STREET, MINOR RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR — A street expected to serve
more than 50 but fewer than 200 dwelling units and no nonresidentially
zoned land.
SUBDIVISION — The process of dividing or resubdividing a tract of land
into two or more lots, or the land being subdivided, provided that a division
of land into two or more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a
"subdivision" if every lot created or altered thereby has the frontage
required by the Southborough Zoning Bylaw on a street or way as defined
therein and by these Rules and Regulations. Conveyances or other
instruments adding to, taking away from or changing the size or shape
§ 244-2 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-2
1:400
of lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot so affected without the
frontage set forth above, or the division of a tract of land on which two or
more nonaccessory buildings were lawfully standing when the Subdivision
Control Law went into effect in Southborough into separate lots on each
of which one of such buildings remains standing, shall not constitute a
"subdivision."
SUBMITTED — Plans and applications shall be deemed "submitted" when
delivered at a meeting of the Board or when sent by registered mail to the
Planning Board, care of the Town Clerk; and if so mailed, the date of mailing
shall be the date of submission (MGL c. 41, § 81O).
TOWN — Unless otherwise stated, "Town" shall mean the Town of
Southborough, and references to Town officials, boards and the like shall
mean those of the Town of Southborough.
§ 244-3. Plan believed not to require approval.
Submission of plan.
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the registry
of deeds or to be filed with the Land Court a plan of land and
who believes that such a plan does not require approval under
the Subdivision Control Law may submit the original drawing and
three contact prints and a properly executed Form A (see Appendix
A)56 to the Planning Board, accompanied by the necessary evidence
to show that the plan does not require approval. Said person shall
file, by delivery or registered mail, a notice with the Town Clerk
stating the date of submission for such determination,
accompanied by a copy of said application and describing the land
to which the plan relates sufficiently for identification. If the notice
is given by delivery, the Town Clerk shall, if requested, give a
written receipt therefor.
(1)
The material, manner of execution, contents and dimensions of said
plan shall conform to the requirements of the registry of deeds or
the Land Court for plans to be recorded, provided that the plan
shall be not smaller than 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches nor larger than
24 inches by 36 inches, and shall contain the following information:
Identification of the plan by name of owner of record and
location of the land in question.
(a)
Plans shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor or
registered civil engineer.
(b)
The statement "Approval Under Subdivision Control Law Not
Required," and sufficient space for the date and the signatures
of all five members of the Board and for an explanatory
statement as to why approval is not required.
(c)
(2)
A.
56.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Town offices.
§ 244-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-3
1:401
§ 244-4. Plan requiring approval.
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law of any land within the Town, or proceed with the improvement
for sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of ways, or preparation
Zoning classification and location of any zoning district
boundaries within the locus of the plan, and including a North
arrow.
(d)
The boundaries of all lots newly established, changed by the
plan or to be recorded without change, including any
remaining land, and the dimensions of the required street
frontage for every lot. The frontage street shall be identified by
name.
(e)
Notice of any decisions by the Zoning Board of Appeals,
including but not limited to variances and exceptions
regarding the land or any buildings thereon.
(f)
Abutters from latest available Assessors' records, unless the
applicant has knowledge of any changes subsequent to the
latest available Assessors' records.
(g)
All existing above- and belowground structures and streams
and wetlands.
(h)
Endorsement of plan not requiring approval.
If the Planning Board determines that the plan does not require
approval, it shall without a public hearing forthwith endorse on the
plan the words "Approval Under the Subdivision Control Law Not
Required."
(1)
The Planning Board may add to such endorsement a statement of
the reason approval is not required. Within 14 days of the date of
plan submission, the plan shall be returned to the applicant, and
the Planning Board shall notify the Town Clerk in writing of its
action.
(2)
B.
Determination that plan requires approval. If the Planning Board
determines that the plan does require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law, it shall, within 14 days of the submission of the plan, so
notify the Town Clerk and the applicant in writing and return the plan.
C.
Failure of Board to Act. If the Planning Board fails to act upon a
plan submitted under this section or fails to notify the Town Clerk
and the person submitting the plan of its action within 14 days after
its submission, the Board shall be deemed to have determined that
approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required, and it shall
forthwith make such endorsement on said plan, and on its failure to do
so forthwith, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate to the same effect.
D.
§ 244-3 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-4
1:402
therefor, or the installation of utilities and municipal services therein, unless
and until a definitive plan of such subdivision has been submitted and
approved by the Planning Board as hereinafter provided.
§ 244-5. Presentation of correct information.
§ 244-6. Limit on dwellings on a lot.
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling
purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any
lots in a subdivision, or elsewhere in the Town, without the consent of
the Planning Board. Such consent may be conditional upon the provision
of adequate ways furnishing access to each such building and adequate
improvements in the same manner as otherwise required for lots within a
subdivision.
§ 244-7. Filing and processing fees.
To reimburse the Town for the cost of plan processing and review, legal
advertising, inspection and other costs, filing and processing fees as
specified in Appendix M58 shall be tendered together with the application
(Forms A, B or C)59 and constitute a part thereof. If a definitive plan follows
closely the layout shown on a preliminary plan and is submitted within
seven months of the preliminary plan submittal, the required definitive plan
fee shall be reduced by the amount of the preliminary plan fee.
§ 244-8. Access agency.
The Board assumes all information provided to be true and correct,
unless evidence is offered or the Board has knowledge that this is not
the case. A subsequent discovery or determination that the Board had
acted on the basis of incorrect information will justify a rescission of
plan approval in addition to other remedies and penalties provided by
law. The responsibility for the presentation of complete and correct
information lies with the applicant.
A.
If the land shown on the plan is abutted by land of another owner, the
Board may require a statement from the person who prepared the plan
as to the source or sources of the information about the location of
boundaries. A separate form for such statement will be furnished by the
Board, Form D, Designer's Certificate (Appendix D).57
B.
General. Plans shall be endorsed as not requiring approval under the
Subdivision Control Law and subdivision plans shall be approved only
if each building lot to be created by such plan has adequate access as
intended under the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through
81GG.
A.
57.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Town offices.
58.Editor's Note: Appendix M is on file in the Town offices.
59.Editor's Note: Forms A, B and C are on file in the Town offices.
§ 244-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-8
1:403
Standards of adequacy. Streets within a subdivision shall be considered
to provide adequate access if and only if complying with the standards
established in these regulations. Ways providing access to streets
within a subdivision shall normally be considered to provide adequate
access only if there is assurance that prior to construction on any
lots, access to the subdivision will be in compliance with the rightof-
way width, pavement width, maximum grade and sight distance
requirements of these regulations as applicable to ways within a
subdivision.
B.
Obligations. The Board may require, as a condition of its approval of a
subdivision plan, that the developer dedicate or acquire and dedicate
a strip of land for the purpose of widening access ways to a width as
required above, and that he either make physical improvements within
such way or compensate the Town for the cost of such improvements in
order to meet the standards specified above.
C.
Waivers. The Board may waive strict compliance with these access
requirements only upon its determination, following consultation with
the Selectmen, Highway Superintendent, Police Chief and Fire Chief,
that the way in fact will be sufficient to serve the needs for access
to serve potential uses of land abutting on or served by the way in
question, and that alteration to existing ways in order to meet these
standards would not be in the public interest because of environmental
damage or unwarranted expense.
D.
§ 244-8 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-8
1:404
ARTICLE III
Plan Submission and Approval Procedure
§ 244-9. Preliminary plan.
General.
A preliminary plan of a subdivision may be submitted by the
applicant and 10 prints of it shall be filed with the Planning Board
and one print shall be filed with the Board of Health. The
submission of such a preliminary plan will enable the subdivider,
the Planning Board, the Board of Health, the Water Department,
the Highway Department, the Police Department, the Fire
Department, the Planning Board's engineer and other Town
agencies and owners of property abutting the subdivision to
discuss and clarify the details of such subdivision before a
definitive plan is prepared. Therefore, it is strongly recommended
that a preliminary plan be filed in each case. A properly executed
application Form B (see Appendix B)60 shall be filed with the
preliminary plans submitted to the Planning Board.
(1)
The applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice with
the Town Clerk stating the date of submission to the Planning
Board for such approval of a preliminary plan and accompanied by
a copy of a properly executed application Form B.
(2)
A.
Contents.
The preliminary plan shall be drawn on tracing paper or suitable
alternative at a scale of 40 feet to the inch unless the Board
authorizes or specifies a different scale. The plan shall form a
clear basis for discussion of the details of the subdivision and
for preparation of the definitive plan. The plan shall contain the
following:
The subdivision name, if any, boundaries. North point, date,
scale, legend and title "Preliminary Plan" (on each numbered
sheet if the plan comprises several sheets).
(a)
The names of the record owner of the land and the subdivider
and the name of the designer, engineer or surveyor who made
the plan, which shall appear in the lower right-hand corner.
(b)
The names of all abutters, as determined from the most recent
assessors records, unless the applicant shall have more recent
knowledge of such abutters.
(c)
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements
and any public or common areas within the subdivision, in a
general manner.
(d)
(1)
B.
60.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Town offices.
§ 244-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-9
1:405
The proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing
natural waterways, in a general manner. (NOTE: Runoff
calculations, when requested by the Board, should be
submitted with preliminary plan.)
(e)
The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with
approximate areas and dimensions.
(f)
The names, approximate location and widths of adjacent
streets.
(g)
The existing and proposed topography of the land with a twofoot
contour interval based on the United States Coast and
Geodetic Survey Datum.
(h)
In addition to the above required items, the Board requests that the
following information essential to the evaluation of the proposed
layout be shown on all preliminary plans:
The proposed names of the proposed streets and a number
on each lot on each proposed street suitable for an address
number consecutively arranged, odd numbers on the righthand
side, even numbers on the left-hand side, leading away
from the existing way, or east to west, north to south if between
two ways. The Planning Board reserves the right to name or
rename proposed public and private streets.
(a)
Major existing features of the land, such as walls, fences, large
trees, wooded areas, ledge outcrops, major ditches, wetlands
and water bodies.
(b)
All existing structures above and below ground (where known),
such as buildings, water mains and other pipelines, polelines,
wells and tanks. Water mains within 1,000 feet shall be
indicated.
(c)
The profiles or existing grades and approximate proposed
finished grades of the roadway, and drain and sewer utilities.
(d)
A locus plan in the scale of one inch equals 800 feet shall be
shown on the first page.
(e)
(2)
Board action on preliminary plan. The Planning Board may disapprove
the preliminary plan and state the specific reasons therefor, or may
approve the preliminary plan, with or without modifications, and may
suggest changes to be incorporated on the definitive plan, after a
review of the plan and consultation with the Board of Health, Engineer
to the Planning Board, and the Water, Highway, Fire and Police
Departments of the Town. The approval of the preliminary plan does
not constitute approval of the subdivision and does not entitle the
plan to be recorded, but facilitates the preparation of a definitive plan
meeting the Board's requirements. The Board shall, within 60 days of
C.
§ 244-9 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-9
1:406
§ 244-10. Definitive plan.
the submission, notify the applicant by certified mail and the Town
Clerk in writing of its action relative to the preliminary plan. One
copy of the preliminary plan shall be returned to the applicant with a
notation of the Board's action.
General.
Any person who submits a definitive plan of a subdivision to the
Planning Board for approval shall file with the Board the following:
A sepia and 13 prints of each drawing of the definitive plan,
dark line on white background. The original drawing shall be
furnished upon request by the Planning Board and will be
returned when the Planning Board is ready to take action.
(a)
A properly executed application Form C (see Appendix C),61
including the time within which the applicant agrees to
complete the ways and install the public utilities in the
subdivision. Form D (see Appendix D),62 a certified list of
abutters (Form E),63 and a filing and processing fee. (See
§ 244-7.) The approval of all plans shall be upon the condition
that the ways and municipal services or utilities shown thereon
shall be completed within the time so specified, or within
such further time as may be allowed by the Board, subject to
adjustments in the penal sum or amount of the security held
and in the construction requirements.
(b)
(1)
The applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice
with the Town Clerk stating the date of submission to the Planing
Board of the definitive subdivision plan, accompanied by a copy of
the completed application for approval (Form C).64 It is strongly
recommended that definitive plans be submitted by appointment,
at a regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting.
(2)
A.
Contents. The definitive plan shall be prepared by a professional
engineer and land surveyor registered in Massachusetts and shall be
clearly and legibly produced on Mylar, polyester film or other media
acceptable to the Board. The plan shall be at a scale of one inch equals
40 feet or such other scale as the Planning Board may accept to show
details clearly and adequately, and shall include plans and profiles of
each individual street at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet horizontal
and one inch equals four feet vertical. All elevation shall refer to the
United States Coast and Geodetic Survey Datum. Sheet sizes shall be
24 inches by 36 inches, including a one-inch border. They shall be
B.
61.Editor's Note: Appendix C is on file in the Town offices.
62.Editor's Note: Appendix D is on file in the Town offices.
63.Editor's Note: Form E is on file in the Town offices.
64.Editor's Note: Form C is on file in the Town offices.
§ 244-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-10
1:407
accompanied by an index sheet at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet
showing the entire subdivision and adjacent streets and dimensions of
the lots and streets and lot numbers. The definitive plan shall contain
the following information:
A title, appearing in the lower right-hand corner of the plan,
showing the name of the subdivision, if any; the date; scale; the
names and address of the applicant; and the names, signatures and
professional stamps of the designer, engineer and surveyor who
made the plan.
(1)
North point, boundaries of the subdivision and benchmarks at
intervals of not more than 1,000 feet.
(2)
A key or locus of the subdivision showing the adjacent existing
streets in the scale of one inch equals 800 feet.
(3)
Location and ownership of abutting property as it appears on Form
E, Certified List of Abutters,65 unless the applicant shall have more
recent knowledge of such abutters.
(4)
Major existing features of the land, such as existing waterways,
swamps and water bodies, wetlands, designated or otherwise,
natural drainage courses, walls, fences, buildings, large trees,
wooded areas, outcroppings of rock, ditches and all existing
structures above- or below ground.
(5)
Lines of existing and proposed ways or streets, easements, public
or common areas, and lots, differentiating between the existing and
the proposed lines and lots, showing sequential and street numbers
for every lot within the subdivision, and ownership of every lot
shown that is not a part of the subdivision, including all land owned
by the applicant and contiguous to the subdivision. The names of
proposed streets and street numbers of the proposed lots shall be
shown in pencil and inked in upon approval by the Board. The
Board reserves the right to name or rename proposed public and
private streets.
(6)
Sufficient data to determine the location, direction and length of
every street and way line, lot line and boundary line, and to
establish these lines on the ground. This shall include the lengths
and bearings of boundary lines of the subdivision perimeter and of
all subdivision lot lines, including lot frontage on the streets, of the
boundary lines of all streets and easements, and the lengths, radii,
tangents and central angles of all curves in lot lines and street
lines. Control points of street lines shall be coordinated with the
Massachusetts Coordinate System. All angle points or intersections
of tangents along the street lines shall be shown. Areas of lots
with lot numbers and the street frontage of adjoining lands of the
applicant not included in the subdivision will be shown.
(7)
65.Editor's Note: Form E is on file in the Town offices.
§ 244-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-10
1:408
Location of all permanent monuments, identified as to whether
existing or proposed.
(8)
Location, names and widths of streets or private ways bounding,
approaching or within 250 feet of the subdivision, showing both
roadway and right-of-way widths.
(9)
Indication of all easements, covenants or restrictions applying to
the land and their purposes, whether or not within the subdivision,
including any decision on appeal or any variances or special permit
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals applicable to the land in
the subdivision or any buildings thereon.
(10)
If any land within or contiguous to the subdivision or any part or
boundary thereof has been examined, approved and confirmed by
the Massachusetts Land Court, such information shall be noted on
the plan with case numbers and other pertinent references.
(11)
Suitable space to record the action of the Planning Board and the
signatures of the five members of the Planning Board, including
space for reference to any conditions of approval.
(12)
Existing and proposed profiles of proposed streets at a vertical
scale of one inch equals four feet and horizontal scale of one
inch equals 40 feet or other scales acceptable to the Board. The
existing profile shall be shown in fine black line, solid at the center
line, dotted for the left and dashed for the right side line; the
proposed center line shall be shown in heavy red or black line.
Existing and proposed center-line elevations shall be shown at 25
feet stations on vertical curves and at 50 feet stations otherwise,
also at intersections, and proposed street center-line grade shall be
indicated in percent, except on vertical curves. All elevations shall
be on national vertical datum, and benchmark elevations shall be
identified at 1,000 feet maximum interval.
(13)
Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals,
the boundaries of floodplains based on Flood Insurance Rate Maps
and the highest high-water mark of the last five years. There shall
also be indicated by different symbols the contour line four feet
above said high-water mark.
(14)
Water mains and drains.
Size and location of existing and proposed water supply mains
and their appurtenances, hydrants, sewer pipes and their
appurtenances and/or sewage disposal systems, storm drains
and their appurtenances and easements pertinent thereto,
data on borings and percolation tests made and method of
carrying water to the nearest watercourse or easements for
drainage as needed, whether or not within the subdivision. The
location, depth and capacity of known existing underground
tanks will be shown.
(a)
(15)
§ 244-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-10
1:409
If surface water drains will discharge onto adjacent existing
streets or onto adjacent properties now owned by the
applicant, the plan shall clearly indicate what course the
discharge will take, and the applicant shall present to the
Board evidence from the Highway Superintendent, the
Engineer to the Board or the owner of adjacent property that
such discharge is satisfactory and permitted by public or
private ownership of adjacent street or property.
(b)
Calculations prepared by a registered engineer to substantiate
proposed drain pipe sizes. See section on design standards for the
criteria and assumptions to be used in drainage calculations.
(16)
A closed traverse for each street in the subdivision, including street
lines at junctions with other existing or proposed streets.
(17)
Location and species of street trees identified as existing, or to be
planted.
(18)
Cross sections typical of each street, roadway and sidewalk to be
constructed.
(19)
On the plan of each proposed street the location and dimensions of
all construction features and municipal services or utilities, such as
sidewalks, grass plots, pavement, hydrants and valves, guardrails,
culverts and streetlights, where known.
Items in Subsection B(13) through (20) may be submitted on the
same sheet as the definitive plan of lots or on separate sheets.
(20)
A tabulation of the total areas within the subdivision of all lots, of
land within the streets, and of land to be set aside for parks, open
space and other public uses, and of the total area of the subdivision
with an explanation of any difference between it and the aggregate
of the areas of lots, streets and common or public lands.
(21)
Any nonstandard or special details of construction, such as the
design of any retaining or wing walls, bridges or large culverts,
special manholes, turnarounds, medians or safety islands and the
like.
(22)
Review by Board of Health as to suitability of the land. At the time
of filing of the definitive plan, the applicant shall also file with the
Board of Health two contact prints of the definitive plan, dark line
on white background, together with such information in the nature
of percolation tests and deep test holes as the Board of Health may
require. The Board of Health shall within 45 days after filing of the
plan report to the Planning Board in writing approval or disapproval
of said plan. If the Board of Health disapproves said plan, it shall
make specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots shown on such
plan cannot be used for building sites without injury to the public
health, and include such specific findings and the reasons therefor in
C.
§ 244-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-10
1:410
such report, and, where possible, shall make recommendations for the
adjustment thereof. Every lot shall be provided with a sewerage system.
The approval of the definitive plan by the Board of Health shall not
be construed to be the approval of any individual sewage disposal or
septic system. The Board of Health shall transmit a copy of its report
and findings to the applicant.
Environmental assessment. A comparative environmental analysis shall
be submitted for any subdivision creating frontage potentially allowing
10 or more dwelling units or serving 10 or more acres of
nonresidentially zoned land, and in other cases where the Board
determines it appropriate in light of special circumstances. The scope
of such analysis, including development alternatives to be compared
and consequences to be studied, shall be approved by the Planning
Board prior to the preparation of the analysis and may be required
to be necessary for plan evaluation. The analysis shall be prepared by
an interdisciplinary team to include a civil engineer and an architect
or landscape architect, unless otherwise agreed to by the Planning
Board. The analysis shall indicate differences among the alternatives
regarding:
Impact upon ground and surface water quality and level, including
estimated phosphate and nitrate loading on groundwater and
surface water from septic tanks, lawn fertilizer and other activities
within the development.
(1)
Material effects upon important wildlife habitats, outstanding
botanical features and scenic or historic environs.
(2)
Capability of soils, vegetative cover and proposed erosion control
efforts to support proposed development without danger of erosion,
silting, or other instability.
(3)
Relationship to the requirements of MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A (the
Wetlands Protection Act).
(4)
Impact upon the existing water supply system and well capacity of
the Town.
(5)
Road layout, egresses from site, sight distances, traffic (vehicles
per day and peak hours) expected to be generated by or attached
to site, impacts on existing ways, possible mitigating actions.
(6)
(7) Building siting and lot shape for solar energy potential.
D.
Additional information may be required.
Upon receipt of the application and the definitive plan, the Clerk
of the Planning Board will transmit copies of the plan or such
parts thereof and of other information as may be appropriate to
the following Town officials and departments for review and
(1)
E.
§ 244-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-10
1:411
§ 244-11. Action on definitive plan.
recommendations relative to those aspects of the definitive plan
relevant to each:
Town Counsel for the review and approval or for the drafting
of agreements, conditions and grants of easements and areas
for public use.
(a)
Highway, Water, Fire and Police Departments, Tree Warden,
Conservation Commission, Building Inspector and Boards of
Selectmen and of Assessors.
(b)
The remaining copies of the definitive plan will be retained for the
Board's files and for the consultant or engineer to the Board.
(2)
Suitability of the land. The Board may require additional information,
soil surveys and percolation test to establish the suitability of land for
the proposed development.
F.
Public hearing requirements. Before taking any action to disapprove or
approve the definitive plan, with or without modifications, the Board
shall hold a public hearing at which parties in interest shall have an
opportunity to be heard, in person or through an agent or attorney.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing and of the subject matter,
sufficient for the identification of the land to be subdivided, shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, such as
the Middlesex News or the Marlborough Enterprise, once in each of
two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than 14 days
before the date of the hearing.
G.
Required conformance for approval. The Planning Board shall review
the definitive plan and consider the recommendations of its
consultants, and of the Town officials and boards. The definitive plan
may be approved if it conforms, or is modified to conform, to the
requirements of Chapter 41 of General Laws, of the Zoning Bylaw
of the Town of Southborough,66 of these rules and regulations of the
Planning Board, and to the applicable regulations and requirements of
the Highway, Water, Fire and Police Departments and of the Boards
of Selectmen and of Health, especially as regards the specifications
for septic systems. The definitive plan will be disapproved if it does
not conform to the standards and requirements of these rules and
regulations or to the applicable requirements of the Zoning Bylaw,
or is inconsistent with the rules and requirements of the Town and
its officials and boards acting within their jurisdictional area. The
definitive plan shall conform, or shall be modified to conform to the
Master Plan for the Town or for any part thereof adopted by the
Planning Board, and the Board may disapprove any layout inconsistent
with such plans adopted by it.
A.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 174, Zoning.
§ 244-10 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-11
1:412
Certificate of action.
Within 60 days of the submission by the applicant of the definitive
plan, unless said time has been extended by vote of the Planning
Board at the written request of the applicant and the Town Clerk
has been notified in writing of such extension to a date certain,
the Board shall by vote approve with or without modifications
or disapprove said plan and notify the applicant by registered
mail, return receipt requested, and the Town Clerk in writing of
its action. Such notification shall be in the form of a certificate
of action, suitable for recording, bearing the signatures of the
majority of Planning Board members or of a person duly authorized
by a recorded vote of the Planning Board to certify Planning Board
actions, and shall include all conditions of approval and, in the
event of disapproval or approval with modifications, the specific
reasons therefor.
The applicant shall give the Town security for the construction
of ways and installation of municipal services or improvements
in accordance with the approved plans and all applicable Town
specifications and requirements and within the time specified,
as provided in Subsection C hereof; and
(a)
The Town Clerk shall certify by inscription on the plan that no
appeal of the Board's action was received at the Town Clerk's
office within 20 days following the recording at said office of
the Board's certificate of action with respect to such definitive
plan.
(b)
(1)
Within 10 days of the release for recording of the approved
definitive plan and covenant, if any, at the registry of deeds, the
applicant shall notify the Board in writing, presenting evidence of
the recording of the plan and the covenant; and six copies of the
approved and recorded definitive plan and a certified title report,
duly searched and executed by an attorney or title company, stating
that the title to the premises shown on said plan and appurtenances
thereto is in the applicant and free of all encumbrances. Upon
receipt of such notification the Planning Board shall file one copy
of the approved and recorded definitive plan each with the Building
Inspector, the Assessors, the Board of Health, the Highway
Superintendent and the Water Commissioners.
(2)
Approval of the definitive plan does not constitute the laying out
or acceptance by the Town of streets with a subdivision as public
ways.
(3)
B.
Performance guaranty. Before the Board endorses its approval and
signs the definitive plan and releases it to the applicant for recording,
the applicant, that is the owners of all land shown on the definitive plan
or other entity having the authority to assume legal obligations with
respect to such land and the improvements thereon, must deliver to
C.
§ 244-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-11
1:413
the Board adequate security for the required construction of ways and
installation of utilities and other required improvements to serve all lots
in the subdivision by one or more of the methods described below. Such
security shall be approved by the Town Counsel as to form and, where
appropriate, shall be cosigned by the mortgage holder, and shall specify
the time within which the required construction and installation shall
be completed.
The security may be in the form of a proper surety company bond
the penal sum of which shall in the opinion of the Planning Board
be sufficient to pay for all required work, including an allowance
for inflation by the end of the time specified for the completion of
all required construction and installation.
(1)
The security may be in the form of a certified check or a savings
bankbook or certificate, together with a signed withdrawal slip and
assignment assented to by the bank or other negotiable securities
acceptable to the Board as regards form, amount and the ability of
the Town to realize upon them in the event of a default.
(2)
The security may be in the form of an agreement executed by the
applicant and the holder of the construction mortgage, in which
the mortgage holder of lender agrees to withhold from the money
otherwise due the applicant an amount sufficient in the Board's
opinion to complete all remaining required work, including an
allowance for inflation as under Subsection C(1) above, and to
make such money available to the Town for the completion of such
work in the event of the applicant's failure to complete it within the
time specified.
(3)
The security may be in the form of a covenant executed and
delivered by the applicant (see Appendix Form I),67 cosigned by
the mortgagee, duly recorded and running with the land, wherein
the applicant agrees to construct ways and install all required
utilities and improvements to serve all the lots covered by the
covenant before any lot may be built upon or conveyed, except by
a mortgage deed, provided that a mortgagee acquiring title to a lot
by foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding owner thereof may
sell such lot subject to the requirement of the covenant that no lot
shall be built upon until it is released by the Planning Board upon
construction of ways, utilities and other required improvements to
serve such a lot; and further provided that the entire parcel of land
covered by the covenant or all lots not previously released may be
conveyed by a single deed and subject to the covenant. The release
of lots for building and sale from the restrictions of the covenant
shall be evidenced by a certificate of performance and release of
lots (Appendix Form K)68 which shall be recorded.
(4)
67.Editor's Note: Appendix Form I is on file in the Town offices.
68.Editor's Note: Appendix Form K is on file in the Town offices.
§ 244-11 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-11
1:414
The applicant may select and may from time to time vary the form
of security, provided that when the applicant wishes to replace
performance security in the form of a bond or other surety by a
covenant, a new plan of the entire subdivision or the part thereof
to be subject to the covenant shall be submitted to the Planning
Board for endorsement with an inscription referring to the terms
and restrictions of the new covenant and shall be recorded with the
covenant.
(5)
It is a policy of the Planning Board that, except where performance
security is in the form of a covenant, at least 25% of such security
shall be in the form of a savings bankbook, certificate of deposit
or certified check allowing immediate withdrawal of money in the
event of a failure to perform.
(6)
A surety agreement describing the limits and the items of work to
be performed and enumerating the lots released shall be executed
by the applicant and the Board if the security is as described under
Subsections C(1),(2) and (3) above (see Appendix Form J).69
(7)
Reduction of security. The penal sum of any such bond, or the amount
of any deposit held under Subsection C(2) or (3) above and any interest
accrued thereon, shall, from time to time, be reduced by vote of the
Planning Board and the obligations of the parties thereto released
by said Board in whole or in part, retaining at all times an amount
sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board to cover the cost of
performing all remaining required work secured thereby.
D.
Release of performance guaranty.
Upon the performance of all required construction of ways,
installation of utilities and other improvements in accordance with
Town specifications and with these rules and regulations, the
applicant shall send a written statement to that effect to the
Planning Board and the Town Clerk by certified mail and request
the release of all security held or of all lots secured by a covenant.
(1)
If the Board determines that such construction and installation
have been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the
conditions of approval and with these rules and regulations, and
have not been allowed to deteriorate while covered by such
security, it shall by vote release all such security and any lots
secured by a covenant, and return any bond, bankbook or deposit
to the person who furnished the same, or execute Form K with
respect to the lots restricted by the covenant.
(2)
If the Board determines that any required work has not been
satisfactorily performed in accordance with the approved plans
and with these rules and regulations and is not in a condition
acceptable to the Town, the Board shall so notify the applicant by
(3)
E.
69.Editor's Note: Appendix Form J is on file in the Town offices.
§ 244-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-11
1:415
certified mail and the Town Clerk and specify the details wherein
said construction or installation fail to meet the requirements of
these rules and regulations and the conditions of definitive plan
approval. The failure to so notify the applicant and the Town Clerk
within 45 days of the receipt by the Town Clerk of the applicant's
request shall be deemed to be a release of the performance
security or the covenant, and the Town Clerk shall issue a
certificate to that effect, which may be recorded, and the security
held by the Town shall be returned to the applicant.
Prior to or at the time of the request for the release of performance
guaranties, the applicant shall submit to the Board three copies of
as-built plans, including profiles and construction details, bearing
a certification by a registered land surveyor or registered civil
engineer that the location, material, elevation and method of
construction or installation of all streets, utilities, stone bounds
or other monuments, street signs and any other required
improvements conform exactly to the approved definitive plans,
as they may have been modified by the Planning Board, and to
these rules and regulations or indicating clearly any departures
therefrom and the actual as-built locations, materials, grades and
other particulars thereof. Work shall not be considered completed
and performance guaranties shall not be released until such
certified as-built plans have been received and the Board
determines that any departures from the approved plans and these
rules and regulations are minor and nonsubstantive or necessary
and require no alterations.
(4)
Upon the approval of the definitive plan but in any event prior to
the release of security or covenant, the applicant or the applicant's
successor-in-title to the land shown on the definitive plan shall
convey to the Town without cost the free and unencumbered right
to enter and use all streets and easements shown thereon,
including the right to install, repair, replace, operate and forever
maintain the streets and the surface and subsurface utilities
therein. Notwithstanding the above, it shall be the responsibility of
the applicant and the applicant's successors-in-title to maintain all
streets and utilities in a subdivision in a good operating condition
until such time as they are formally accepted by the Town, and not
to allow any abuse or damage which could interfere with the use of
streets and utilities.
(5)
§ 244-11 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-11
1:416
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 244-12. General requirements.
Design criteria.
All subdivisions shall adhere to the principles of correct land use,
sound planning, and good engineering, and shall meet the
requirements of public safety, including reasonable precautions
against possible natural disasters, traffic safety and convenience,
adequate water supply, stormwater drainage and protection
against flooding, and sanitary sewage disposal and be designed
with due regard to the rights, health and welfare of the residents
of the Town, including the future residents of such subdivisions.
(1)
All subdivisions shall be designed and improvements made by the
developer shall accomplish the following:
Reduce, to the extent reasonably possible:
[1] Volume of cut and fill.
Area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed;
especially if within 200 feet of a river, pond or stream or
having a slope of more than 15%.
[2]
[3] Number of mature trees removed.
[4] Extent of waterways altered or relocated.
Visual prominence of man-made elements not necessary
for safety or orientation.
[5]
[6] Erosion and siltation.
[7] Flood damage.
[8] Number of driveways exiting onto existing streets.
Disturbance of important wildlife habitats, outstanding
botanical features, and scenic or historic environs.
[9]
(a)
Increase, to the extent reasonably possible:
Vehicular use of collector streets to avoid traffic on streets
providing house frontages.
[1]
[2] Visual prominence of natural features of the landscape.
[3] Legal and physical protection of views from public ways.
[4] Street layout facilitating south orientation of houses.
[5] Use of curvilinear street patterns.
(b)
(2)
A.
§ 244-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-12
1:417
§ 244-13. Streets.
Adherence to plans. All subdivisions shall be laid out so as to conform to
the Master or General Plan for the Town or any part thereof adopted by
the Planning Board, and to the requirements of the Planning Board and
the rules and specifications of other boards and officials of the Town
acting within their jurisdiction. Where such action is deemed by the
Board to be in the public interest and in consideration of alternative
improvements, the Planning Board may waive the specific requirements
of these rules and regulations and of plans adopted by the Board.
B.
Subdivision costs. All expenses for advertising, engineering and design,
plans, hearings, reviews, acquisition of necessary rights, construction
and other improvements within the subdivision, recording and filing of
plans and other documents, and all other expenses in connection with
or for a subdivision shall be borne by the applicant.
C.
Preservation of Town character. It is a policy of the Town and a major
objective of the Board to preserve to the maximum extent feasible the
open, rural character of the Town and its significant natural features
and to minimize removal of healthy trees and stone walls, excessive
grading and destruction of natural vegetated surfaces.
D.
Layout, location and alignment.
All proposed and existing streets in a subdivision shall be designed
and laid out so that they will provide, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, for public safety and a convenient and attractive layout.
(1)
All proposed and existing streets in a subdivision shall be classified
by the Planning Board according to their function and the traffic
they will be expected to carry (see § 244-2, Definitions) and the
design, alignment and construction of all subdivision streets shall
be in accordance with these rules and regulations.
(2)
All streets shall be designed and constructed to the end of the
layout or to the boundaries of the subdivision, so as to provide a
continuous, connecting network with other existing and proposed
streets. Where an existing street ends within 250 feet of the
subdivision border, and a connection is necessary for the safety and
convenience of traffic, the Board may require that a subdivision
street be extended to connect to such existing street. Reserve
strips preventing access to a street from the adjacent property
shall not be permitted, except where, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, such reserve strip is in the public interest.
(3)
Dead-end streets shall not exceed the lesser of 1,000 feet from the
side line of the intersecting street to the street side line at the end
of the turnaround, measured along the center line of the street
extended, or the minimum length necessary to accommodate 12
lots with the minimum permitted frontage along both sides of such
(4)
A.
§ 244-12 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-13
1:418
street. This limitation shall apply to any subdivision with a single
street exit, whether terminating in a turnaround or involving loops
or branching side streets, except that only 1/2 the length of any
loop shall be included in calculating the length of a dead-end street.
Dead-end and horseshoe-shaped streets are appropriate where a
through street connection is not required.
Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet between
two streets joining the third street from the opposite sides shall be
avoided.
(5)
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles, but in no instance at an angle of less than 60° for a
distance of at least 100 feet from the intersection of center lines.
(6)
Where the street grade exceeds 4% (four feet vertically per 100
feet horizontally), a leveling area of not more than two-percent
grade shall be provided for a distance of 75 feet from the side line
of the intersecting street right-of-way.
(7)
Changes in grade shall be by means of vertical curves such as to
allow an adequate sight distance.
(8)
Residential streets defined as minor, local and minor collector shall
conform to the topography of the land and avoid straight segments
of more than 400 feet which encourage high speeds and detract
from the appearance of residential areas.
(9)
With the exception of locations expected to have traffic lights
installed, T-intersections shall be used in preference to four-way
intersections. Intersections involving more than four approach
ways will only be approved when no reasonable alternative is
possible.
(10)
Dead-end streets shall be designed with a circular turnaround with
a pavement radius of at least 50 feet. Other turnaround designs
capable of accommodating a vehicle with a fifty-foot turning radius
may be allowed by the Board.
(11)
Dead-end streets longer than otherwise permitted may be
approved where access and egress are provided by means of two
parallel twenty-foot-wide pavements separated by a median at least
10 feet wide.70
(12)
Curb cuts.
Curb cuts for driveways shall be avoided and kept to a minimum
along arterial and major collector streets. Curb cuts and utility
connections in state highways require approval of the
(1)
B.
70.Editor's Note: Original Subsection 4.2.2. Design Standards for Various Street
Classifications, which originally followed this subsection, is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 244-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-13
1:419
§ 244-14. Open space.
Before approval of a plan, the Planning Board may require either of the
following:
§ 244-15. Easements.
Massachusetts Department of Public Works;71 opening a Town way
requires the approval of the Superintendent of Highways and may
require the posting of a bond to guarantee restoration.
Curb cuts for driveways shall be at least 10 feet wide and shall have
three feet radius flare at the pavement. Driveway roundings shall
be provided with the same type of curbing as the pavement at that
location.
(2)
No driveway openings shall be located within 65 feet of the
intersection of the center lines of intersecting streets.
(3)
Between the side line of the street right-of-way and the edge of the
pavement or gutter line, driveway grades shall be not less than 1%,
nor more than 8%.
(4)
The plan to show a park or parks, suitably located in the Board's
opinion for playground or recreation purposes or to provide light and
air. The Planning Board may require by appropriate endorsement on
the plan that no building be erected upon such park or parks without
its approval for a period of three years. Each area reserved for such
purposes shall be of suitable size, dimension, topography and natural
character. The Board may require that the areas so reserved shall be
located so as to be used in conjunction with similar areas of adjoining
or potential subdivisions and to serve adequately all parts of the
subdivision, as approved by the Planning Board. Unless otherwise
specified by the Board, the total area to be reserved for park and
playground purposes shall be not less than 10% of the gross area of the
subdivision. The land so reserved shall not be a wetland and shall not be
stripped or altered, except as may be approved by the Board to ensure
suitability for the purposes intended.
A.
Certain portions of each lot, collectively equal to no less than 10% of
the gross area of the subdivision, shall be set aside under covenant,
not to be developed and to remain as open space in its natural state in
perpetuity.
B.
Where utilities cross lots or are centered on rear or side lot lines,
easements shall be provided of a width of at least 30 feet.
A.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage-way,
channel or stream, the Planning Board may require a stormwater
easement or drainage right-of-way of at least 30 feet and proper side
B.
71.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 244-13 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-15
1:420
§ 244-16. Drainage.
slope to conform substantially to the lines of such watercourse,
drainageway, channel or stream and to provide for construction or
other necessary purposes.
Easements shall be provided if required by the Planning Board, and
shall be at least 30 feet wide.
C.
Lot drainage. Lots shall be prepared and graded in such a manner in
accordance with the approved topographic plans that the development
of one lot shall not interfere with the proper drainage of other lots
and will not cause ponding or flooding. Earthwork and paving shall
be kept to a minimum in order to preserve the natural precipitation
retention capacity of the soil and reduce impervious areas. If provision
is necessary to carry drainage to or across a lot, an easement of at least
30 feet and proper side slope shall be provided. The applicant shall
furnish evidence that adequate provision has been made for the proper
drainage of surface and underground waters from such lot or lots.
A.
Drainage system.
The definitive plan shall show surface and subsurface storm drains,
culverts, swales and related drainage structures sufficient to
adequately drain snowmelt, other precipitation and flooding runoff
from lots and streets. Drainage capacity shall be designed for
a fifty-year flood event, except that culverts for watercourses
crossing streets shall be designed for a one-hundred-year flood
event, and the Planning Board may require design for one-hundredyear
frequency where the high damage potential or other
circumstances warrant it. The rational formula or the SCS Modified
Soil Complex Method shall be used, and the value of the coefficient
of imperviousness shall vary according to terrain, but shall not be
less than 0.30. Hydraulic design computations shall be submitted
to the Board at its request. No net increase in runoff from the site
is allowed.
(1)
The main street drain and the manholes centered thereon shall be
located five feet from the center line of pavement; drain manholes
and catch basins shall have inside diameter of four feet, and the
catch basins shall have a two-and-one-half-foot deep sump below
the outlet pipe invert and shall be centered one foot into the
street from the curb or gutter line. The minimum pipe diameter
shall be 12 inches and the grade shall be such as to provide a
minimum velocity of two feet per second when flowing full and
without surcharge. The distance between catch basins shall be no
greater than 400 feet in order to provide proper drainage. Where
water needs to be channeled or piped to or across land of others
in a manner resulting in a change in intensity, subdivision approval
will be predicated on the applicant first obtaining the necessary
easement rights which later shall be recorded.
(2)
B.
§ 244-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-17
1:421
§ 244-17. Water supply and fire hydrants.
Adequate water supply shall be assured for each lot in a subdivision. If
any boundary of a subdivision is within 1,000 feet of a municipal public
water system, then each lot in that subdivision shall be connected to that
water system. If said distance is greater than 1,000 feet then a separate onlot
well of adequate yield and quality may be provided. The definitive plan
shall indicate the location of any public water system and fire hydrants with
2,000 feet of the subdivision. Extensions of the Town water system shall
conform to the requirements of the Water Department. Water mains shall be
located five feet in from the side line of the street right-of-way and five feet
deep, and shall have a minimum inside diameter of eight inches. Whenever
possible the water mains shall form a loop. Fire hydrants shall be located
at least 18 inches into the grass plot from the curb or gutter line and shall
be spaced no more than 500 feet apart, unless the Fire Chief approves in
writing a different spacing. Hydrants shall be of a style approved by the Fire
Chief.
§ 244-18. Wiring and fire alarm systems.
Electric, telephone, cable television, fire alarm and other conduits and
wiring shall be installed underground in accordance with the requirements
of the source company or authority, unless the Board waives this
requirement due to soil conditions or other reasons.
§ 244-17 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-18
1:422
ARTICLE V
Required Improvements; Construction Standards
§ 244-19. General requirements.
§ 244-20. Streets and roadways.
No street or way through private property shall be accepted by the
Town unless the same be previously constructed and completed in
accordance with the standard cross section (See Appendix N)72 and the
approved street layout plan, profile and these specifications.
A.
Unless otherwise specified, all the work and the materials used in
the work to be done shall conform to the requirements of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Department of Public Works,73
Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, hereinafter referred
to as the "standard specifications," as amended and the special
provisions included below.
B.
References in the following specifications, unless otherwise stated, are
to the aforesaid Standard Specifications. In case of conflict between
these specifications or special provisions and the aforesaid standard
specifications, amendments or addenda, these specifications and
special provisions shall take precedence and shall govern.
C.
To facilitate reference, some paragraphs in these specifications show
the paragraph numbers of the applicable sections of the standard
specifications.
D.
Wherever in the standard specifications or other contractual
documents, the following terms or pronouns in place of them, are used,
the intent and meaning shall be interpreted by substitution as follows:
COMMONWEALTH — The Town of Southborough.
DEPARTMENT — Highway Superintendent, Town of Southborough.
ENGINEER — The Highway Superintendent of the Town of
Southborough, acting directly or through an authorized representative,
such representative acting within the scope of the particular duties
entrusted to him.
E.
The extent of work required shall be shown upon approved plans, and
shall be in compliance with the standard cross section. Stakes shall be
set which will indicate the exact amount of cut or fill.
F.
As each construction operation is completed, it shall be approved by
the proper Town authority prior to starting work on the succeeding
operation.
G.
72.Editor's Note: Appendix N is on file in the Town offices.
73.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 244-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-20
1:423
Clearing. The entire area to be paved in each street or sidewalk shall
be cleared of all stumps, brush, roots, boulders, loam, peat, mulch,
quicksand and other spongy or undesirable material to whatever depth
it occurs. All spongy, organic or unstable material shall also be removed
at the sides of the roadbed to the point where slopes of three feet
horizontal to two feet vertical from the edges of pavement intersect
hard bottom, so as to ensure lateral support of the roadway. No rocks
over three inches in diameter shall be retained or placed within 18
inches of the street surface. This work shall be inspected and approved
as hereinafter described, before continuation of the project. (Standard
Specifications 101)
A.
Rough grading. The entire length and width of the vehicular roadway
shall be brought to a firm subgrade 15 inches below the finished grade,
and the entire length and width of all required sidewalks shall be
brought to a firm subgrade nine inches below the finished grade. All
fill or ordinary borrow for the subgrade shall consist of firm bearing
material acceptable to the Superintendent of Highways and shall
contain no loam or organic matter. This work shall be inspected and
approved, as hereinafter described, before continuation of the project.
(Standard Specifications 170 and 101)
B.
Fill. When in the opinion of the Engineer suitable material is not
available within the limits of the highway location to form the subgrade
or subbase, the contractor shall obtain such additional material from
other sources in accordance with this section and as may be approved
by the Highway Superintendent. (Standard Specifications 150)
C.
Utilities.
All drain, sewer, gas and water pipes, underground utilities and
other structures shall be installed upon the completion of roadway
subgrade and before the placing of the subbase, gravel base
course, sidewalks or pavement. (Standard Specifications 200)
(1)
All subsurface utility piping shall be installed to true grade on
firm bed free of rocks, soft or unstable material, and shall be
backfilled, puddled and tamped only upon inspection and approval
of installation in the open trench. Water pipes shall be flushed,
chlorinated and tested prior to connection to Town system. No
connection will be permitted if evidence of leakage, excessive
infiltration or contamination exists. All water main construction
shall conform to all specifications of the Town of Southborough's
Water Commissioners.
(2)
D.
Finish grading and paving. All subgrades of vehicular roadways shall
be covered with well-compacted gravel to within 3 1/2 inches below
the finish grade shown on the approved profile with a transverse pitch
from the center line down toward the edges of roadway of 3/8 inches
per foot. Bituminous concrete pavement shall be applied in two courses
[three in arterial streets] as specified in Table 4.2.2. Bituminous
E.
§ 244-20 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-20
1:424
§ 244-21. Sidewalks.
§ 244-22. Curbs and berms.
concrete shall be Type I-1 or equivalent, as specified in the Standard
Specifications for Highways, Bridges and Waterways of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Works.74 The
concrete shall be installed to the approved finish grade and compacted
by means of a roller with a pressure of not less than 240 pounds
per square inch. Where paved bituminous berms are required, paved
surface shall extend 12 inches beyond the edge of roadway with a 3/8
inch minimum pitch toward the gutter, as shown on the standard street
cross section.
Roadside grading. Embankments outside the right-of-way shall be
evenly graded and pitched at a slope of not greater than two horizontal
to one vertical in fill. Where cuts are made in ledge, other slopes may
be determined with the approval of the Board. Whenever embankments
are built in such a way as to require approval by the Planning Board,
the developer must furnish to the Town duly recorded access easements
free of encumbrances for maintenance of the slopes, terraces or
retaining walls. All such slopes shall be grassed in accordance with
the specifications for the area between the roadway and sidewalk or
roadway and boundary of the right-of-way. (Standard Specifications
685)
F.
Sidewalks shall be constructed within the subdivision and, when the
Board determines it is necessary, outside the subdivision to connect
to the existing sidewalks. The sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with the standard street cross section as shown on the
approved plans for the full length of the street layout on one or both
sides, as required by the Board, except that in turnarounds the sidewalk
shall terminate at the last driveway entrance.
A.
The sidewalks shall be constructed of Type I-1 bituminous concrete in
two courses one and 1 1/2 inches thick each on a base of six inches of
well-compacted gravel to the required grade. Where driveways cross
paved sidewalks, the elevation of driveway shall conform to the
elevation and grade of the paved sidewalk and slope down to meet the
gutter grade at the roadway for unobstructed drainage.
B.
Bituminous wheelchair ramps between the sidewalk and the roadway
shall be required at intersections next to the corner rounding curb on
major residential and all commercial collector streets. Under unusual
circumstance the Board may specify a location for a pedestrian walk
or path other than adjacent to the street right-of-way where necessary
to preserve a valuable historical or environmental asset or to facilitate
an easier and more direct pedestrian access. (Standard Specifications
700)
C.
74.Editor's Note: Now the Department of Transportation.
§ 244-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-22
1:425
§ 244-23. Grass plots.
The entire area between the gutter or curb and the side line of street rightof-
way on each side not occupied by a sidewalk shall be graded to within
six inches of the finished grade, shall have six-inch depth of well-compacted
loam installed, graded to slope down not less than 3/8 inch per foot toward
the gutter or curb, and shall be seeded with a high-quality grass seed. The
area shall be maintained and reseeded if necessary. Utility and light poles
shall be placed in the grass plot, centered three feet away from the gutter
or curb face, except that no poles shall be located less than 30 feet from the
intersection of tangents of street side lines at corner roundings.
§ 244-24. Shade trees.
Straight or radial granite curbing. Type VO or VB (see Standard
Specifications) with a seven-inch initial reveal of exposed face above
gutter shall be installed at street corner roundings and roadway curves
as specified in the Table located at the end of these regulations, at all
catch basin curb inlets, and where the roadway grade exceeds 6%, as
specified in said Table.
A.
Rolled bituminous curbing or Cape Cod berm shall be installed where
required to minimize erosion and damage to grass plots: see the table
located at the end of these regulations. Bituminous curbing shall extend
12 inches beyond the roadway and shall slope down toward the gutter
three inches in 12 inches. Other cross-sectional shapes may be
authorized by the Board or the Superintendent of Highways.
B.
Unpaved areas within the right-of-way which have been stripped by
construction shall be graded to meet the adjoining property with a
slope of not more than one-foot vertical to two feet horizontal. These
areas shall be covered with at least six inches of good quality topsoil
and thickly seeded with perennial grasses or other planting materials
approved by the Board.
A.
Suitable existing trees within the right-of-way approved by the Tree
Warden, if larger than four inches caliper and located outside the
shoulders, shall be preserved. Trees to be retained shall not have grade
changes over their root areas more than 12 inches. Where suitable
trees do not exist at intervals of less than 40 feet on each side of the
street, they shall be provided by the developer.
B.
Trees to be planted shall be well-branched, nursery-grown stock at
least two inches trunk diameter at four feet above ground, and shall
be free of injury, harmful insects and diseases. Trees shall be planted
in 1/2 cubic yards of loam, guy wired and wrapped as necessary for
protection. They shall be long-lived species adapted to the local
environment and approved by the Tree Warden.
C.
§ 244-22 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-24
1:426
§ 244-25. Street signs.
Coincident with the beginning of construction of any subdivision street,
street name signs shall be erected at the entrances thereto from existing
streets using dark letters four inches tall on white background and with
the bottom of the sign at least eight feet above ground. Such signs shall
be replaced by permanent street name signs of a type generally in use in
Southborough before release of performance guaranty is requested.
§ 244-26. Monuments.
Granite bounds or reinforced concrete at least three feet long and six inches
square in cross section shall be set under the supervision of a registered
land surveyor with the top flush with the ground and with a drill hole or
lead plug denoting the point at intersection of subdivision boundaries with
the right-of-way lines of existing and new streets and at all angle points
and points of curvature or tangency in subdivision street right-of-way lines.
Reinforced concrete bounds shall be required by the Planning Board at the
corner points of the boundaries of the subdivision and at corners and the
changes in direction of the boundaries of each lot.
§ 244-27. Special construction details.
If any tree dies or has to be removed due to construction, it shall be
replaced, so that at least three shade trees per lot are provided at the
time of release of the performance guaranty or covenant.
D.
Temporary turnarounds. If a subdivision street is constructed in stages
and temporarily does not extend to another street or end in a
permanent turnaround, a temporary turnaround of a design acceptable
to the Board and capable of accommodating a vehicle of 50 feet turning
radius shall be installed at the end of the constructed portion of street.
Parts of such temporary turnaround located outside the street rightof-
way need not have bituminous pavement, but shall have wellcompacted
waterbound macadam suitable for all weather use. Public
travel easements in such temporary turnarounds shall lapse when the
street is constructed to another street or turnaround.
A.
Retaining walls. Field masonry retaining walls shall be constructed
at street right-of-way line whenever the slope of land adjacent to the
street would be too steep for the stability of soil [generally in excess
of one-foot vertical to two feet horizontal] or would require grading for
more than 30 feet back to meet the existing grade at a slope of one-totwo.
Retaining walls shall be bound with cement concrete, be designed
according to good engineering practice and provided with drainage
weep holes as may be necessary.
B.
Guardrails. At the termination of street pavement at a subdivision
boundary or at a lot line or where the land adjacent to street rightof-
way falls off steeper than one-foot vertical in three feet horizontally,
C.
§ 244-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-27
1:427
four-foot-high wooden guardrails of a design acceptable to the Board
and the Superintendent of Highways shall be required.
Culverts. Culverts under streets may be of reinforced concrete,
corrugated aluminum, or other suitable material and may be round,
elliptical or rectangular in cross section. Culverts of 18 inches or
greater inside diameter shall be provided with gratings at both ends for
safety. Culverts of 24 inches or greater inside diameter shall normally
require wing-walls at exits to prevent erosion or weakening of
embankments. If the top of a culvert is within 30 inches of street
surface, a concrete saddle may be required to reduce the danger of
crushing. The design of culverts and of approaches and downstream
channels shall adhere to good engineering practice and may include
provisions to minimize damage from flooding.
D.
§ 244-27 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-27
1:428
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 244-28. Variances and waivers.
Strict compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations may
be waived, when, in the judgment of the Planning Board, such action is in
the public interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law.
§ 244-29. Applicability of statute.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is made
to MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive, as amended.
§ 244-30. Appeals authority.
As provided for by MGL c. 41, §§ 81Z and 81AA, the Zoning Board of
Appeals of the Town of Southborough shall act as Subdivision Board of
Appeals and may authorize the issuance of building permits for lots where
the denial of such permit under the provisions of the Subdivision Control
Law would entail unnecessary hardship or difficulty and where the building
need not be related to an approved or constructed way.
§ 244-31. Building permits.
No building shall be erected in a subdivision unless the lot on which it
is to be located has been first released by a written vote of the Planning
Board evidenced by Form K, Certificate of Performance — Covenant,75 or by
a surety agreement secured by bond, savings passbook or other negotiable
securities, or by withholding construction mortgage money and
enumerating the lots released in consideration of such agreement. The
Building Inspector shall issue no building permit for the erection or location
of a building on a lot until he is first satisfied that the lot is not in a
subdivision or that such lot has been released for building as specified
above, and that any restrictions or conditions limiting the right to erect and
maintain buildings on said lot have been satisfied or waived by the Planning
Board. In the event that more than one principal building is to be erected or
placed on a lot, whether or not within a subdivision, the Building Inspector
shall first verify that consent has been obtained from the Planning Board,
as provided by Article II of these rules and regulations and by MGL c. 41,
§ 81-4.
§ 244-32. Inspections.
Inspections and payment therefore shall be arranged by the developer
with the proper Town official for that purpose prior to the construction
of streets and the installation of utilities and during construction as
specified herein at each significant construction stage.
A.
75.Editor's Note: Form K is on file in the Town offices.
§ 244-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-32
1:429
Inspection shall be requested in writing at least 48 hours in advance of
each inspection to the proper Town official and a copy of each request
shall be sent to the Planning Board.
B.
Inspection shall be for each of the following operations or construction
phases:
(1) Excavation and removal of unsuitable material.
(2) Laying of water mains and appurtenances.
(3) Laying of gas mains and appurtenances.
Installation of surface and subsurface drainage systems and related
structures, appurtenances and channels.
(4)
(5) Fill with approved material.
(6) Compacting and rolling.
Installation of electric and other lines or conduits and related
equipment, including telephone, cable television and fire alarm
conduits.
(7)
Completion of the pavement in the required number of courses and
true to grade.
(8)
(9) Placing of curbs.
(10)Construction of sidewalks.
Installation and finish grading of loam and seeding of grass plots
and roadside slopes.
(11)
(12)Satisfactory maintenance or planting of shade trees.
(13) Installation of monuments.
(14) Installation of hydrants.
C.
The Planning Board may establish the order of the required inspection
and require satisfactory completion of one step before the subdivider
proceeds to the next. The Board may require tests to be done by
the subdivider as a condition for approval when in the opinion of the
Planning Board it is advisable. Failure to have work inspected before it
is covered up may necessitate excavation or opening of trenches or may
lead to rejection of work.
D.
The proper Town official shall indicate on Form L, Inspection Form
(Appendix L),76 provided by the Planning Board, the date of inspection
and the approval and shall file such form with Planning Board.
E.
76.Editor's Note: Appendix L is on file in the Town offices.
§ 244-32 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 244-33
1:430
§ 244-33. Maintenance of improvements.
For the purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the
Town's inhabitants; for the provision of adequate access to all of the lots
in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for
reducing the danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles:
for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies;
under the authority of MGL c. 41, § 87-M,77 as amended, the applicant
and his successors-in-title to the subdivision or lots therein shall provide
for the proper maintenance and repair of the construction required by
the definitive plan and the improvements under this Section of the rules
and regulations during the construction and after the completion of the
construction and improvements until the Town votes to accept such
construction and improvements. Such maintenance shall also include snow
removal beginning from the time of occupancy of an individual or tenant
other than the developer.
§ 244-34. Compliance with National Flood Insurance Program.
All definitive plans must be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage, provide that all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electric and water systems, shall be located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage, provide adequate drainage so as to
reduce exposure to flood hazards and comply with other requirements of
the National Flood Insurance Act, as amended from time to time, to the
extent in force and applicable.
§ 244-35. Severability.
The provisions of these rules and regulations shall be severable, and if any
provision or the application thereof is found to be invalid, this shall not
affect the validity of any other application or provision thereof.
77.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81M.
§ 244-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-35
1:431
Chapter 249
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 174.
§ 249-1. Authority; effective date; amendments.
§ 249-2. Officers and duties.
The following rules and regulations are adopted by the Town of
Southborough (the "Town ") Zoning Board of Appeals (the "Board")
under the authority of, and in compliance with, the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts (the "General Laws"), Chapter 40A,
§ 12, and Chapter 174, Article VI, § 174-25 of the Town Zoning Code.
A.
These rules and regulations shall be filed with the Town Clerk, and
after such filing are effective as of February 21, 2017. These rules and
regulations supersede any and all previous regulations of the Board.
B.
These rules and regulations may be amended at any time by a vote
of four of the five then-sitting members of the Board. Any such
amendments shall be filed with the Town Clerk in the same manner in
which these rules and regulations were so filed and will be effective as
of such filing date (or other later date as specified as part of such filing).
C.
Chairman: A Chairman shall be elected annually no later than June 30
by majority vote of the Full Members of the Board and will serve for a
twelve-month term from July 1 through the subsequent June 30. Should
a new Chairman not be elected by June 30 of a particular year, the thencurrent
Chairman shall continue to serve as Chairman until a successor
is elected. The Chairman shall be responsible for the overall conduct of
the Board's activities, including but not limited to:
(1) Calling meetings;
(2) Presiding at meetings and regulating their conduct;
Appointing subcommittees, to the extent permissible pursuant to
applicable law, as he/she deems necessary, to review Board
administrative issues and make recommendations to the Board for
consideration and approval; and
(3)
Authorizing purchase orders for expenditures by the Board.
The Chairman may, at his/her discretion, designate another Board
member to fulfill certain of these duties.
(4)
A.
§ 244-35 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § 249-2
1:432
§ 249-3. Meeetings, hearings and decisions.
The Board shall conduct its affairs, meetings and hearings and render its
decisions according to the requirements of the Town Zoning Bylaw (the
"Bylaw"), the Town Code (the "Town Code") and the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts (the "General Laws"), as applicable.
§ 249-4. Petitions and appeals.
Appendix
Chapter A252
GENERAL LAWS AND SPECIAL ACTS
§ A252-1. General Laws.
The following is a list of General Laws and Acts of the Legislature accepted
by the Town of Southborough:
Acting Chairman: If the Chairman is absent from a meeting or unable to
fulfill his/her duties for a period of time, he/she may appoint an Acting
Chairman to fulfill the Chairman's duties for a particular meeting or for
a specified period of time. If the Chairman has not appointed an Acting
Chairman to serve during such absence, the senior member present, in
point of service, shall be Acting Chairman during such absence.
B.
Process for petitions and appeals. The Board's process for considering
and disposing of petitions and appeals shall be according to the
requirements of the By-Law, the Town Code and the General Laws, as
applicable. The Board may establish related administrative processes
not inconsistent with the By-Law, the Town Code and the General
Laws as it deems necessary, and such administrative processes may be
modified from time to time by a vote of four of the five then-sitting
members of the Board.
A.
Forms and Instructions for Petitions and Appeals
All petitions and appeals to the Board shall be presented on forms
to be supplied by the Board, according to the instructions provided
with these forms. Such forms and instructions may be modified
from time to time as the Board deems necessary, by a vote of four
of the five then-sitting members of the Board.
(1)
If there is any conflict between these rules and regulations and
the Bylaw, the Town Code and the General Laws pertaining to
a zoning matter, then the order of precedence for resolution of
such conflict shall be first, the General Laws, then second, the
Town Code (including the Bylaw) and then third, these rules and
regulations.
(2)
B.
§ 249-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A252-1
1:433
Action Taken Chapter or Act Subject
3-23-1891 Ch. 386, Acts of 1890 Ballots
3-1-1909 Ch. 209, Acts of 1908 Forest fires
11-5-1912 Ch. 503, Acts of 1912 Pensioning laborers
11-4-1913 Ch. 807, Acts of 1913 Workmens' compensation
11-3-1914 Ch. 217, Acts of 1914 Vacations for laborers
11-3-1914 Ch. 634, Acts of 1911 Retirement system
11-3-1914 Ch. 790, Acts of 1914 Party enrollment
11-4-1914 Ch. 688, Acts of 1914 Saturday half holiday
3-1-1915 Ch. 807, Acts of 1913 Workmens' compensation
11-4-1919 Ch. 311G, Acts of 1919 Continuation of schools
8-6-1921 Ch. 591, §§ 27, 28, 29,
Acts of 1920
Establish Fire Department
3-6-1922 MGL c. 54, § 6 Precincts
10-8-1923 Ch. 474, Acts of 1923 Fayville Fire/Water District
11-19-1926 Ch. 371, Acts of 1926 Railroad securities
4-18-1930 Ch. 133, Acts of 1930 Water supply
3-14-1938 MGL c. 54 Absentee voting
11-5-1946 Ch. 166, Acts of 1946 Equal pay for teachers
3-14-1955 MGL c. 41, § 97A Establish Police Department
and Chief of Police
3-14-1960 MGL c. 139 §§ 1-3 Burned/dangerous bridges
5-25-1960 MGL c. 40, § 8C Conservation Commission
3-11-1963 MGL c. 40, § 8A Industrial Development
Commission
3-12-1963 Ch. 782, Acts of 1962 Accelerated Highway Program
3-8-1965 MGL c. 40, § 5B Establish Stabilization Fund
3-15-1965 MGL c. 32B Contributory group insurance
3-19-1969, Art.
47
MGL c. 40, § 8D Establishment of Historical
Commission
3-20-1972 Ch. 486, Acts of 1971 Beano
5-12-1975 MGL c. 40D Industrial Development
Financing Authority
9-3-1975 Ch. 586, Acts of 1975;
MGL c. 41, § 41B
Town Treasurer/direct deposit
10-21-1977 Ch 665, Acts of 1977 Establish recreation/park
service
4-13-1978 MGL c. 40, § 8E Establish Youth Commission
§ A252-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § A252-1
1:434
Action Taken Chapter or Act Subject
4-13-1980 MGL c. 32B, § 10A Group dental insurance
4-14-1980 MGL c. 32B, § 7A Increase Town's share of the
cost for municipal employees
Blue Cross/Blue Shield
insurance from 50% to 75%
5-12-1980 MGL c. 258, § 13 Indemnification of municipal
officers
4-13-1981, Art.
10
Ch. 217, Acts of 1980;
MGL c. 40, § 4G
Bidding on public contracts
4-13-1981 MGL c. 71, § 71E Adult education program
7-21-1981 Ch. 351, § 83, Acts of
1981
License amusement devices
12-7-1981 Ch. 605, Acts of 1981 Parking regulations
12-23-1981 MGL c. 90, § 20A Parking regulations
1-18-1982 Ch. 809, Acts of 1981 Assistant Electrical Inspector
4-23-1982 Ch. 43, Acts of 1982;
MGL c. 71. § 71F
Tuition for nonresident
students
6-2-1982 MGL c. 148, § 26C Heat detector
6-2-1982 MGL c. 148, § 26E Heat detectors in private
homes
12-15-1982 Ch. 545, Acts of 1982;
MGL c. 148, § 26G
Automatic sprinklers
4-9-1984 MGL c. 59 § 5 Senior citizen homeowners tax
exemption, $175
4-9-1984 MGL c. 41B § 5 Senior citizen homeowners tax
abatement, $500
4-9-1984 MGL c. 37A, § 5 Blind homeowners tax
abatement, $500
5-13-1985 MGL c. 32, § 9A Payment by Town of one-half
the premium costs for retired
employees for insurance
1-27-1986, Art. 7 MGL, c. 64G, § 3A Local occupancy excise 4%,
effective 4-1-1986
4-14-1986 MGL c. 41, § 21A Removal of Chief of Police or
head of Municipal Police
Department
4-13-1987 MGL c. 40 § 4H Purchase of equipment from
other government agencies
4-13-1987, Art.
34
Ch. 194, Acts of 1986 Scholarship fund
§ A252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A252-1
1:435
Action Taken Chapter or Act Subject
4-13-1987, Art.
37
Ch. 265, Acts of 1986;
MGL c. 148, § 26H
Automatic sprinklers in
boardinghouses
4-13-1987, Art.
48
Ch. 73, § 1, Clause 17D,
Acts of 1986; MGL c.
59, § 5, Clause 17D
Broader tax exemptions for
surviving spouse, aged person
or minor
4-13-1987, Art.
49
Ch. 73, § 3, Clause
forty-first C, Acts of
1986; MGL c. 59, § 5
Property tax for those 70
years and over
4-13-1987, Art.
50
Ch. 640, Acts of 1985;
MGL c. 40 § 57
License denial for failure to
pay taxes or charges
4-11-1988, Art. 7 MGL c. 62F, § 4 Establish Land Bank and
Housing Fund
4-12-1988, Art.
39
MGL c. 140, § 147
amended by Ch. 308,
Acts of 1985
Town of Southborough
assumes dog licensing
responsibility
4-24-1990, Art.
24
Ch. 642, Acts of 1989;
MGL c. 148, § 26I
Automatic sprinklers in new
construction
4-30-1990, Art.
45
MGL c. 32, § 22D Retirement system funding
schedule
4-23-1990, Art.
47
Ch. 653, § 41, Acts of
1989; MGL c. 59, § 57c
Quarterly tax bills
4-8-1991 Ch. 291, Acts of 1990 Enhanced 911 service
4-8-1991 Ch. 245, Acts of 1988 Spending up to $100,000
4-8-1991 Ch. 213, Acts of 1989 Penalize those who abandon
motor vehicles
4-8-1991 MGL c. 161B, § 3 Join Worcester Regional
Transit Authority for elderly
and handicapped
4-13-1992, Art. 9 Ch. 275, § 1, 2, Acts of
1990; MGL c. 44,
§ 53E 1/2
Establish certain revolving
funds for Sealer of Weights
and Measures, plumbing and
wiring
4-14-1992 MGL c. 161B, § 3 Join Worcester Regional
Transit Authority
4-14-1992 MGL c. 33 § 59 Continuation of pay to
employees in armed forces
4-14-1992 Ch. 138, § 123, Acts of
1991; MGL c. 40, § 22F
Setting municipal fees and
charges
4-11-1994, Art.
38
Ch. 71, § 83, Acts of
1993
Teachers' early retirement
incentive program
§ A252-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § A252-1
1:436
Action Taken Chapter or Act Subject
4-10-1995 MGL c. 40 § 8G Mutual aid for Police
Departments
4-8-1996, Art. 70 MGL c. 32B, § 9D 1\2 Group insurance coverage for
surviving spouses of retirees
4-8-1996, Art. 71 MGL c. 32B, § 9D Additional group insurance
coverage for surviving spouses
of retirees
4-8-1996, Art. 72 MGL c. 32B § 9I Group insurance coverage for
employees on military leave or
active service
4-13-1998 MGL c. 40, § 13C Workers' Compensation claim
reserve fund
4-12-1999 MGL c. 41, § 108L Acceptance of the Quinn Bill
4-15-1999 Ch. 653, § 40, Acts of
1989
Assessment of new buildings
structures or physical
improvements
4-15-1999 MGL c. 59, § 5, Clause
18
Nonbinding resolution
guidelines for determining
hardship real estate tax
exemptions
4-9-2002 MGL c. 59, § 5, Clause
41A
Tax deferral for homeowners
65 years or older by amending
an applicant's gross receipts
from $20,000 to an amount
not to exceed $40,000
4-9-2002 MGL c. 59, § 5, Clause
17C 1/2
Increasing the exemption for
certain senior citizens and
surviving spouses and minors
in accordance with the annual
adjustment of the consumer
price index
10-21-2002 MGL c. 59, § 5, Clause
41C
Change the senior option
eligible age from 70 to 65
years and increasing the
income and asset limits and
the amount of exemption.
10-21-2002 MGL c. 59, § 5K Amending the assistance
under Senior Work Program
from $500 to $750, effective
for FY04
§ A252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A252-1
1:437
Action Taken Chapter or Act Subject
10-21-2002 MGL c. 60, § 3D Providing a place on municipal
tax bills for a voluntary
checkoff of not less than $1
for establishing a town aid for
the elderly and disabled
taxation fund, effective
7-1-2003
5-12-2003 MGL c. 44B, §§ 3 - 7 Community Preservation Act
3-23-2004 MGL c. 32B, § 16 Optional insurance for
services of health care
organizations
4-11-2005, Art. 3 Ch. 491, Acts of 2004;
MGL c. 44, § 55C
Affordable Housing Trust
Fund
4-11-2005, Art. 8 Ch. 137, §§ 1, 2, 3, Acts
of 2003
Military leaves of absence of
Town employees
4-11-2005 MGL c. 40, § 4A Authorizing municipality to
enter into an intermunicipal
joint purchasing agreement
for provision of technology
solutions and related
consulting and support
services
11-27-2006 MGL c. 39, § 23D Voting at adjudicatory
hearings of boards,
commissions and committees
11-27-2006 MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 Revolving fund account to pay
expenses of immunization and
emergency dispensing clinics
4-10-2007, Art.
38
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 Revolving fund account to pay
expenses of Recreation
Department
4-14-2008, Art. 8 MGL c. 40, § 3 Allowing Southborough School
District to keep monies
received from the rental of the
school space in Neary School
4-17-2008, Art.
49
MGL c. 82A, § 2 Vote to designate the Board of
Selectmen as the means by
which the Town shall
designate the board or officer
to issue permits for creating
trenches
4-17-2008, Art.
52
MGL c. 44, § 53D Authorizing Recreation
Revolving Account
§ A252-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § A252-1
1:438
Action Taken Chapter or Act Subject
4-14-2009, Art. 1 MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 Revolving fund account to
cover Public Safety and Public
Works departments’ costs
incurred by responding to
incidents involving hazardous
material
4-14-2009, Art. 6 MGL c. 71, § 14E(3) Approving amendment to the
Assabet Valley Regional
Vocational School District
Agreement
9-29-2009, Art. 2 MGL c. 59, § 5K Property tax liability reduced
for persons over age 60 in
exchange for volunteer
services
9-29-2009, Art. 3 MGL c. 32B, § 18A Requiring any future
Medicare-eligible retiree who
wishes to continue health care
benefits to be transferred to a
Medicare supplemental health
plan offered by the Town
9-29-2009, Art.
11
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 Revolving fund account for
Conservation Commission
local wetland filing fees
1-25-2011 MGL c. 48, § 59A Fire Department aid to other
municipalities and
jurisdictions
4-12-2011, Art.
22
MGL c. 64G, § 3A Local room occupancy excise
tax at rate of 6%
4-12-2011, Art.
23
MGL c. 138, § 33B Sale of alcoholic beverages on
Sundays beginning at 10:00
a.m.
4-12-2011, Art.
31
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 Revolving fund for
Department of Public Works
for 9-11 Field Maintenance
and usage and DCR annual fee
to a maximum of $50,000
4-8-2013, Art. 4 MGL c. 30, § 12(b) Authorize Board of Selectmen
and/or Superintendent of
Schools to enter into contracts
in excess of three years
§ A252-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A252-1
1:439
Action Taken Chapter or Act Subject
4-8-2013, Art. 12 MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 Revolving fund for Tobacco
Control Program to allow the
Board of Health to conduct
periodic compliance checks
with vendors to a maximum of
$4,000
4-8-2013, Art. 13 MGL c. 40, § 13D Reserve fund for Assabet
Regional Vocational School
District for compensated
absences
4-8-2013, Art. 22 MGL c. 32B, § 20 Other Post-Employment
Benefits Liability Trust Fund
4-16-2014, Art.
10
MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2 Revolving fund for technology
fee from permits for the
annual costs of municipal
licensing/permitting software
to a maximum of $40,000
4-12-2016, Art.
28
780 CMR 115.AA MA Board of Building
Regulations and Standards
Stretch Energy Code,
including future editions,
amendments or modifications
thereto, effective 1-1-2017
4-25-2017, Art.
38
MGL c. 53, § 9A Nomination papers for cities
or towns
§ A252-2. Special Acts.
The following is a chronological list of Special Acts and Resolves adopted in
General Court pertaining to the Town of Southborough:
Year Enacted Resolve or Chapter Subject
1968 Ch. 513 of the Acts of
1966
Formation of a Vocational
Regional School District
1976 Ch. 483 Combine and appoint Town
Treasurer and Tax Collector
1981 Ch. 16 Additional license for sale of
alcoholic beverages
1986 Ch. 479 Land on Framingham Road
and Marlboro Road from MDC
to town
1989 Ch. 638 Osgood T. Hadley Memorial
Bridge (Route 9)
§ A252-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § A252-2
1:440
Year Enacted Resolve or Chapter Subject
1991 Ch. 447 Establish a Department of
Public Works
1995 Ch. 10 Election of Regional School
Committee members
1996 Ch. 149 Parcel of land (Middle Road to
Cordaville Road) for cemetery
purposes
1996 Ch. 474, § 5 Robert R. Foley, Jr. Memorial
Bridge (Route 85)
2001 Ch. 38 Establishing boundary line
between Town of
Southborough and Town of
Westborough
2013 Ch. 134 Increasing the membership of
the Board of Selectmen
2013 Ch. 177 Authorizing the Administrator
to sign warrants
2014 Ch. 329 Additional license for sale of
alcoholic beverages
2014 Ch. 330 Additional license for sale of
alcoholic beverages
2016 Ch. 40 Additional license for sale of
alcoholic beverages
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Board of
Selectmen
3-23-2004 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 3 4-12-2004 Administration
amendment
Ch. 3
ATM, Art. 40 4-12-2004 False alarms Ch. 95
ATM, Art. 44 4-12-2004 Housing Opportunity
Partnership Committee
Ch. 6, Art. IV
§ A252-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:441
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 55 4-12-2004 Administration
amendment
Ch. 3
ATM, Art. 56 4-12-2004 Community Preservation
Committee
Ch. 9, Art. IV
ATM, Art. 45 4-12-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
Board of
Selectmen
8-31-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 207
Board of
Selectmen
7-20-2004 Cemetery amendment Ch. 68
STM, Art. 3 4-11-2005 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 8 4-11-2005 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 54 4-11-2005 Selectmen: transfer
station; violations and
fines
Ch. 36, Art. III
ATM, Art. 39 4-11-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 40 4-11-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 48 4-11-2005 Intermunicipal joint
purchasing agreement
See Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 42 4-10-2006 Zoning Map Ch. 174, footnote
only
ATM, Art. 43 4-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 44 4-10-2006 Earth removal Ch. 85
ATM, Art. 45 4-10-2006 Illicit discharge Ch. 225
ATM, Art. 46 4-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 47 4-10-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 53 4-10-2006 Commissioners of Trust
Funds
Ch. 9, Art. V
STM, Art. 9 11-27-2006 Revolving fund account See Ch. A252
STM, Art. 11 11-27-2006 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 32 4-10-2007 Capital Budget Planning
Committee amendment
Ch. 9, Art. II
ATM, Art. 34 4-9-2007 Town Meetings
amendment
Ch. 41, Art. I
ATM, Art. 35 4-10-2007 Commissioners of Trust
Funds amendment
Ch. 9, Art. V
(footnote only)
ATM, Art. 36 4-10-2007 Police user detail fees Ch. 234, Art. I
ATM, Art. 38 4-10-2007 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
§ DL-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § DL-1
1:442
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 39 4-10-2007 Selectmen: transfer
station; violations and
fines amendment
Ch. 36, Art. III
STM, Art. 1 4-14-2008 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 8 4-14-2008 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 34 4-15-2008 Advisory Committee
amendment
Ch. 9, Art. III
ATM, Art. 37 4-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 38 4-15-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 49 4-17-2008 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 51 4-15-2008 Registered sex offender
restrictions
Ch. 118
ATM, Art. 52 4-17-2008 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
Board of
Selectmen
2-3-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 207
STM, Art. 1 4-14-2009 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
STM, Art. 6 4-14-2009 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 26 4-14-2009 Southborough Housing
Opportunity Partnership
Committee amendment
Ch. 6, Art. IV
STM, Art. 2 9-29-2009 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
STM, Art. 3 9-29-2009 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
STM, Art. 5 9-29-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
STM, Art. 8 9-29-2009 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Ch. 81
STM, Art. 10 9-29-2009 Public consumption of
marijuana or
tetrahydrocannabinol
Ch. 51
STM, Art. 11 9-29-2009 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
STM, Art. 13 9-29-2009 Town Meeting Report
and Warrant amendment
Ch. 41, Art. III
ATM, Art. 19 4-13-2010 Administration
amendment
Ch. 3
Board of
Selectmen
1-25-2011 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 22 4-12-2011 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 23 4-12-2011 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 31 4-12-2011 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:443
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 32 4-12-2011 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
Zoning Board
of Appeals
9-28-2011 Zoning Board of Appeals
amendment
Superseded
2-21-2017
ATM, Art. 22 4-10-2012 Fire Department:
pumping water from
private buildings
Ch. 96, Art. I
Board of
Selectmen
4-23-2012 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 207
ATM, Art. 4 4-8-2013 Finance: contracts Ch. 16, Art. IV
ATM, Art. 7 4-8-2013 Town Administrator Ch. 27, Art. IX
ATM, Art. 12 4-8-2013 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 13 4-8-2013 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 21 4-8-2013 Capital Budget Planning
Committee repealer
Ch. 9, Art. II
(reference only)
ATM, Art. 22 4-8-2013 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
STM, Art. 9 10-7-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
Acts of 2013,
Ch. 134
11-20-2013 Special Act (increasing
membership of Board of
Selectmen)
Ch. A252
Acts of 2013,
Ch. 177
12-6-2013 Special Act (authorizing
Town Administrator to
sign warrants)
Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 10 4-16-2014 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 17 4-16-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 18 4-16-2014 Flood insurance Ch. 19
ATM, Art. 19 4-16-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 23 4-14-2015 Boards, committees and
commissions: residency
requirement;
qualification
Ch. 9, Art. VI
ATM, Art. 26 4-14-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 29 4-14-2015 Demolition delay Ch. 63
ATM, Art. 27 4-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 28 4-12-2016 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 32 4-12-2016 Selectmen: transfer
station; violations and
fines amendment
Ch. 36, Art. III
ATM, Art. 33 4-12-2016 Dogs amendment Ch. 81, Art. II
§ DL-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § DL-1
1:444
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 34 4-12-2016 Dogs amendment Ch. 81, Art. II
ATM, Art. 35 4-12-2016 Boards, committees and
commissions: residency
requirement;
qualification; minutes;
social media amendment
Ch. 9, Art. VI
ATM, Art. 36 4-12-2016 Town meetings
amendment; Town
elections
Ch. 36, Art. I; Ch.
42
ATM, Art. 37 4-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
STM, Art. 6 10-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
Zoning Board
of Appeals
2-21-2017 Zoning Board of Appeals
amendment
Ch. 249
ATM, Art. 23 4-25-2017 Municipal Technology
Committee
Ch. 9, Art. VIII
ATM, Art. 25 4-25-2017 Economic Development
Committee
Ch. 9, Art. VII
ATM, Art. 26 4-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 27 4-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 28 4-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 29 4-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 30 4-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 31 4-25-2017 Marijuana
establishments
Ch. 53
ATM, Art. 32 4-25-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 174
ATM, Art. 35 4-25-2017 Town Meetings:
miscellaneous
provisions amendment
Ch. 41, Art. I
ATM, Art. 36 4-25-2017 Town Meetings:
miscellaneous
provisions amendment
Ch. 41, Art. I
ATM, Art. 37 4-25-2017 Finance: miscellaneous
provisions amendment
Ch. 16, Art. III
ATM, Art. 38 4-25-2017 General Law acceptance Ch. A252
ATM, Art. 39 4-25-2017 Town Meetings:
miscellaneous
provisions amendment
Ch. 41, Art. I
ATM, Art. 19 4-9-2018 Finance: Revolving
Funds
Ch. 16, Art. IV
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:445
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
ATM, Art. 35 4-9-2018 Town Meetings:
Miscellaneous
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 41, Art. I
STM, Art. 1 5-22-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 174
STM, Art. 3 5-22-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 174
STM, Art. 5 5-22-2018 Town Meetings:
Miscellaneous
Provisions Amendment
Ch. 41, Art. I
§ DL-1 SOUTHBOROUGH CODE § DL-1
1:446