


SOUTHBRIDGE HOME RULE CHARTER 


CHAPTER 1  INCORPORATION; SHORT TITLE; POWERS; DEFINITIONS 


SECTION 1 – INCORPORATION 

1-1-1:    The inhabitants of the Town of Southbridge, within the corporate limits as established by law, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate with perpetual succession under the name "Town of Southbridge". 


SECTION 2 – FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND TITLE 

1-2-1:    This charter provides for a town council - town manager form of town government, and it shall be known by the title "Southbridge Home Rule Charter". The Town of Southbridge shall be governed by those General Laws applicable to towns where the laws of the commonwealth distinguish between towns and cities all the provisions of law applicable to the town of Southbridge, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter; provided, however, that Chapter 40, of the General Laws of section 32 shall not apply to the town of Southbridge. 


SECTION 3 – POWERS 

1-3-1:    Subject only to express limitations on the exercise of any power or function by a municipality in the Constitution or Laws of the Commonwealth, it is the intent and the purpose of the voters of Southbridge to secure, through the adoption of this charter, all of the powers it is possible to secure for a municipal government under the Constitution and Laws of the Commonwealth. 


SECTION 4 – CONSTRUCTION 

1-4-1:    The powers of the Town of Southbridge under this charter are to be construed liberally in its favor and the specific mention of particular powers is not intended to limit in any way the general powers of the Town of Southbridge as stated in Section 1-3-1. 


SECTION 5 – DEFINITIONS 

1-5-1:    "By-Law": The word “by-law” shall refer to a general and permanent legislative enactment by the town council establishing the structure of the town government or prescribing the activities of its citizens. 

"Charter": The word “Charter” shall mean this document and any amendments to it that may hereafter be adopted. 

"Measure": The word “Measure” shall refer to any enactment, vote, resolution or motion by the town council other than a by-law. 


CHAPTER 2  THE TOWN COUNCIL 


SECTION 1 – COMPOSITION 

2-1-1:    A town council of nine members shall be nominated and elected from the town at large to serve three year staggered terms. 


SECTION 2 – ELIGIBILITY 

2-2-1:    All qualified voters of the town shall be eligible to hold office of councilor except as otherwise limited by this charter. 

2-2-2:    No councilor shall hold any other town office during his or her term of office. Any person elected to the council while serving as a municipal employee or officer shall, prior to assuming the office of councilor, resign from said municipal employee or officer position. No councilor or former councilor shall be offered or accept any compensated town appointive office or employment until one year after his or her term shall have ended. 

2-2-3    Terms of councilors shall be limited to three consecutive terms. 


SECTION 3 – COMPENSATION 

2-3-1:    The town council may provide an annual salary for its members. No councilor shall receive said salary nor shall any increase thereof become effective until after the commencement of the next fiscal year. 

2-3-2:    Town councilors shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties from an annual appropriation for such purpose. 


SECTION 4 – GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES 

2-4-1:    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all general, corporate, legislative, policy- making, and appropriations powers of the town shall be vested in the town council. 

2-4-2:    The council may enact by-laws and other measures and rules and regulations not inconsistent with this charter governing its own proceedings and other matters pertaining to the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties. 

2-4-3:    The council shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings which shall be a public record. 

2-4-4:    The council may establish committees, subcommittees and advisory committees as it deems reasonable and necessary and such committees may include non-councilor members. Councilor appointments to such committees shall be made by council chairperson and non-councilor member appointments to such committees shall be made by the council subcommittee members subject to confirmation by the council. 

2-4-5:    Town councilors shall interact with town officers and employees under the jurisdiction of the town manager solely through the manager, and neither the council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. This prohibition shall not preclude the council or its members from asking questions, seeking information, or conducting conversations with municipal employees. 

2-4-6:    The council or its members may freely and fully discuss with the manager anything pertaining to the appointment or removal of any town officer and employee, but neither the council nor its members shall in any way dictate the appointment or removal of any officer or employee under the jurisdiction of the manager unless otherwise specified by the charter. 


SECTION 5 – MEETINGS AND QUORUM 

2-5-1:    The council shall meet regularly at least twice in every month. Special meetings may be held if called by the chairperson or by any three members of the council, provided that notice of such meeting shall have been delivered to each other member at least forty-eight hours in advance thereof and shall have been posted in accordance with state law. 

2-5-2:    All meetings of the council shall be public, except as provided by general law provisions respecting closed sessions. The agenda for such meetings shall be as determined by the chairperson and shall follow the order of business set forth in “Roberts Rules of Order.” The rules of the town council shall provide that inhabitants and employees of the town shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any such meeting in regard to any matter considered thereat, except matters that could be subject to executive session. 

2-5-3:    A majority of the members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. A lesser number than the quorum may organize any meeting lacking a quorum in order to adjourn it to a stated date, time and place. 

2-5-4:    In no instance shall it be required that all members of the council be present at a meeting to allow the conduct of business. 


SECTION 6 – BY-LAWS 

2-6-1:    Proposed by-laws shall deal with one subject only and shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. 

2-6-2:    Any by-law which repeals or amends part of the town by-laws shall set out in full the section or sections of the by-laws to be repealed or amended, by the use of strikeout type, brackets, and/or underscoring. 

2-6-3:    Every by-law shall be read at three separate meetings before its passage. 

2-6-4:    The affirmative vote of at least five members, unless a greater number is prescribed by General Laws or by this charter, shall be necessary for the passage of any by-law and all votes thereon shall be taken by roll call and recorded in the journal. 


SECTION 7 – ACTION REQUIRING A BY-LAW 

2-7-1:    In addition to other acts required by law or by this charter to be done by a by-law, those acts of the town council shall be by a by-law which: adopt or amend administrative by-laws or establish, alter or abolish any town department, office or agency; provide for a fine or other penalty, or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty is imposed. 


SECTION 8 – FILLING VACANCIES IN THE TOWN COUNCIL 

2-8-1:    A vacancy in the office of town councilor whether caused by death, resignation, or removal shall be filled by a special election to be called within thirty days of said vacancy unless a regular town election will occur within one hundred eighty days. 


SECTION 9 – THE CHAIRPERSON AND VICE-CHAIRPERSON OF THE TOWN COUNCIL; ELECTION AND REMOVAL 

2-9-1:    On the first regularly scheduled meeting on or after July 1 following the town elections, and after newly elected members shall have taken office, the council shall organize itself and elect one of its members to serve as chairperson of the council and a vice-chairperson of the council, both for a term expiring at the first regularly scheduled council meeting on or after July 1 following the town elections the next year. The chairperson pro tem of the organizational meeting would be the senior in point of service or if equal in service, senior in age. 

2-9-2:     The chairperson shall preside at meetings of the town council, shall be recognized as head of the town government for all ceremonial purposes and by the Governor of the Commonwealth in the case of an emergency. 

2-9-3:    The chairperson may be removed from said office by a two-thirds vote of the entire council (i.e., a minimum of 6 votes). Any member of the council at any point may make a motion to remove the chairperson, and if the motion is seconded, the motion shall be voted upon at that time, without exception, by the council. 

2-9-4:    The vice-chairperson shall automatically become chairperson in the event of the permanent disability, death, resignation or removal of the chairperson. A new vice-chairperson shall be elected by a majority vote of the town council at the first regularly scheduled meeting called by the new chairperson. 

2-9-5:    The vice-chairperson may be removed from office by 2/3 vote of the entire council. Any member of the council at any point may make a motion to remove the vice-chairperson and, if the motion is seconded, the motion shall be voted on by the council at that time, without exception. A new vice-chairperson shall be elected by a majority of the vote of the tonw council at the next regularly scheduled meeting. 


CHAPTER 3  OTHER ELECTED TOWN BOARDS AND OFFICERS 


SECTION 1 – GENERAL PROVISIONS 

3-1-1:    Members of town boards to be elected by the qualified voters of the town shall be, in addition to the town council: (a) a school committee as hereinafter set forth; (b) a regional vocational school committee; (c) a town clerk; (d) four members of a housing authority; (e) four members of a redevelopment authority; and (f) two part time members to the board of assessors. 

3-1-2:    Boards and commissions established under this charter shall perform their functions and duties in accordance with the Constitution, General Laws, this charter or by-laws. 

3-1-3:    During the term for which he or she was elected and for one year following the expiration of this term, no member of any board or commission established under this charter shall be eligible to accept any appointed paid town position under jurisdiction of the board of which he or she was a member. 

3-1-4:    Members of boards and commissions established under this charter shall receive actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, within limits of an appropriation made for that purpose. 

3-1-5:    Any elected or appointed member of a quasi-judicial board (zoning board of appeals, the conservation commission, the board of health, the liquor licensing board, and the special permit granting authority) shall be limited to one such board and ineligible to serve on any other such quasi-judicial board during that member’s term.


SECTION 2 – VACANCIES 

3-2-1:    Vacancies in the elected town boards established under this charter shall be filled by the town council in joint convention with the remaining members of the respective board within sixty days unless a regular town election shall occur within one hundred and twenty days, but only until the next town election. 


SECTION 3 – REGIONAL VOCATIONAL SCHOOL COMMITTEE 

3-3-1:    Terms for the Southern Worcester County Regional Vocational School Committee (Bay Path) shall be for three years. The terms are to be staggered. 


SECTION 4 – TOWN CLERK 

3-4-1:    The town clerk shall be elected to serve for a three-year term. The town clerk shall receive such compensation not to exceed the amount appropriated by the town council. 


SECTION 5 – HOUSING AUTHORITY 

3-5-1:    A housing authority of five members, four of whom shall be elected and one of whom shall be appointed as provided by state law. 


SECTION 6 – REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

3-6-1:    A redevelopment authority of five members, four of whom shall be elected and one of whom shall be appointed as provided by state law. 


SECTION 7 – BOARD OF ASSESSORS 

3-7-1:    A board of assessors, two part-time members to be elected by the voters for three year staggered terms, the third member to be full time and appointed by the town manager for a staggered three year term who shall be the clerk of the board. 


SECTION 8 – POWERS, DUTIES AND COMPENSATION 

3-8-1    Officers and members of boards established under this chapter, unless otherwise provided herein, shall exercise such powers and duties as are and may be provided by General Law, this charter, by-law and/or order of the town council. 

3-8-2    Officers and members of boards established under this chapter may receive such compensation as may be authorized and established by the town council within limits of an appropriation made for that purpose. 


CHAPTER 4  TOWN MANAGER 


SECTION 1 – APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS 

4-1-1:    The town council, by a majority vote of its full membership (i.e., a minimum of 5 votes) shall appoint a town manager who shall administer and implement the directives and policies adopted by the town council. 

4-1-2:    In seeking candidates the council chair shall appoint a search committee of five members, two of whom shall be members of the council and three of whom shall be citizens of the town who are not holding elective office and are not compensated employees of the town. The appointment of the non-councilor members of such committee shall be subject to confirmation by the council. 

The committee may, in its discretion, engage a professional search firm and the council shall appropriate sufficient funds to allow the committee to engage such a firm, to place appropriate advertisements and to meet such other expenses as the council and the committee deem appropriate. 

4-1-3:    The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of educational, executive and administrative qualifications and experience, which shall include at least a bachelor’s degree from an accredited four-year degree granting institution and shall include professional experience of at least three years full time, compensated, supervisory service in municipal administration or related administrative activity, and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. To be considered for appointment such experience shall be certified to the council by an appropriate official of the entity where such experience was obtained. 

If a resident of the town, the successful candidate shall have held no elective municipal office for a period of one year prior to appointment. 

4-1-4:     Upon appointment or reappointment, as the case may be, the council shall enter into a written contract with the manager. Nothing in said contract shall affect the appointment or removal powers of the council over the manager, as hereinafter set forth. 


SECTION 2 – POWERS, DUTIES AND ROLE 

4-2-1:    The town manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the town, and shall be directly responsible and accountable to the town council for the effective administration of all town affairs placed in his or her charge by the council or by this charter. 

The manager shall serve as a resource to the council. The council shall provide policy and political leadership for the town. The manager shall bring policy issues to the council to consider in making policy choices and shall then implement the policies chosen by the council. 

4-2-2:    The town manager shall hold no elective or other appointive office, shall devote full-time to the duties of the office and shall engage in no other business or occupation without advance authorization of the council. 

4-2-3:    The manager shall: 

(a) attend all council meetings, except when excused, and shall have the right to speak, but not to vote; 

(b) keep the council fully informed regarding town and departmental operations, fiscal affairs, general problems and administrative actions; shall keep the town council fully advised as to the financial condition of the town by filing written reports with the council not less frequently than quarterly throughout the year; shall provide the councilors with such town records and shall generate such reports as may be requested by the chairperson of the council or a majority of the council; 

(c) keep the council fully informed as to the long range needs of the town, the practices and governmental trends of other communities and the laws and regulations of the Commonwealth and make such recommendations to the council as deemed necessary and appropriate; 

(d) prepare, assemble and present to the council the annual town operating and capital budgets, shall present said budgets to the council in a format acceptable to the council and cooperate with the council in all financial matters; 

(e) serve as general ombudsman for the town; 

(f) maintain an inventory of all town real and personal property; 

(g) be responsible for the daily administration of the personnel system, including the maintenance of personnel records and enforcement of personnel rules and regulations; 

(h) except as otherwise set forth in the General Laws, shall serve as central purchasing agent for all town departments; 

(i) be responsible for the maintenance of all buildings and property owned or leased by the town; 

(j) perform such other duties as may be required by this charter, by by-law or by order of the council; 

(k) the town manager shall propose and the town council may adopt personnel rules providing for the job descriptions for all town positions, based on the duties, responsibilities, and authority of each position, with adequate provision for reclassification of any position whenever warranted by changed circumstances, and such other practices and procedures as may be deemed necessary for the administration of the town personnel system; 

(l) execute all deeds conveying town real property, but any such conveyance shall have been previously authorized by the vote of the town council pursuant to the applicable provisions of the General Laws; 

(m) to negotiate, or cause to be negotiated, all contracts involving any subject within the jurisdiction of the office of town manager; and 

(n) be responsible for the coordination of the activities of all agencies under his or her control with the activities of all other town agencies, including those elected by the voters of Southbridge and those appointed by other elected officials. 

4-2-4:    Subject to confirmation by the town council, the town manager shall have the power to appoint, on the basis of merit and fitness alone: 

A Fire Chief; a Police Chief; a Director of Public Works; a Town Treasurer; a Town Collector; a Veterans Agent; a Director of Inspection Services and all inspectors except as otherwise provided by General Law; upon recommendation of the Chief, a Police Department; upon recommendation of the Chief, a Fire Department; upon recommendation of the Director, a Department of Public Works; a Finance Director; a Town Accountant; one full time Assessor who will assume the duties of the clerk of the board of assessors; and, upon the recommendation of the Trustees of the library, a Head Librarian and such other individual Town officers as are authorized by the General Laws, this charter or town by-laws and for whom appointment is not otherwise provided. 

The town may enter into contracts with such departments and individuals as may be allowed by civil service, collective bargaining and/or state law. 


SECTION 3 – POWER TO APPOINT TOWN BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

4-3-1:    The town manager shall have the power to appoint, subject to confirmation by the town council, the following boards and commissions: (a) a five member board of health, (b) a seven member planning board, with two alternate members; (c) a three member board of registrars, (d) a three member board of appeals, with two alternate members; (e) a seven member conservation commission; (f) a three member liquor licensing board with one alternate member, and the members of such other boards and commissions as the council deems appropriate to establish. The terms of the members of such boards and commissions shall be staggered. 

4-3-2:    The town manager shall have the power to appoint, subject to confirmation by the town council, the following town boards and commissions: constables, commissioners of trust funds and World War I memorial trustees. 

4-3-3:    The town manager shall have the power to appoint, subject to confirmation by the town council, such other members of boards and commissions as are authorized by the General Laws, this charter or by-laws and for whom appointment is not otherwise provided. 


SECTION 4 – POWER TO RESCIND APPOINTMENTS 

4-4-1:    The town manager shall have the power to rescind, subject to confirmation by the town council, for cause, including but not limited to excessive and un-excused absenteeism, incapacity other than temporary illness, inefficiency, insubordination or conduct unbecoming the officer, any appointment made by him or her to any board, commission, committee or individual office under the authority of this charter, provided that the appointee shall first have been served with written notice of the town manager’s intention specifying the reasons for the proposed removal and informing the appointee of his or her right to be heard at a public hearing if requested. 

4-4-2:    Said power shall not apply to quasi-judicial bodies as determined by the town attorney. 


SECTION 5 – REORGANIZATION PLANS BY THE TOWN MANAGER 

4-5-1:    The town manager may propose a plan, subject to applicable law and the terms of this charter, to establish, reorganize, consolidate or abolish any town agency under his or her jurisdiction. Such reorganization plan may not be amended by the town council but shall either be approved or disapproved in the form as submitted. 


SECTION 6 – REMOVAL OF THE MANAGER 

4-6-1:    Final removal of the manager shall be effected by a 2/3 vote of the entire council (i.e., a minimum of 6 votes) at an open council meeting. 


SECTION 7 – ACTING TOWN MANAGER 

4-7-1:    During the absence or disability of the town manager, an acting town manager shall be appointed by the council to perform the duties of the town manager. Any vacancy in the office of the town manager shall be filled as soon as possible by the town council. The term of service of any person as acting town manager may not exceed twelve months. Compensation for such person shall be set by the town council. Except as otherwise prohibited by this charter, nothing in this section shall prevent an acting town manager from being appointed as town manager. 

During a period of absence or disability of the town manager, pending the appointment of an acting town manager, the finance director shall perform the duties of the manager, provided however that an acting manager who is not a member of the council shall be appointed by the council as soon as possible. 


CHAPTER 5  SCHOOL COMMITTEE 


SECTION 1 – COMPOSITION 

5-1-1:    There shall be a school committee of seven members. All members of the committee shall be elected for terms of three years. The terms shall be staggered so at least two members are elected each year. All school committee members will be elected by the voters at large. The members and chairperson of the school committee shall receive compensation identical to that received by the members and chairperson of the council, if any. 


SECTION 2 – POWERS AND DUTIES 

5-2-1:    The school committee established under this charter shall have general charge of the public schools of the town. The school committee shall have the power to select and terminate a superintendent of schools, establish educational goals and policies for the schools consistent with the requirements of the Laws of the Commonwealth and standards established by the Commonwealth. The school committee shall have all the powers and duties given to school committees by the Laws of the Commonwealth. 


CHAPTER 6  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS 


SECTION 1 – ESTABLISHMENT 

6-1-1:    There shall be established in the Town of Southbridge a department of public works administered by the town manager. 

6-1-2:    The responsibilities of the following departments shall be incorporated in the department of public works: highway department, engineering department, sewer department, parks department, maintenance function of the recreation committee, cemetery department, tree warden, moth superintendent, fence viewer, field driver, custodian of town structures, water department, and other related functions.

6-1-3:    There shall be a director of public works, appointed for a three year term by the town manager, subject to confirmation by the town council. The director shall report directly to the town manager.

6-1-4:    The director may be removed in the same manner as other department heads as provided by this charter.


SECTION 2 – POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR 

6-2-1:    The powers and duties, in addition to those otherwise conferred or imposed, shall include the power to establish divisions within the department of public works. Each division shall assume such management and control as determined by the director. The director shall have the power to make rules and regulations for the governing of the department of public works and divisions thereof and shall attend to the proper enforcement of the same. The director shall have jurisdiction over the divisions and over each member of each division. No person shall be hired as an employee of the department without the consent of the director. 

6-2-2:    In the event that the director is absent from the town, he or she shall notify the town manager, in writing, of the person designated to assume the responsibilities of the director during his or her absence. 

6-2-3:    The director shall attend meetings of the town council when requested, and recommend to the town manager measures, requiring action, as deemed necessary or expedient by the director. 

6-2-4:    The director shall keep full and complete records of the department, and shall render to the town manager as often as may be required a full report of all department operations during the period reported, and annually, or more often if required by the town council, make for publication a synopsis of his or her reports. 

6-2-5:    Each petition submitted to the town council and referred to the department of public works shall be returned to the town council with the recommendation of the director within thirty days after its referral to the department of public works. 

6-2-6:    The director shall keep the town manager and town council fully advised as to the needs of the town within the scope of his or her duties, and to furnish the town manager on or before the first day of March each year a detailed list of the appropriations required during the next ensuing fiscal year for proper conduct of all divisions under his or her control, and to furnish a master plan for all major public works for the town, giving priority to the projects in accordance with their necessity and importance and to establish long range planning as may be determined to be in the best interests of the town. 

6-2-7:    The director shall cause to be performed all of the work of construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair maintenance and upkeep and all other work incidental thereto of the departments specified in 6-1-2 in accordance with the policies of long range plans, priority of major projects and capital outlay requirements as may be authorized and established by the town manager. 

6-2-8:    The director shall inspect all streets and ways being constructed to ascertain whether said construction complies with plans filed with the planning board and with all planning board regulations, town by-laws and state statutes and to give to the planning board a report of his or her inspection prior to the approval of said street by the planning board. 


CHAPTER 7  TOWN ATTORNEY 


SECTION 1 – APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES 

7-1-1:    The town manager shall, subject to confirmation by the town council, appoint a town attorney to serve as chief legal advisor to the town council, the town manager, and all town departments, offices and agencies. The town attorney shall represent the town in all legal proceedings and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the General Laws, this charter or town by-laws. Provided however that nothing in this section shall prevent the town from engaging or being represented by other counsel, where appropriate. 

It is prohibitive that any town office or agency to employ, advise with or consult any attorney with regard to its duties or any town business, unless such legal services are determined to be required, necessary or desirable by the town manager, after consultation with the town attorney and the office or agency involved.

In advising the town with regard to intra-town matters, the attorney shall exercise independent and impartial judgment. 


CHAPTER 8  TOWN AUDITOR 


SECTION 1 – APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES 

8-1-1:    The town manager shall, subject to confirmation by the town council, appoint an auditor who shall annually, in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards for governmental financial audits, audit all town accounts and financial statements with regard to compliance with applicable laws, regulations, contract provisions and/or grant agreements. The audits may be made by a certified public accountant, or firm of such accountants, who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the town. All documents and reports presented to the town or any employee thereof, by the auditor as a result of said audit shall, upon submission, be filed with the town clerk and shall be deemed public records. 


CHAPTER 9  LICENSING 


SECTION 1 – LIQUOR LICENSING BOARD 

9-1-1:     There shall be a liquor licensing board established in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth, provided however, the town manager is authorized to appoint three members to said board, subject to the approval of the town council. Provided further, the town manager shall appoint one alternate member, subject to the approval of the town council, and said alternate member shall be appointed without regard to party enrollment. Provided further, the three-member board shall designate their chairperson and vice- chairperson. All members so appointed shall have been residents of the Town of Southbridge for at least two years immediately preceding such appointment and shall serve for terms of three years each so arranged that the term of one member shall expire each year. The alternate member shall sit on the board at the designation of the chairperson in the case of absence, inability to act or conflict of interest on the part of any member of the board, or in the event of a vacancy on the board until such vacancy is filled by the town manager. All vacancies shall be filled by the town manager for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner provided for an original appointment. 

9-1-2:     A person appointed to the liquor licensing board shall not be engaged, directly or indirectly, in the commercial manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages, and if once appointed a member engages in such commercial manufacture or sale, that member’s office shall immediately become vacant. 


SECTION 2 – LICENSING OTHER THAN LIQUOR 

9-2-1:     With respect to licenses and permits, other than those relating to alcoholic beverages, the town manager shall grant all such licenses and permits and shall have all the powers and duties of a licensing authority under the General Laws, provided however, that the town council retains the power to delegate to one or more town agencies, the powers vested in the town council by the laws of the Commonwealth to grant and issue licenses and permits, and may regulate the granting and issuing of licenses and permits by any such town agency, and may in its discretion, rescind any such delegation without prejudice to any prior action which has been taken. 


CHAPTER 10  FINANCIAL PROVISIONS AND PROCEDURES 


SECTION 1 – APPLICABILITY OF GENERAL LAW 

10-1-1:    In all matters concerning finances and financial procedures of the town, the provisions of the General Laws shall apply, together with such other requirements as are provided by this charter or by-law. 


SECTION 2 – CONTRACTS 

10-2-1:     All contracts for services negotiated by the town manager shall be ratified by a majority vote of the town council. 


SECTION 3 – SUBMISSION OF BUDGET AND BUDGET MESSAGE 

10-3-1:    At least ninety days prior to the start of each fiscal year, the town manager shall submit to the town council a budget for the ensuing year and an accompanying message, unless otherwise provided for by the General Laws. 

10-3-2:    The town manager’s message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of work programs. It shall outline the proposed financial policies of the town for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the town’s debt position and include such other material as the town manager deems desirable. 


SECTION 4 – PROPOSED BUDGET 

10-4-1:    The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all town funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year, including the proposed school budget and, except for the school budget, or as required by law or this charter, shall be in such form as the town council deems desirable and shall require. It shall indicate in separate sections (1) proposed expenditures for current operations during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by offices, departments and agencies, and the method of financing such expenditures; and (2) proposed capital expenditures during the ensuing fiscal year, detailed by offices, departments, and agencies when practicable and the proposed method of financing each such capital expenditure. 

10-4-2:    In submitting the proposed budget, the town manager shall utilize modern fiscal principles so as to afford maximum information and financial control. The budget shall detail all estimated revenue from the property tax levy and other sources and all proposed expenditures, including debt service for the previous, current and ensuing years, and shall indicate separately: (a) proposed expenditures for both current operations and capital projects during the ensuing year, detailed by agency, purpose and position, together with proposed financing methods; and (b) estimated surplus revenue and free cash available at the close of the fiscal year, including estimated balance in special accounts and enterprise funds. 


SECTION 5 – NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON PROPOSED BUDGET 

10-5-1:    The town council shall publish, in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the town, the general summary of the budget and a notice stating: (1) the times and places where copies of the budget are available for inspection; and (2) the date, time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, when a public hearing on the budget shall be held. 


SECTION 6 – ADOPTION OF THE BUDGET 

10-6-1:    The town council shall adopt the budget, with or without amendments, on or before the end of the eleventh month of the fiscal year currently ending. In amending the budget, it may by majority vote of the full council (i.e., a minimum of 5 votes) delete or decrease any programs or amounts except expenditures required by law or for debt service. It may by two-thirds vote of the full council (i.e., a minimum of 6 votes) increase any amount in, or the total of, the proposed budget. Adoption of the budget shall constitute an appropriation of the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated. 


SECTION 7 – CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM 

10-7-1:    Within the period provided by General Law, the town manager shall submit to the town council a six year capital improvements program which shall include: (a) a clear summary of its contents; (b) a list of all capital improvements proposed to be undertaken during the next six fiscal years with supporting data; (c) cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules; and (d) the estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining any facility to be constructed or acquired. 

10-7-2:    The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 


SECTION 8 – NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING ON CAPITAL PROGRAMS 

10-8-1:    The town council shall publish, in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the town, the general summary of the capital program and a notice stating: (1) the times and places where copies of the capital improvements program are available for inspection by the public; and (2) the date, time and place, not less than two weeks after such publication, when a public hearing on said program shall be held. 

10-8-2:    After the public hearing, and on or before the end of the eleventh month of the current fiscal year, the town council shall adopt the capital improvements program by resolution, with or without amendment, provided that each amendment must be voted separately and that any increase in the capital improvements program as submitted must clearly identify the method of financing proposed to accomplish this increase. 


SECTION 9 – SUPPLEMENTAL APPROPRIATIONS 

10-9-1:    If during the fiscal year the town manager certifies, through the finance director, that revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget are available for appropriation, the town council may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 


SECTION 10 – EMERGENCY APPROPRIATIONS 

10-10-1:    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the town council may make emergency appropriations. Any such emergency order shall be so declared in an emergency preamble thereto, separately voted on and receiving the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the full council membership (i.e. a minimum of 6 votes). 


SECTION 11 – REDUCTION OR RESTRICTION OF USE OF APPROPRIATIONS 

10-11-1:    If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the town manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he or she shall report to the town council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit and any remedial action taken by him or her and his or her recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The town council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary and for that purpose may reduce, restrict or limit the use of the unexpended balance of appropriations. 


SECTION 12 – TRANSFER OF APPROPRIATIONS 

10-12-1:    At any time during the fiscal year the town council may, upon recommendation of the town manager through the finance director, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office, or agency and may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office or agency to another. 


SECTION 13 – LIMITATION: EFFECTIVE DATE 

10-13-1:     No appropriation for debt service may be reduced, restricted, limited or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 


SECTION 14 – LAPSE OF APPROPRIATIONS 

10-14-1:    Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned. 


SECTION 15 – PAYMENTS AND OBLIGATIONS PROHIBITED 

10-15-1:    No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and unless the town manager or his or her designee first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such appropriation to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. 

10-15-2:    Any authorization or payment or incurring of obligations in violation of this charter shall be void and any payment so made illegal. Such action shall be cause for removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligation, and he or she shall also be liable to the town for the payment for any amount so paid. However, except where prohibited by law, nothing in this charter shall be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payment or making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payment beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such obligation is funded by appropriation or authorized by the General Law. 


CHAPTER 11  NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS 


SECTION 1 – TOWN ELECTIONS 

11-1-1:    The regular election for all town offices shall be by official ballot held on the second Tuesday in June.

11-1-2:    Any person duly elected to any office or board shall take up the duties of his or her office on the first weekday of July, provided that he or she first shall have been sworn in to the faithful performance of his or her duties. 

11-1-3:    All provisions of the General Law with regard to town elections shall apply except as may herein be provided by this charter. 


SECTION 2 – ELIGIBILITY OF TOWN VOTERS 

11-2-1:     Any registered voter of the town shall be eligible for election to any elective office or board of the town except as otherwise limited by this charter. 


SECTION 3 – FILLING OF VACANCIES IN ELECTED TOWN OFFICES 

11-3-1:    A vacancy in the office of town councilor whether caused by death, resignation, removal or recall shall be filled by a special election to be called within thirty days of said vacancy unless a regular town election will occur within one hundred and eighty days. 

Filling of vacancies in town boards other than the town council shall be by joint convention of the council and the remaining members of said board. 


SECTION 4 – RECALL OF ELECTIVE OFFICERS 

11-4-1:    An elective officer of the town may be recalled and removed from public office by the voters of the town as herein provided. Any voter of the town may file with the town clerk a petition containing the name and title together with a statement of the grounds for his or her removal. Said petition shall be signed in ink or indelible pencil by qualified voters of the town equal to at least ten percent of the voters registered at the last municipal election, provided that no recall petition may be filed against any officer until he or she shall have held office for at least six months. Said petition shall be accompanied by affidavits as to the authenticity of signatures, signed and sworn to by each circulator. Said petition shall then be filed with the board of registrars of voters for certification. Within ten days from such filing, the board of registrars of voters shall check each name to be certified, and shall certify thereon the number of signatures so checked, and shall report the results to the persons filing the petition, the town clerk and the town council. 

11-4-2:    Upon presentation of the certified petition to the town council, it shall become the duty of the town council within thirty days after the receipt thereof to order a special election, which shall take place within ninety days but no sooner than sixty-five days after presentation of the certified petition to the council. No such election shall be ordered if the term of office of such elective official shall expire within one hundred twenty days from the date of the original filing or if such elective officer shall resign from such office before the election. Said recall election shall be called and conducted in the same manner as is provided in the General Laws for the call and conduct of a special election. 

11-4-3:    The form of the question to be voted upon shall be substantially as follows: "Shall (here insert the name and title of the elective officer whose recall is sought) be recalled?" A majority vote of the voters to recall such elective officer shall not be effective unless a total of at least fifteen percent of the electorate entitled to vote on the question shall have voted. Recall of such elective officer shall become effective upon certification of the results of the voting thereon, regardless of any technical deficiency in the recall petition. 

11-4-4:     No person, having been recalled or having resigned from office while recall proceedings were pending against him or her, shall be appointed to any town office within two years following said recall or resignation. 


SECTION 5 – ELECTION TO BE BY PLURALITY VOTE 

11-5-1:    Election to all town offices established by this charter shall be by plurality of those voting on each office. 


CHAPTER 12  GENERAL PROVISIONS 


SECTION 1 – INITIATIVE PETITION AND REFERENDUM 

12-1-1:     The voters of the town shall have the power to propose by-laws and other measures within the authority of the town council by initiative petition and to review by-laws and other measures as set forth in section 12-4-1 of this charter by referendum in accordance with the procedures established by this charter. 

12-1-2:    At any election at which an initiative petition or a referendum is submitted to the voters the polls shall be opened at seven o’clock in the morning and shall be closed not earlier than eight o’clock in the evening, and all votes upon any questions so submitted shall be taken by ballot. 


SECTION 2 – INELIGIBLE MEASURES 

12-2-1:    None of the following shall be subject to the initiative or the referendum procedures: (1) proceedings relating to the internal organization or operation of the town council or of the school committee; (2) an emergency measure adopted in conformity with the charter; (3) the town budget or the school committee budget as a whole; (4) revenue loan orders; (5) any appropriation for the payment of the town’s debt or debt service; (6) an appropriation of funds to implement a collective bargaining agreement; (7) proceedings relating to the election, appointment, removal, discharge, employment, promotion, transfer, demotion or other personnel action; (8) any proceedings repealing or rescinding a measure or part thereof which is protested by referendum procedures, and ( 9) any proceeding providing for the submission or referral to the voters at an election. 


SECTION 3 – INITIATIVE PETITION 

12-3-1:    The voters of the town may initiate legislation by submitting a petition to the town council which requests the submission of the proposed by-law or measure to a vote of the town council. Said petition must be signed by qualified voters of the town equal in number to not less than five percent of the total number of voters registered at the last regular town election. Each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation. Said petition shall then be filed with the board of registrars of voters for certification. 

12-3-2:    Within ten days from such filing, the board of registrars of voters shall check each name to be certified, and shall certify thereon the number of signatures so checked, and shall report the results to the persons filing the petition, the town clerk and the town council. 

12-3-3:    Upon presentation of the certified petition to the town council, it shall become the duty of the town council, within thirty days of receipt thereof, to pass and adopt or reject such by-law or measure without alteration as to meaning or effect. Should the town council reject the proposed legislation, it shall be the further duty of the town council to forthwith submit the question to a vote at the next regular town election at which the qualified voters of Southbridge shall vote on the question of adopting or rejecting the proposed legislation. 


SECTION 4 – REFERENDUM 

12-4-1:    A vote passed by the town council authorizing the expenditure of two hundred fifty thousand ($250,000.00) dollars or more as a special appropriation or establishing a new board or office or abolishing an old board or office or merging two or more boards or offices, or fixing the term of town officers, where such term is optional, or increasing or reducing the number of members of a board, or adopting a new by-law, or amending an existing by-law, shall not be operative until after the expiration of fourteen days. 

12-4-2:    If, within said fourteen days, a petition, signed by not less than five percent of the registered voters of the town, containing their names and addresses as they appear on the list of registered voters, is filed with the town clerk asking that the question or questions involved in such a vote be submitted to the registered voters of the town at large, then the town council, after the expiration of fourteen days, shall forthwith call a special election for the sole purpose of presenting to the registered voters at large the question or questions so involved. 

12-4-3:    Each copy of the referendum petition shall have attached to it a copy of a brief description of the substance of the town council vote sought to be reviewed. The town clerk shall forthwith, upon the receipt of a referendum petition, cause the signatures appearing thereon to be certified by the board of registrars of voters who shall certify thereon within ten days the number of signatures so checked and shall report the results to the persons filing the petition, the town clerk and the town council. Upon presentation of the certified referendum petition to the town council it shall become the duty of the town council within thirty days after the receipt thereof to order a special election as aforesaid. 

12-4-4:    The questions so submitted shall be determined by a majority vote of the registered voters of the town voting thereon, but no action of the town council shall be reversed unless at least twenty-five percent of the registered voters shall vote. Each question so submitted shall be in the form of the following question which shall be placed upon the official ballot: "Shall the town vote to approve the action of the town council whereby it was voted (brief description of the substance of the vote)? If such petition is not filed within said period of fourteen days, the vote of the town council shall become operative and effective upon the expiration of said period. 


SECTION 5 – CHARTER AMENDMENT AND BY-LAW REVIEW 

12-5-1:    This charter may be revised or amended with the provisions of Article LXXXIX of the Amendments to the Constitution and General Laws implementing said amendment. 

12-5-2:    The chairperson of the town council shall appoint a charter review committee every five years. The committee shall consist of five members, and shall report its recommendations to the town council within one year from the date of its appointment. 

12-5-3:    In every year following the issuance of a report by a charter review committee, the chairperson of the town council shall appoint a by-law review committee. The committee shall consist of five members, and shall report its recommendations to the town council within one year from the date of its appointment. 


SECTION 6 – SEVERABILITY 

12-6-1:    If any provision of this charter is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction such holding shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this charter. 


SECTION 7 – SPECIFIC PROVISIONS TO PREVAIL 

12-7-1:    To the extent that any specific provision of this charter shall conflict with any general provision thereof, the specific provision shall prevail. 


SECTION 8 – COUNTING OF DAYS 

12-8-1:    In counting days under this charter, every calendar day shall be counted, including Sundays and all holidays. 


CHAPTER 13  TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 


SECTION 1 – CONTINUATION OF EXISTING LAWS 

13-1-1:    All General Laws, special laws, town by-laws, town council votes and rules, and rules and regulations of or pertaining to the town that are in force when this charter takes effect, and are not specifically or by implication repealed hereby, shall continue in full force and effect until amended or repealed, or rescinded by due course of law, or until they expire by their own limitation. 

13-1-2:    Where provisions of this charter conflict with provisions of town by-laws, rules, regulations, orders and special acts and acceptances of General Law, the charter provisions shall govern. All provisions of town by-laws, rules, regulations, orders and special acts not superseded by this charter shall remain in force. 


SECTION 2 – DISPOSITION OF CERTAIN SPECIAL ACTS 

13-2-1:    Chapter 790 of the Acts of 1975, titled, An Act Clarifying the Charter of the Town of Southbridge, is repealed and shall no longer apply to the Town of Southbridge. 


SECTION 3 – CONTINUATION OF GOVERNMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 

13-3-1:    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all town agencies shall continue to perform their duties until reelected, or until successors to their respective positions are duly appointed or elected and qualified, or until their duties have been transferred and assumed by another agency. 


SECTION 4 – TRANSFER OF RECORDS AND PROPERTY 

13-4-1:    All records, property and equipment whatsoever of any town agency, or part thereof, the powers and duties of which are assigned in whole or in part to another town agency, shall be transferred forthwith to such agency. 


SECTION 5 – EXISTING OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES 

13-5-1:    Any person holding a town office or employment with the town shall retain such office or employment and shall continue to perform the duties of the office until provisions shall have been made in accordance with this charter for the performance of the said duties by another person or agency. No person in the permanent full-time service or employment of the town shall forfeit pay grade or time in service. 


SECTION 6 – EFFECT ON OBLIGATIONS, TAXES, ETC 

13-6-1:    All official bonds, recognizances, obligations, contracts and other instruments entered into or executed by or to the town before the adoption of this charter, and all taxes, assessments, fines, penalties, forfeitures, incurred or imposed, due or owing to the town, shall be enforced and collected, and all writs, prosecutions, actions and causes of action, except as herein otherwise provided, shall continue without abatement and remain unaffected by the charter, and no legal act done by or in favor of the town shall be rendered invalid by reason of the adoption of this charter. 


SECTION 7 – TIME OF TAKING EFFECT 

13-7-1:    This charter shall become effective on the first business day of July in the year following the year in which this charter is adopted by the voters. A nine-member town council, as provided for in this charter, shall be elected at the first regular town election following the regular town election at which this charter is adopted. 

At such election, the terms of office of all members of the town council then serving shall expire notwithstanding the term for which they were elected or appointed. At such election, a new nine-member town council, as provided for in this charter, shall be elected as follows: 

The three candidates receiving the first, second and third greatest number of votes among those elected shall each serve a three-year term. 

The candidates receiving the fourth, fifth and sixth greatest number of votes among those elected shall each serve a two-year term. 

The candidates receiving the seventh, eighth and ninth greatest number of votes among those elected shall each serve a one year term. 

Ties shall be resolved by flip of a coin. 

Prior service as town councilor under the Southbridge Home Rule Charter adopted March 2, 1973, shall not be considered with respect to the term limit imposed by 2-2-3 of this charter. 

13-7-2:     UPON IMPLEMENTATION OF THIS CHARTER: 

The town council shall enter into contractual negotiations with the incumbent town manager (unless already under contract) pursuant to section 4-1-4 of this charter. 

The town council shall immediately review the rules and regulations of the town council to insure that they are in compliance with the charter. 

13-7-3:     UPON ADOPTION OF THIS CHARTER: 

Section 4-3-2 of the Southbridge Home Rule Charter adopted March 2, 1973, as amended, shall be repealed as of the first day of the fiscal year beginning immediately after adoption of this charter. 

Within three months after the adoption of this charter, the town council shall appoint a by-law review committee to review the town by-laws to insure they are in compliance with the charter. Said committee shall report its recommendations to the town council within six months following their appointment. The committee may, in its discretion, engage a legal consultant and the town council shall appropriate sufficient funds to allow the committee to engage such services. 


CHAPTER 14  CHARTER COMMISSIONS’ NOTES 


SECTION 1 – INTENT OF NOTES 

The following notes are intended by the nine member Charter Commission elected on June 7, 2002, to clarify selected provisions of the charter. 

Note 1:    The intent of Section 2-2-3 is to limit the term of office of town councilors to three consecutive terms. A councilor reaching the end of such three terms would be eligible to hold the office of councilor following a one year hiatus. 

Note 2:    The Commission clarifies that if it is ever unclear as to the proper way in which any power of the town is to be exercised, or by whom any power of the town is to be exercised, the town council shall, consistent with Section 2-4-1, provide for the exercise of such power and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed upon the town by law. 

Note 3:    The Commission includes non-councilor members of committees in Section 2-4-4 to reduce the work load on councilors and to utilize expertise in the community. The Commission emphasizes that all committees established by the council are advisory and all committee members, including non-councilor members, shall have a vote for the purpose of committee business. 

Note 4:    Section 2-5-4 is intended to emphasize that the presence of all nine members of the town council shall under no circumstances be required in order for the council to conduct business. 

Note 5:    It is the intent of the Commission that the three non-council members of the five member search committee provided for in Section 4-1-2 be chosen on the basis of their proven expertise in hiring upper level management. Further, while the hiring of a professional search firm is discretionary, the Commission strongly recommends that the committee engage such a firm. 

Note 6:    The finance director’s performance of the duties of the manager in Section 4-7-1 is intended to last only as long as it takes the Council to appoint an acting town manager. 

Note 7:    The purpose of Section 12-2-1, ineligible measures, is to promote stability in the management of the town’s affairs. 


CHAPTER 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section

1-101    By-laws – Definition, Enacting Style

1-102    How Code Designated and Cited

1-103    Rules of Construction and Definitions

1-104    When These Rules of Construction Shall Not Apply

1-105    References to Titles, Chapters, or Sections

1-106    Conflicting Provisions

1-107    Publication of General By-laws

1-108    When By-laws to Take Effect

1-109    Code Not to Affect Prior Offenses, Rights, etc.

1-110    Effect of Repeal of By-laws

1-111    Violations and Penalty – Municipal Infractions – Noncriminal Disposition

1-112    Violations and Penalty – Misdemeanors

1-113    By-laws, Recording of

1-114    Orders and Resolves

1-115    Code Book to be Kept Up-to-date

1-116    Future By-laws

1-117    Severability


1-101 By-laws – Definition, Enacting Style

The town council may, by the adoption of by-laws, exercise any power or function which the state legislature has power to confer on it and which is not inconsistent with the state constitution or laws enacted by the state legislature or denied to the town by its home rule charter.

By-laws adopted by the Southbridge town council shall be effective in accordance with Section 12-4 of the Town Charter or on such later date as may be fixed by the town council. In accordance with the Town Charter, such by-laws shall not require the approval of the Attorney General of the Commonwealth.

The enactment form shall be substantially as follows:

“The town council of the Town of Southbridge in the exercise of powers conferred on it by Section 8 of Article LXXXIX of the amendments to the state constitution and by its own home rule charter does hereby adopt and enact the following:

Amend the code of by-laws of the Town of Southbridge by inserting..., or

Amend Section ... of the code of by-laws of the Town of Southbridge by...”


1-102 How Code Designated and Cited

The By-laws set forth in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of By-laws, Town of Southbridge, Commonwealth of Massachusetts," and may be so cited.


1-103 Rules of Construction and Definitions

In the construction of this code, and of all By-laws, the following rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body.

Generally. The provisions of this code shall be liberally construed to affect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression thereof. Words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to their common and usual meaning unless the contrary is clearly indicated. Technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.

Agency. The word “agency” when used in conjunction with the word “office” (as in “office or agency”) shall mean any multiple member body, or department, or any other division of the town administrative service, however designated or described.

Charter. The terms "charter" or "town charter" shall mean the “home rule” charter of the Town of Southbridge, ratified by the voters at the annual town election held in 2003, as most recently amended.

Chief Administrative Officer. The words "chief administrative officer" shall mean the Town Manager of the Town of Southbridge.

Code. The word "code" shall mean the Code of By-laws, Town of Southbridge as designated in Section 1-102.

Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any By-law or in any order issued pursuant to any By-law, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, if seven days or fewer, only business days (not including Saturdays, Sundays, or legal holidays) shall be counted; if more than seven days, every day shall be counted, provided, however, if the last day of the period so computed would fall on a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday the period shall end at five o’clock P.M. on the first business day following such Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, except as may otherwise be required by law

Council. The words "council" or "town council" shall mean the Town Council of the Town of Southbridge.

County. The words "county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Worcester, or such other counties in which the town may lie.

Gender. Words importing one gender shall include and apply to the other gender as well.

Governing body. The words "governing body" shall mean the town council of the town of Southbridge.

Heretofore, hereafter. Whenever the word "heretofore" occurs in any By-law it shall be construed to mean any time previous to the day when such By-law shall take effect; and whenever the word "hereafter" occurs it shall be construed to mean the time after the By-law containing such word shall take effect.

Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three (3) or more town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.

Month. The word "month" shall mean a period of thirty days, or, if the context so requires, a calendar month.

Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural include the singular number.

Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed."

Owner. The word "owner," applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such property.

Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to natural persons.

Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include all tangible and intangible property other than real property.

Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively.

Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property.

Public way. The term "public way" shall mean those ways appearing on the official list of public ways prepared by the Director of the Department of Public Works.

Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements, and hereditaments.

Reasonable time. In all cases where any By-law shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with such notice.

Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property intended for the use of pedestrians.

State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future when applicable.

Town. The terms "the town" or "this town," shall mean the Town of Southbridge.

Town officers and departments. Whenever reference is made to an officer of a department, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the Town of Southbridge."

Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days; but publication in a newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated number of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for more than one day in each week.

Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.

Year. The word "year" shall mean a period of twelve months, or, if the context so requires, a calendar year.


1-104 When These Rules of Construction Shall Not Apply

The rules of construction set forth in this By-law shall not be applied to any By-law which shall contain any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject matter or context of such By-law may be repugnant thereto.


1-105 References to Titles, Chapters, or Sections

All references to titles, chapters, or sections are to the titles, chapters and sections of these By-laws unless otherwise specified. Where the letters “MGL” appear or where the reference is to the General Laws, the reference is to the Massachusetts General Laws. Where the letters “MGLA” appear, the reference is to the Massachusetts General Laws Annotated. Where the phrase “TCM (xx/xx/xx)” appears, the reference is to the Town Council Meeting of xx/xx/xx. Where the phrase “Article XX, §__” appears, the reference is to the Town By-laws in effect prior to the 2006 recodifiction.


1-106 Conflicting Provisions

1-106.1 If the provisions of different chapters of these By-laws conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such chapter.

1-106.2 If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in time shall prevail.

1-106.3 To the extent that any provision of this code expressed in general terms shall conflict with any provision expressed in specific terms, the specific provision shall prevail.

1-106.4 In all cases in which provisions of this code conflict with one another the provision enacted most recently in time shall be deemed to prevail over any older provision.


1-107 Publication of General By-laws

At least ten days before final passage of a general by-law (except an emergency by-law), notice of such by-law shall be published once in a local newspaper and posted on the town bulletin board. Such proposed by-law shall also be posted in full on the town web site and be available in the office of the town clerk. After final passage, the by-law, notice thereof, shall be posted on the town bulletin board and web site and shall be available in full in the office of the town clerk.

Notice, publication and posting of a proposed general by-law under this section shall be performed for the benefit of the public, solely for purposes of information and to make the public aware of the general nature of certain subject matter the town council may consider at a future meeting. Notice, publication and posting under this section is not intended to suggest that the measure will be adopted in that precise form, that it will be adopted with amendments, or that it will be adopted at all. Notwithstanding any amendments which may be made to the proposed general by-law by the town council, the proposed by-law or notice thereof will not be re-published or re-posted before final enactment unless at least three Councilors vote to require the same.

Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall not invalidate any by-law enacted by the town council.


1-108 When By-laws Take Effect

All by-laws passed by the town council, except when otherwise specifically provided, shall take effect and be in force in accordance with Section 12-4 of the Town Charter.


1-109 Code Not to Affect Prior Offenses, Rights, etc.

1-109.1 Nothing in this code or the By-law adopting this code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this code.

1-109.2 The adoption of this code shall not be interpreted as authorizing any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any By-law of the town in effect on the date of adoption of this code, except as otherwise provided.


1-110 Effect of Repeal of By-laws

1-110.1 The repeal of a By-law shall not revive any By-law in force before or at the time the By-law repealed took effect.

1-110.2 The repeal of a By-law shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the By-law repealed.


1-111 Violations and Penalty – Municipal Infractions – Noncriminal Disposition

Whoever violates any provision of this Code of By-laws or of any regulation of any municipal officer, board or department, may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition as provided in MGL, Chapter 40, Section 21D. Each day on which any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. Violations of any by-law or rule or regulation of any town officer, board or department, may be enforced by any police officer of the Town of Southbridge.

The following Schedule of Penalties shall apply to violations of a by-law, rule or regulation, except as otherwise specified in such by-law, rule or regulation:

	A. for a first violation of any provision in one calendar year	$25.00

	B. for the second violation of the same provision within the same calendar year 	$50.00

	C. for the third and subsequent violations of the same provision within the same calendar year	 $100.00

	If reference is made in any by-law or regulation to Schedule of Penalties D through F, the following schedule shall apply:	 

	 	 

	D. $250	 

	E. $275	 

	F. $300	 

Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the intent of this provision that the following by-laws may be enforced through non-criminal disposition in accordance with this section and Chapter 40, §21D of the General Laws, and that Schedule of Penalties A through C shall apply to violations thereof, unless otherwise specified in such by-laws. In addition to town police officers, the municipal personnel listed for each section, if any, shall also be enforcing persons for such by-laws.

List of Provisions Subject to Enforcement Under MGL Chapter 40, Section 21D 

	 	 

	6-203 Removal of Dog Litter

	Additional Enforcement Persons:	Animal Control Officer & Health Inspector

	7-102 Regulation of Overhanging Objects /Devices

	Additional Enforcement Person:	 Building Inspector

	7-103 Obstructions in Public Way

	Additional Enforcement Person:	 Building Inspector

	7-104 Regulation of Leaves, Garden Trimmings, etc., in Public Way

	Additional Enforcement Persons:	 Health Agent & Health Inspector

	7-105 Painting, Printing, etc., Figures or Pictures on Sidewalk or Street

	Additional Enforcement Persons:	 Health Agent & Health Inspector

	7-106 Distribution of Certain Materials in Public Ways

	Additional Enforcement Person:	 Building Inspector

	7-107 Restrictions on Playing Musical Instruments, Public Gatherings in Public Ways

	7-108 Regulation of Digging in Public Ways

	Additional Enforcement Person:	 DPW Superintendent

	7-109 Regulation of Use of Public Areas for Assembly, Parades, etc.

	7-110 Regulation of Use of Sound Trucks, etc.

	7-111 Restrictions on Use of Vehicles in/on Certain Town Owned Land

	7-112 Repair or Removal of Buildings Abutting Public Way

	Additional Enforcement Person:	 Building Inspector

	7-113 Hoisting Materials over Public Ways

	7-201 No Parking During Street Sweeping Operations

	7-202 Inoperable Motor Vehicles in Public Ways

	7-203 Parking of Vehicles in Excess of Certain Width/Height on Public Ways

	7-204 Moving Buildings

	7-205 Motor Scooters

	7-301 Use of Pubic Ways by Pedestrians

	7-302 Prohibition of Possession of Intoxicating Liquors in Public Places

	7-303 Regulation of Coasting in Public Ways

	7-304 Use of Certain Articles/Devices Prohibited on Sidewalks

	7-305 Play, Games, Sport, Other Activities Prohibited in Public Ways

	7-401 Care of Public Property, Buildings and Water Bodies

	7-402 Regulation of Swinging Objects/Devices

	7-403 Notice of Intent to Do Work in Public Ways to be Given

	7-404 Town Boundary Markers to be Respected

	7-405 Street Lights, Warning Lights to be Respected

	7-406 Owners/Agents of Property Abutting Sidewalks Required to Remove Snow

	7-407  No Snow, Ice or Water to be Permitted to Fall or be Discharged into Public Way

	7-501 Youth Protection Curfew

	7-502 Disorderly Actions

	7-503 Noise Control

	7-504 Alarm Systems

	7-505 Fire Regulations

	Additional Enforcement Person:	Fire Inspectors

	7-506 Prohibition of “Camping”

	8-201 Drainage and Erosion Control

	Additional Enforcement Person:	DPW Superintendent

	9-101 Building Inspections

	Additional Enforcement Person:	Building Inspector

	9-102 Plumbing & Gas Fitting Inspections

	Additional Enforcement Persons:	Building Inspector & Plumbing & Gas Inspector

	9-103 Wiring and Electrical Standards

	Additional Enforcement Persons:	 Building Inspector & Wire Inspector

	9-201 Regulation of Earth Removal

	Additional Enforcement Person:	 Building Inspector

	9-202 Regulation of Signs

	Additional Enforcement Person:	 Building Inspector

	9-300    Blighted Properties

	9-301    Purpose

	9-302    Definitions

	9-303    Blighted Conditions

	9-304    Administration

	9-305    Appeals

	9-306    Registration of Vacant Buildings Required

	9-307    Penalties and Enforcement

	9-308    Severability

	10-102 Collection of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse

	Additional Enforcement Persons:	 Health Agent & Health Inspector

	10-103 Maintenance of Areas Free From Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse

	Additional Enforcement Persons:	 Health Agent & Health Inspector

	10-200 Mandatory Recycling

	Additional Enforcement Persons:	 Health Agent & Health Inspector


1-112 Violations and Penalty – Misdemeanors

Any person violating any of these By-laws will be subject to a fine up to the maximum amount permitted by law by criminal complaint filed in the Dudley Division of the District Court. Each day a violation continues will constitute a separate offense. (Article I, § 1) (TCM 3/11/91)


1-113 By-laws, Recording of

All By-laws shall be recorded by the town clerk in the order in which they are passed to be ordained, in a book prepared and kept for that purpose, with proper margins and index, lettered "Record of By-laws of the Town of Southbridge" which book shall be preserved in the office of the town clerk and subject to public inspection.


1-114 Orders and Resolves

Whenever the town council expresses anything by way of command, the form of expression shall be "ordered"; and when the town council expresses opinions, principles, facts or purposes, the form shall be "resolved."


1-115 Code Book to be Kept Up-to-date

It shall be the duty of the town clerk, or someone authorized and directed by the town clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the code required to be filed in the office of the town clerk for the use of the public. All changes in said code and all By-laws adopted subsequent to the effective date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new By-laws are printed as supplements to said code book at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.


1-116 Future By-laws

All By-laws hereafter enacted or presented to the town council for enactment shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of or additions to the Code of Southbridge.


1-117 Severability

It is hereby declared to be the intention of the town council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this code are severable, and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, because the same would have been enacted by the town council without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional or invalid word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.


CHAPTER 2 TOWN ELECTIONS AND ELECTED TOWN OFFICERS

Section

2-100    ELECTIONS

2-101    Officers to be Elected

2-102    Eligibility for Elected Office

2-103    Date of Town Election

2-104    Hours Polls are to be Open

2-105    Terms of Office

2-106    Annual Reports

2-200    TOWN COUNCIL

2-201    Powers, In General

2-202    Meetings of the Town Council

2-300    TOWN CLERK

2-301    Powers, In General

2-400    SCHOOL COMMITTEE

2-401    Powers, In General

2-500    BOARD OF ASSESSORS

2-501    Powers, In General

2-600    REGIONAL VOCATIONAL SCHOOL COMMITTEE

2-601    Southern Worcester County Regional Vocational School Committee

2-700    SOUTHBRIDGE HOUSING AUTHORITY

2-701    Powers, In General

2-800    SOUTHBRIDGE REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY

2-801    Powers, In General


2-101 Officers to be Elected

The offices to be filled by the voters shall be a -

(a) town council (nine members)

(b) school committee (seven members)

(c) town clerk

(d) board of assessors (two of three members)

(e) housing authority (four of five members)

(f) redevelopment authority (four of five members)

(g) regional vocational school committee (two members)

(h) such other representatives to regional authorities, districts, or committees as may be established by law or by inter-local agreement.


2-102 Eligibility for Elected Office

Any registered voter shall be eligible to hold any elective town office except as otherwise provided in the town charter, provided, however, no person while serving as a member of the town council shall hold any other town office or employment. (Charter §§ 2-2-1, 2-2-2 and 11-2-1)


2-103 Date of Town Election

The regular election for all town offices shall be by official ballot on the last Tuesday in June. (Charter § 11-1-1)


2-104 Hours Polls Are to Be Open

The polls shall be opened for all regular elections at 7:00 o’clock in the morning and shall remain open until 8:00 o’clock in the evening. (see MGL c. 54, § 64)


2-105 Terms of Office

The term of office of all elective town officers shall, unless another term is stated, be three years, beginning on the first weekday of July following the election. Every person elected to a town office shall, before assuming the duties of the office, be sworn to the faithful performance of the duties of the office. Vacancies in elective offices shall be filled in the manner provided in Charter Section 11-3-1 (c). (see Charter §§ 11-1-2 and 11-3-1)


2-106 Annual Reports

All elective town officers and multiple member bodies shall prepare annual reports of their activities and shall submit these reports to the town manager for inclusion in the annual report of the town, on or before such date as the town manager may annually establish for the filing of such reports. (see Article VII, § 2)


2-201 Powers, In General

2-201.1 Establishment – A town council of nine members shall be nominated and elected from the town at large to serve for terms of three years each so arranged that the terms of three members expire each year. (see Charter § 2-1-1)

2-201.2 Authorities and Responsibilities – Except as otherwise provided in the town charter, all general, corporate, legislative, policy-making, and appropriations powers of the town shall be vested in the town council. (see Charter § 2-4-1)


2-202 Meetings of the Town Council

All meetings of the town council and of every committee or sub-committee of the town council are subject to Chapter 39, Sections 23A -23C of the General Laws, the, so-called, Open Meeting Law. All matters which come before the town council shall be decided by a majority vote of those present and voting, provided that at least a quorum of the Town Council is present, unless some other provision is made by general law, by-law, or the town charter. (see MGL c. 39, §§ 23A-23C)


2-301 Powers, In General

2-301.1 Establishment – The town clerk shall be elected to serve for a three-year term. The town clerk shall receive such compensation not to exceed the amount appropriated by the town council. (Charter § 3-4-1)

2-301.2 Authorities and Responsibilities – The town clerk shall be the head of the agency known as the office of the town clerk. The town clerk is the chief election official and clerk of the board of registrars of voters, registrar of vital statistics, custodian of the town seal, and licensing officer.

It shall be the duty of the town clerk immediately after every town council meeting to notify in writing all members of committees who may be elected or appointed at such meeting, stating the business upon which they are to act and the names of the persons composing the committees, of all votes passed at such meeting in any way affecting them.

The town clerk shall have all the powers and duties given to the town clerk by the town charter, by-laws, and the Massachusetts General Laws. (Article II, § 2)

2-301.3 Salary – The compensation of the town clerk shall be established by the Town Council. The town clerk shall receive as additional compensation the same sick days, holidays, vacation days, personal days and other benefits as are afforded to other municipal employees generally.


2-401 Powers, In General

2-401.1 Establishment – A school committee of seven members shall be nominated and elected from the town at large to serve for terms of three years each so arranged that the terms of at least two members expire each year. The members and chairperson of the school committee shall receive compensation identical to that received by the members and chairperson of the town council. (Charter § 5-1-1)

2-401.2 Authorities and Responsibilities – The school committee shall have general charge of the public schools of the town. The school committee shall have the power to select and terminate a superintendent of schools, establish educational goals and policies for the schools consistent with the requirements of the laws of the Commonwealth and standards established by the Commonwealth. The school committee shall have all the powers and duties given to school committees by the laws of the Commonwealth. (Charter § 5-2-1)


2-501 Powers, In General

2-501.1 Establishment – There shall be a board of assessors consisting of two part-time members elected by the voters and a third full time member, to be the clerk of the board appointed by the town manager, for terms which expire in different years. (Charter § 3-7-1)

2-501.2 Authorities and Responsibilities – The board of assessors shall, annually and in accordance with the general laws and the recommendations of the state department of revenue, make a fair cash valuation of all the estate, both real and personal, subject to taxation within the town. The board of assessors shall annually provide to the town council its recommendations regarding the percentage of the local tax levy to be borne by each class of property and the effect of such recommendation on each class of property. The board of assessors shall annually determine the annual tax rate. The board of assessors shall hear and decide all questions relating to the abatement of taxes levied by it. The board of assessors shall have all of the other powers, duties and responsibilities given to boards of assessors by the laws of the Commonwealth.


2-601 Southern Worcester County Regional Vocational School Committee

2-601.1 Establishment – Two members of the Southern Worcester County Regional Vocational School Committee (Bay Path) shall be elected for terms which expire in different years. (Charter § 3-3-1)

2-601.2 Authorities and Responsibilities – Officers and members of this board, unless otherwise provided in the charter, shall exercise such powers and duties as are and may be provided by law and inter local agreement. (Charter § 3-8-1)


2-701 Powers, In General

2-701.1 Establishment – There shall be a Southbridge Housing Authority consisting of four members elected by and from the voters of Southbridge and one member appointed as provided by state law. The terms of members shall be for five years so arranged that the term of one member expires each year. (Charter § 3-5-1; MGL c. 121B)

2-701.2 Authorities and Responsibilities – The Southbridge Housing Authority shall make careful studies of housing needs within the town and shall provide such programs to make available housing for families of low income and for elderly persons of low income as it deems necessary or desirable and it may make studies and investigations relative to community development, including desirable patterns for land use and community growth. The housing authority shall have all the powers, duties, authorities and responsibilities as are afforded to such entities under Chapter 121B of the General Laws.


2-801 Powers, In General

2-801.1 Establishment – There shall be a Southbridge Redevelopment Authority consisting of four members elected by the voters of Southbridge and one member appointed as provided by state law. The terms of members shall be for five years so arranged that the term of one member expires each year. (Charter § 3-6-1; MGL c. 121B)

2-801.2 Authorities and Responsibilities – The Southbridge Redevelopment Authority shall make careful studies, surveys and plans relative to community development including desirable patterns for land use and community growth and to determine what areas within the town constitute decadent, substandard or blighted areas. The redevelopment authority shall have all the powers, duties, authorities and responsibilities as are afforded to such entities under Chapter 121B of the General Laws.


CHAPTER 3 APPOINTED OFFICES

Section

3-100    STANDARD PROVISIONS

3-101    Officers, Other Officials and Multiple Member Bodies

3-102    Term of Office

3-103    Council Confirmation of Certain Appointments

3-104    Multiple Member Body Internal Organization

3-105    Time and Place of Meetings

3-106    Meetings with Town Manager

3-107    Filing of Minutes

3-108    References to Statutes

3-109    Reorganization Plans Submitted by the Town Manager

3-200    MULTIPLE MEMBER BODIES

3-201    Aging, Council on

3-202    Airport Commission

3-203    Appeals, Board of Zoning

3-204    Facilities Planning and Construction Committee

3-205    Cable TV Advisory Committee

3-206    Conservation Commission

3-207    Cultural Council

3-208    Disabilities, Commission on

3-209    Health, Board of

3-210    Historical Commission

3-211    Library Trustees, Board of

3-212    Liquor Licensing Board

3-213    Local Historic District Study Committee

3-214    Planning Board

3-215    Recreation Committee

3-216    Registrars of Voters, Board of

3-217    Retirement Board, Contributory

3-218    Scholarship and Education Committees

3-219    Southbridge Trails Committee

3-220    Special Permit Granting Authority

3-221    Trustees of Soldiers, Sailors, Marines and Airmen Memorials

3-222    Agricultural Commission

3-223    Economic Development Commission

3-300    TOWN OFFICE OR POSITION

3-301    Accountant, Town

3-302    Animal Control Officer

3-303    Animal Inspector

3-304    Assessor, Principal

3-305    Attorney, Town

3-306    Building Inspector, Director of Inspectional Services

3-307    Civil Defense Director/Emergency Management Director

3-308    Collector, Town

3-309    Constables

3-310    Economic Development and Planning, Director of

3-311    Elder Services, Director of

3-312    Finance, Director of

3-313    Fire Chief

3-314    Municipal Hearings Officer

3-315    Parking Clerk

3-316    Plumbing and Gas, Inspector of

3-317    Police Chief

3-318    Procurement Officer, Chief

3-319    Public Works, Director of

3-320    Sealer of Weights and Measures

3-321    Treasurer, Town

3-322    Veteran’s Services Director

3-323    Wire Inspector


3-101 Officers, Other Officials and Multiple Member Bodies

3-101.1 Town Officers and Other Officials – Any by-law establishing an office or position shall specify the duties and responsibilities of such office or position.

3-101.2 Multiple Member Bodies – Any by-law establishing a multiple member body shall specify the following: membership, term of office, duties and responsibilities.

3-101.3 Temporary Multiple Member Bodies – The town council may from time to time, by vote, establish advisory multiple member bodies. Whenever the town council establishes such a committee it shall, in writing, advise the town manager it has done so, including in such notice the names and residence addresses of the persons appointed.

The town manager may from time to time establish advisory multiple member bodies. Whenever the town manager establishes such a committee, the town manager shall, in writing, advise the town council that the town manager has done so, including in such notice the names and residence addresses of the persons appointed.

3-101.4 Town Residency Required – Unless some other provision is made in a particular by-law, pursuant to Section 3-101.3, or other provision of law or the Town Charter, all members of multiple member bodies shall at all times be residents of the Town of Southbridge, provided however, non-residents who hold a town office or town employment may serve by virtue of their office as a member of a multiple member body. Any person who during the term of office as a member of a multiple member body removes from the town and becomes a resident of another municipality shall be deemed to have resigned as a member of the multiple member body.

3-101.5 Compensation – Unless some other provision is made in a particular case all members of multiple member bodies shall serve without compensation.

3-101.6 Qualifications of Appointees – In making appointments the appointing authority shall take into account appropriate education, training, experience and other factors which qualify the appointee to perform the duties of the office or other position.


3-102 Term of Office

3-102.1 Town Officers and Officials – Appointments made by the town manager, to individual town offices shall be made in accordance with Sections 4-2-4, 4-3-2 and 4-3-4 of the Town Charter, for a term to expire on a date certain.

3-102.2 Multiple Member Bodies – The terms of office of all appointed multiple member bodies shall be arranged so that as nearly one-third of the terms as is possible shall expire each year. A vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority for the remainder of the term. The term for each office shall be three years, except as otherwise specified by law or by-law. Appointments shall be effective on the first day of July, and expire on the thirtieth day of June, or when a successor has been appointed and qualified. Persons may be reappointed to successive terms, but no member shall have a right to be reappointed. Members of multiple member bodies may be removed pursuant to Section 4-4-1 of the Town Charter. Whenever a new multiple member body is established by by-law, the initial appointments shall be to terms of office of such varying lengths as will serve to create the overlapping terms described in the first sentence of this paragraph.


3-103 Council Confirmation of Certain Appointments

The town manager shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, the officers and department heads listed in Section 4-2-4 of the Town Charter. The town manager shall also appoint, subject to confirmation, members of multiple member bodies as specified in Sections 4-3-1 and 4-3-2 of the Town Charter.


3-104 Multiple Member Body Internal Organization

Each multiple member body shall, at a minimum, annually elect from its membership, a chair, vice-chair and clerk, and such other officers as may be required by the M.G.L. The annual organization and election shall occur in July of each year, or immediately following the annual appointment of members by the appointing authority. Each multiple member body shall, forthwith following its annual organization and election of officers, file a report in the office of the town clerk on a form approved by the town clerk.

The chair shall preside over all meetings of the multiple member body and shall be its official representative in all proceedings before the town council, with the town manager, with other officials of the town and with the public. The vice-chair shall perform the chair’s functions, in the absence of the chair.

The clerk shall be responsible for the certification of the minutes of the meetings of the multiple member body, observance of the public records law, and maintenance of other records of the multiple member body.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this by-law, the members of a multiple member body may reorganize at any time.


3-105 Time and Place of Meetings

The clerk of each multiple member body shall be responsible for notifying the town clerk and the town manager of the regularly scheduled meetings and all special meetings for the ensuing fiscal year. The notification shall also include the location where each meeting will be held. Notice of any meeting of a multiple member body shall be posted in accordance with the provisions of MGL 39, §23B, the so-called Open Meeting Law.


3-106 Meetings with Town Manager

The delivery of services to the public requires coordination and cooperation amongst the various departments, divisions and programs within the town. At the administrative and operational branch level, managers shall seek to identify those areas of concern where it is believed that the various departments and divisions can assist each other in accomplishment of their mission.

The chair of each multiple member body may annually meet with the town manager for the purpose of defining an appropriate reporting relationship during the ensuing fiscal year.


3-107 Filing of Minutes

Certified copies of the minutes of all meetings of all multiple member bodies shall be filed with the town clerk within five days following the meeting of the multiple member body at which meeting said minutes shall have been approved by the body. The minutes of all executive sessions of multiple member bodies shall be filed with the town clerk within five days following the date the minutes of those meetings have been made public. This filing of minutes of meetings with the town clerk is for the convenience of the public. Such filing shall not be construed to be the official records of the multiple member body. The official records shall continue to be maintained in the custody of the person designated pursuant to MGL Chapter 66, Section 6.


3-108 References to Statutes

The references to state statutes which are contained in the sections which follow (describing the powers, duties and responsibilities of the town agencies) are provided for the purpose of describing the broad scope of the authority and responsibility which may be exercised by Southbridge with respect to each particular matter. Such enumeration is not to be construed in any way as intended to impose a limitation on the ability of the town, pursuant to Sections 1-3-1, 2-7-1 and 4-5-1 of the Southbridge Home Rule Charter and Section 20 of Chapter 43B of the General Laws, to reassign powers, duties and responsibilities among and between town agencies generally.


3-109 Reorganization Plans Submitted by the Town Manager

Each proposed reorganization plan filed by the town manager pursuant to Section 4-5-1 of the Town Charter shall bear an identifying number and shall be accompanied by a detailed statement of the town manager in explanation of the reasons underlying the submission of the proposed plan and the goals and objectives expected to result from the implementation of the plan.

Each proposed reorganization plan shall make due provision for the civil service status, seniority, retirement and other rights of town employees as may be required by the provisions of state statute, town by-laws or collective bargaining agreements covering the employees to be affected by such plan.


3-201 Aging, Council on

3-201.1 Establishment – There shall be a council on aging appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, to consist of nine members. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)

3-201.2 Authority and Responsibility – The council on aging shall advocate for the needs of the elderly people residing in the Town of Southbridge. The council on aging shall make continuing surveys of the elderly population to better determine their needs, problems and concerns. The Council on Aging shall develop criteria for program and supportive services development based upon an assessment of needs and participates in programs offered by the Commonwealth’s Department of Elder Affairs and others. The responsibilities of the council on aging shall be to serve in an advisory capacity to the director of elder services. (MGL c. 40, § 8B)


3-202 Airport Commission

3-202.1 Establishment – There shall be an airport commission, consisting of five commissioners. The members of the airport commission shall serve for terms of five years and until their successors are qualified. (Chapter 389, Acts of 1946)

3-202.2 Authority and Responsibility – The airport commission shall have the custody, care and management of the airport and air navigation facilities owned by the town. Subject to appropriation by vote of the town, the commission shall appoint and fix the salaries of all employees appointed or employed by it provided; however, the salaries and benefits of any employees shall be consistent with the town’s compensation and benefits plan.

The airport commission may let or lease said airport or any part thereof for a period not to exceed twenty years, with the approval of the town manager and the town council.

The airport commission may adopt, and may from time to time alter, amend or repeal, rules and regulations for the use of said airport and for the safety of the public thereon. Such rules and regulations shall not be effective until approved by the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and published in the same manner that the General By-laws are required to be published. Such rules and regulations shall conform to and be consistent with the laws of the Commonwealth and the rules and regulations of the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and shall be kept in conformity, as nearly as may be, with the then current federal legislation governing aeronautics and the regulations duly promulgated there under and rules and standards issued from time to time pursuant thereto.

All pertinent provisions of Sections 35 to 52, inclusive, of Chapter 90 (MGL) shall apply to the airport commission. (Chapter 389, Acts of 1946)


3-203 Appeals, Board of Zoning

3-203.1 Establishment – There shall be a board of zoning appeals appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, to consist of three members and two associate members. In the case of an unfilled vacancy or inability to participate on the part of a member of the board, the chairperson shall designate one of the associate members to take the place of such member. The terms of office of associate members shall be for two years. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; MGL c. 40A, § 12)

3-203.2 Authority and Responsibility – The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide individual cases brought by persons seeking land use relief; all as provided for in MGL Chapter 40A, Sections 7, 9, 14 and 17, and the zoning by-law of the town. The board of zoning appeals shall have such duties and responsibilities as may from time to time be assigned by the Massachusetts General Laws.


3-204 Municipal Building Committee

3-204.1 Establishment – There shall be a municipal building committee (MBC), specific to each municipal building project, appointed by the town manager, subject to confirmation by the town council, to consist of seven members. Six members of a MBC shall be appointed by the town manager. In making appointments to a MBC the town manager shall seek to include in its membership a professional engineer, an architect, an attorney and a person representing the building and construction trades. The seventh member of a municipal building committee shall be appointed by the school committee if the project is school related. In all other cases, a person related to the proposed project shall be recommended by the relevant department head to the town manager for appointment and confirmed by the town council. Example: A project related to the fire station, a member from the fire department shall be recommended by the fire chief. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; TCM 3/26/18)

3-204.2 Authorities and Responsibilities – Whenever any construction or reconstruction of a building or other facility is authorized, a municipal building committee shall be responsible for all work in connection therewith including site planning, preliminary architectural plans and drawings, detailed architectural plans and drawings, all bid documents and construction supervision subject to the designer selection procedures adopted by the town council in compliance with MGL c. 7C, §§ 44 – 57 (Designer Selection Law).

The municipal building committee shall meet regularly with the town manager to discuss its ongoing work program and to provide for an orderly interface with other municipal entities, with meeting subject to the Open Meeting Law. (TCM 3/26/18)


3-205 Cable TV Advisory Committee

3-205.1 Establishment – There shall be a cable antenna television advisory committee appointed by the town manager, subject to confirmation by the town council, to consist of five (5) members. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)(TCM 10/19/15)

3-205.2 Authority and Responsibility – The cable antenna television advisory committee shall review all requests made by the general public and general access users and make decisions to resolve outstanding problems based upon the approved guidelines contained in the policies and procedures manual and such other powers and duties as may be provided in the contract between the town and the cable antenna television provider.


3-206 Conservation Commission

3-206.1 Establishment – There shall be a conservation commission appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, to consist of seven members. The commission shall exercise the powers provided in MGL Chapter 40, Section 8C and Chapter 140, Sections 40 and 40A and such other powers as may from time to time be assigned by the town charter, general laws, or by-laws. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)

3-206.2 Authority and Responsibility – The conservation commission shall protect, promote and enhance the quantity and quality of the natural resources within the town, especially wetlands, wildlife and water resources, through planning, acquisition, land management, regulation, scientific research and public education. The commission may conduct research into local land areas and shall seek to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes.

The conservation commission may receive gifts, bequests or devises of personal property or interests in real property in the name of the town, subject to approval of the town council. The commission may receive monetary gifts and expend the same without further appropriation, subject to applicable provisions of the General Laws

The conservation commission shall be responsible for the implementation of the provisions of MGL Chapter 131, Sections 40 and 40A in protecting flood plains, water bodies and other wetlands within the town, and the wetlands protection By-laws and other By-laws and regulations as directed. (See MGL c. 40, § 8C and c.131, §§ 40 and 40A)


3-207 Cultural Council

3-207.1 Establishment – There shall be a local cultural council appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, which shall consist of nine members. No member shall be appointed to a third consecutive term. Members shall have demonstrated scholarship or creativity in, or distinguished service to, the arts, humanities, or interpretive sciences. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; MGL c. 10, § 58)

3-207.2 Authority and Responsibility – The cultural council shall determine the distribution of arts lottery funds or other funds that may be allocated to it, may conduct other activities to promote and encourage the arts, enter into contracts, subject to approval of the town’s legal counsel as to form, and do and perform any and all acts which may be necessary or desirable to carry out such powers and the purposes of MGL Chapter 10, Sections 56 to 58, inclusive.


3-208 Disabilities, Commission on

3-208.1 Establishment – There shall be a disability commission appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, consisting of seven members. A majority of the persons appointed shall consist of persons with disabilities, one member shall be a member of the immediate family of a person with a disability, and one member shall be either an elected or appointed official of the town. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; MGL c. 40, § 8J)

3-208.2 Authority and Responsibility – The disability commission shall research local problems of people with disabilities, advise and assist municipal officials and employees in ensuring compliance with state and federal laws and regulations that affect people with disabilities, coordinate or carry out programs designed to meet the problems of people with disabilities in coordination with programs of the Massachusetts office on disability, review and make recommendations about policies, procedures, services, activities and facilities of departments and boards of the town as they affect people with disabilities, provide information, referrals, guidance and technical assistance to individuals, public agencies, businesses and organizations in all matters pertaining to disability, and coordinate the activities of other local groups organized for similar purposes. (MGL c. 40, § 8J)


3-209 Health, Board of

3-209.1 Establishment – There shall be a board of health, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, which shall consist of five members. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; MGL c. 41, § 1)

3-209.2 Authority and Responsibility – The board of health shall be responsible for the formulation and enforcement of regulations affecting the environment and actions affecting health. The Board of Health shall have such authority and responsibility as is provided to the board of health by the Massachusetts General Laws, including MGL Chapters 111 to 114, inclusive, and by the state sanitary code. The board shall also establish and enforce standards to protect the public health with regard to refuse collection and disposal in the town. (MGL c. 111 to 114 generally)


3-210 Historical Commission

3-210.1 Establishment – There shall be an historical commission, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, which shall consist of seven members. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; MGL c. 40, § 8D)

3-210.2 Authority and Responsibility – The historical commission shall act for the preservation, promotion and development of the historical assets of the town. The commission shall conduct research into places of historic value and shall seek to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar purposes. The commission may acquire by gift, purchase or otherwise articles, artifacts, books, paintings and other materials of historic interest or value and shall provide a proper place for the storage and display of any such materials. The commission may advertise, prepare, print and distribute books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which it deems necessary for its work. For the purpose of protecting and preserving places of interest as it deems worthy, the commission may recommend to the town that such places be certified as an historical landmark. The historical commission shall have such authority and responsibility as is provided to historical commissions by the Massachusetts General Laws.


3-211 Library Trustees, Board of

3-211.1 Establishment – There shall be a board of trustees of the Jacob Edwards Memorial Library composed of seven members. Four members shall be appointed by and in accord with the Jacob Edwards Trust and three members shall be appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; MGL c. 78, § 10)

3-211.2 Authority and Responsibility – The board of library trustees shall have such authority and responsibility as is provided to library trustees by the Massachusetts General Laws. (MGL c. 78, generally)


3-212 Liquor Licensing Board

3-212.1 Establishment – There shall be a liquor licensing board, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, to consist of three members and one alternate member, in accordance with the provisions of MGL Chapter 138, Sections 4-10B and Section 9-1-1 of the Town Charter. (Charter, §4-3-2)

3-212.2 Authority and Responsibility – The liquor licensing board shall have the authority and responsibility provided under MGL Chapter 138.


3-213 Local Historic District Study Committee

3-213.1 Establishment – Historic district study committees, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, may be established pursuant to MGL Chapter 40C, § 4. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)

3-213.2 Authority and Responsibility – An historic district study committee shall investigate the desirability of establishing an historic district or districts. (MGL c. 40C, generally)


3-214 Planning Board

3-214.1 Establishment – There shall be a planning board, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, consisting of seven members. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; MGL c. 41, § 81A)

3-214.2 Authorities and Responsibilities – The planning board shall exercise the powers provided in MGL Chapter 41, Sections 70 to 72 and Sections 81A through 81JJ.

The planning board shall make careful studies of the resources, possibilities and needs of the town and shall make plans for the development of the town. The board shall make, and may from time to time amend and perfect, a comprehensive or master plan, setting forth in graphic and textual form policies to govern future growth and development in the town. The board shall monitor, and report on, progress made by the town implementing the recommendations of the master plan and other plans and studies prepared by the board.

The planning board shall have the power to regulate the subdivision of land within the town by the adoption of rules and regulations governing such development and the administration of such rules and regulations upon the application of landowners for the subdivision of land in Southbridge.

The planning board shall make an annual report, giving information regarding the condition of the town and any plans or proposals for its development and estimates of their costs. The board shall have all of the other powers and duties planning boards are given by general law, by the charter, by By-law or otherwise.

The planning board shall have such authority and responsibility pursuant to relevant sections of the general laws and such additional authority and responsibility as may be assigned by by-law.


3-215 Recreation Committee

Reserved


3-216 Registrars of Voters, Board of

3-216.1 Establishment – There shall be a board of registrars of voters, which shall consist of three members appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, and the town clerk who shall serve ex officio. The members of the board shall represent the two leading political parties, and in no case shall an appointment be made so as to cause the board to have more than two members, including the town clerk, of the same political party. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; MGL c. 51, § 15)

3-216.2 Authority and Responsibility – The board of registrars of voters shall supervise the qualification of persons to vote, shall certify the names of voters on nomination papers and petition forms and shall hold hearings to decide all disputes relating to these matters. They shall have all the other authority relating to elections as provided by MGL Chapters 51-56, inclusive.


3-217 Retirement Board, Contributory

3-217.1 Establishment – There shall be a Southbridge Contributory Retirement Board which shall consist of five members. The town accountant shall serve, by virtue of office, as a member of the board, one member shall be appointed by the town manager and two members shall be elected by the members in or retired from service of such system from among their number and the fifth member, who shall not be an employee or retiree or official of the Town of Southbridge, shall be chosen by the other members. The terms of all members shall be for three years. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)

3-217.2 Authority and Responsibility – The contributory retirement board shall have the powers and duties provided in subdivision (5) of Chapter 32, Section 20 of the General Law, and shall be responsible for the management of the retirement system for the Town of Southbridge subject to the requirements of MGL Chapter 32 and to the oversight of the commissioner of public employee retirement as provided in MGL Chapter 32, Section 21, and otherwise.


3-218 Scholarship and Education Committees

3-218.1 Scholarship Committee – Establishment, Authority and Responsibility – There shall be a scholarship committee composed of five members. One member shall be the superintendent of schools; the remaining four members shall be appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. The scholarship committee shall have all the authority and responsibility provided to such a committee pursuant to MGL Chapter 60, Section 3C. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)

3-218.2 Education Committee – Establishment, Authority and Responsibility – There shall be an education committee composed of five members. One member shall be the superintendent of schools, the remaining four members shall be appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. The education committee shall have the authority and responsibility provided to such a committee pursuant to MGL Chapter 60, Section 3C. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)


3-219 Southbridge Trails Committee

3-219.1 Establishment – There shall be a trails committee, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, composed of five members. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)

3-219.2 Authority and Responsibility – The trails committee shall oversee and promote the recreational trail system in and about the Town of Southbridge.


3-220 Special Permit Granting Authority

3-220.1 Establishment – The planning board, as provided for in Section 3-214 of these by-laws, shall be the special permit granting authority under the zoning by-law. In addition to the seven persons serving as members of the planning board, two alternate members shall be appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, as alternate members of the planning board when sitting as a special permit granting agency. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)

3-220.2 Authority and Responsibility – The planning board, as provided for in section 3-214 of these by-laws, shall be a special permit granting authority under the zoning by-law including, but not limited to, the special permits described in MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9, and for such other purposes as may be provided in the zoning By-law.

When sitting to hear applications for special permits if any member of the planning board is absent or because of a conflict of interest or other disability is unable to participate on a particular matter, the chair shall seat one of the alternate members to act on that specific matter during any such absence or disability.


3-221 Trustees of Soldiers, Sailors, Marines and Airmen Memorials

3-221.1 Establishment – There shall be a board of trustees of soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen memorials, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, which shall consist of five members, three of whom shall be veterans and two of whom shall not be veterans of any war. (Charter, §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2; MGL c. 41, § 105)

3-221.2 Authority and Responsibility – The board of trustees of soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen memorials shall have charge and control of any memorial established by the town for the purpose of properly commemorating the services and sacrifices of the soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen who have served the country in war or persons who have rendered military service for the commonwealth in time of war. Such board may make such rules and regulations relative to the use of said memorials as they deem necessary.


3-222 Agricultural Commission

3-222.1 Establishment – There shall be an Agricultural Commission, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, which shall consist of five members serving staggered terms of three years each. The initial appointments shall consist of two members for three year terms, two members for two year terms, and one member for a one year term, with all subsequent terms to be three years. The majority of the members shall be engaged in “farming” or “agriculture” activities, as defined at Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 128, §1A, but an individual so engaged shall be eligible for appointment regardless of whether he or she derives income from such activities. One member may be a non-resident with an interest in agricultural property located in Southbridge. Up to two voting alternate members, who may be residents not engaged in farming or agriculture activities but with an interest in agricultural property located in Southbridge, may be appointed. The chairman of the Commission may designate any alternate member to sit on the Commission in case of absence, inability to act or conflict of interest on the part of any member, or in the event of a vacancy on the Commission until said vacancy is filled in the manner provided in this section.

3-222.2 Authority and Responsibility – The Agricultural Commission may be called as needed by the various Town boards and commissions to serve as advisors on projects and activities involving agricultural lands and affairs in Southbridge. The Agricultural Commission shall encourage, promote and facilitate the continued pursuit of farming and a sustainable agricultural industry, support and advance agricultural-based economic opportunities in the Town, and work for the preservation of prime agricultural land in Southbridge.


3.223 Economic Development Commission

3.223.1 Establishment – There shall be an Economic Development Commission, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, which shall consist of not more than seven members serving staggered terms of three years each. The initial appointments shall consist of two members for three year terms, two members for two year terms, and one member for a one year term, with all subsequent terms to be three years. One member may be a non-resident, providing that said member be in a decision-making position in a Southbridge enterprise. Up to two voting alternate members may be appointed. The chairman of the Authority may designate any alternate member to sit on the Authority in case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any member or in the event of a vacancy on the Commission until said vacancy is filled in the manner provided in this section. (Charter §§4-3-1 and 4-3-2)

3.223.2 Authority and Responsibilities – The Economic Development Commission shall promote a strong and vibrant town economy in order to increase the tax base and to provide jobs, goods, and services to the community. The Economic Development Commission shall work to promote an entrepreneurial spirit throughout the various sectors of economic development in the Town.

The Economic Development Commission shall review and make recommendations regarding Tax Increment Financing agreements; facilitate the Town’s permitting processes; promote the Town’s industrial park and other enterprise areas; work to attract and retain advantageous growth; and perform such services as will establish a good environment for growth and the retention of enterprise, thus improving the economic condition of the Town.


3-301 Accountant, Town

3-301.1 Establishment – There shall be a town accountant, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4)

3-301.2 Powers and Duties – The town accountant shall keep and have charge of all accounts of the town. The town accountant shall keep the books in such form and detail as may be necessary to clearly exhibit all expenditures and receipts of each town agency. The town accountant shall credit each municipal account with its appropriation for the fiscal year, charging against each such account the expenditure there under as may be made. The town accountant shall perform such other duties as required by the town manager. The town accountant shall also be a member of the contributory retirement board pursuant to Chapter 32, Section 20 of the General Laws. The Town Accountant shall have all the duties and responsibilities given to town accountants under the General Laws.


3-302 Animal Control Officer

3-302.1 Establishment – There shall be an animal control officer appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4)

3-302.2 Powers and Duties – The animal control officer shall be responsible for the enforcement of all laws relating to dogs, including but not limited to Section 136A to Section 175 of Chapter 140 of the General Laws and all by-laws of the town further regulating animals. The animal control officer shall, in addition, have all of the powers of a field driver and pound keeper, as provided in Section 22 to Section 42 of Chapter 49, the authority to take up stray beasts as provided in Chapter 134 of the General Laws and every other enabling authority as may be. In addition, the animal control officer shall be responsible for the taking up, confinement and disposition of wild animals that are disturbing the public peace or providing a threat to public safety. The animal control officer shall coordinate and cooperate, as necessary, with the various humane societies that are active in Southbridge and the surrounding area. The animal control officer shall have all of the other powers, duties and responsibilities given to animal control officers by the Massachusetts General Laws.


3-303 Animal Inspector

3-303.1 Establishment – There shall be an animal inspector appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4; MGL c. 129, § 15)

3-303.2 Powers and Duties – The animal inspector shall make regular and thorough inspections of all neat cattle, sheep, swine, and other domesticated animals within the limits of the town, and, if the inspector knows or has reason to suspect any are infected with or have been exposed to any contagious disease, the inspector may order their quarantine. The animal inspector shall have all of the other powers, duties and responsibilities given to animal inspectors by the Massachusetts General Laws. (MGL c. 129, §§ 15-25)


3-304 Assessor, Principal

3-304.1 Establishment – There shall be a principal assessor appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4)

3-304.2 Powers and Duties – The principal assessor shall, with the remaining members of the Board of Assessors, as appropriate, appraise real and personal property in the town; perform field measurements and inspections of residential and commercial buildings, including new buildings, additions, major alterations, demolition and partial construction; the principal assessor also inspects land and land changes resulting from map changes, deed transfers and subdivision changes, using appropriate appraisal techniques, makes estimate of market value of properties; and keeps apprised of all deed transfers and checks deeds for ownership.

The principal assessor maintains record file system on permanent properties including collected data and calculated cost with depreciation, current market and assessed valuation considered. The principal assessor performs other related duties as required.


3-305 Attorney, Town

3-305.1 Establishment – There shall be a town attorney appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §7-1-1)

3-305.2 Powers and Duties – The town attorney shall represent the town in all legal proceedings and shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the general laws, the town charter, or town By-laws. In advising the town with regard to intra-town matters, the attorney shall exercise independent and impartial judgment. (Charter § 7-1-1)

3-305.3 Special Counsel – No town office or agency shall, unless specifically authorized to do so by the town manager, employ, advise with or consult any attorney or counselor at law, other than the town attorney, with regard to its duties, or to any town business. Whenever it is determined that the services of a legal specialist are required, necessary or desirable, the town manager shall, after consultation with the town attorney and the office or agency involved, designate such special counsel.


3-306 Building Inspector, Director of Inspectional Services

3-306.1 Establishment – There shall be a building inspector appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4; MGL c. 43, § 3)

3-306.2 Establishment – There shall be a director of inspectional services, appointed by the Town Manager, who may, but need not, be the Building Inspector.

3-306.3 Powers and Duties – The building inspector shall examine or cause to be examined all buildings upon which any work is to be done as often as is practicable, and shall upon application examine all buildings which are to be moved, raised, enlarged, altered, restored, built or rebuilt, and shall examine all buildings which are reported as unsafe or dangerous. In addition, the building inspector shall have the authority and responsibility of a building inspector as provided by Chapter 143 of the General Laws.


3-307 Civil Defense Director/Emergency Management Director

3-307.1 Establishment – There shall be a civil defense director/emergency management coordinator appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (See §13 of Chapter 639 of the Acts of 1950)

3-307.2 Powers and Duties – The civil defense director/emergency management coordinator shall be the head of the department of civil defense and emergency management responsible for all emergency functions of the town in the event of an emergency caused by natural or other means. The civil defense director/emergency management coordinator shall have the authority and responsibility which is provided to the office by Section 13 of Chapter 639 of the Acts of 1950, as amended, and published as Section 13-13 of Chapter 33, Appendix, MGLA.


3-308 Collector, Town

3-308.1 Establishment – There shall be a town treasurer collector appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter §4-2-4; MGL c. 41, § 38A; MGL c. 41, § 35)

3-308.2 Powers and Duties – The town treasurer collector shall be responsible for billing and receiving all money due the town and for depositing such funds in appropriate accounts. The town treasurer collector shall maintain such records as may be required and perform such other duties as may be required by the town manager. Further, the town treasurer collector shall receive custody of all money belonging to the town. The town treasurer collector shall be responsible for the investment and disbursement of town funds and shall maintain such records and perform such other duties as the town manager may require. The town treasurer collector shall have all duties and responsibilities given to treasurers and collectors under the General Laws.


3-309 Constables

3-309.1 Establishment – There shall be at least three constables appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. The term of office of each constable shall be three years so arranged that the term of at least one shall expire each year. (Charter, §4-2-4)

3-309.2 Powers and Duties – Constables may serve writs, warrants and processes in civil and criminal matters as authorized by law. They shall have the power of sheriffs to require aid in the execution of their duties. They shall serve all warrants and other processes directed to them by the town manager for notifying of meetings or for other purposes. (MGL c. 41, § 94)


3-310 Economic Development and Planning, Director of

3-310.1 Establishment – The economic development and planning department shall be under the control and supervision of an economic development and planning director who shall be appointed by and responsible to the town manager.

3-310.2 Powers and Duties – The economic development and planning director shall supervise and coordinate the town’s economic development, community development, and planning activities. These activities include advancing the town’s economic development programs; pursuit of funding and management of programs to improve quality of life in the town; conduct research and make recommendations on issues of land use, planning, and growth; assist applicants as they proceed through the statutory planning and conservation processes; and perform other relevant duties as may be requested by the town manager.


3-311 Elder Services, Director of

3-311.1 Establishment – There shall be a director of elder services appointed by the Town Manager.

3-311.2 Powers and Duties – The director of elder services shall, in consultation with the council on aging, coordinate and conduct programs dealing with the problems of aging and shall promote facilities for the health, education, welfare and recreation of the aging. The director shall be an advocate for the needs of the elderly people residing in the town, and shall conduct surveys of the elderly population to better determine their needs, problems and concerns.


3-312 Finance, Director of

3-312.1 Establishment – There shall be a finance director appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4)

3-312.2 Powers and Duties – The finance director shall be responsible for the supervision and coordination of all activities of the department of finance in accord with state statutes, town charter and by-laws. During a period of absence or disability of the town manager, pending the appointment of an acting town manager, the finance director shall perform the duties of the manager pursuant to Section 4-7-1 of the Town Charter.


3-313 Fire Chief

3-313.1 Establishment – There shall be a fire chief appointed by the town manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, who shall be in charge of the fire department. (Charter, §4-2-4)

3-313.2 Powers and Duties – Under the direction of the fire chief, the fire department shall have full charge of extinguishing fires in the town and of protecting life and property in case of fire. The fire chief shall establish a program of fire prevention and safety, and provide for the training of all fire department personnel. The chief shall have authority over the administration of the fire department and shall propose for approval by the town manager all rules and regulations for department operation. The fire chief shall provide ambulance service to the town and shall act as forest warden. (MGL c. 48, §§ 42A-55, c. 148)


3-314 Municipal Hearings Officer

3-314.1 Establishment – There shall be a municipal hearings officer appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4).

3-314.2 Powers and Duties – The municipal hearings officer shall be responsible for the performance of all of the functions assigned to municipal hearings officers by MGL Chapter 148A and by MGL Chapter 90, Section 22B and each and every other provision in the General Laws where a municipal hearings officer is specified. The municipal hearings officer shall have such additional powers, duties, responsibilities and functions as may be provided by the Massachusetts General Laws and town by-laws


3-315 Parking Clerk

3-315.1 Establishment – There shall be a parking clerk appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter §4-2-4)

3-315.2 Powers and Duties – The parking clerk shall supervise and coordinate the processing of parking notices in the town. (MGL c. 90, §§ 20A-E)


3-316 Plumbing and Gas, Inspector of

3-316.1 Establishment – There shall be a plumbing and gas inspector appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4; MGL c. 142, § 11)

3-316.2 Powers and Duties – The plumbing and gas inspector shall inspect and approve all plumbing installations in the town, in accord with applicable rules and regulations or town By-laws, or MGL Chapter 142, and shall inspect and approve gas fitting in accord with applicable laws.


3-317 Police Chief

3-317.1 Establishment – There shall be a police chief appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, who shall be in charge of the police department. (Charter, §4-2-4; MGL c. 41, § 97A)

3-317.2 Powers and Duties – Under direction of the police chief, the police department shall have full charge of keeping the peace and the enforcement of all laws. The chief of police shall have authority over the administration of the police department and shall propose for approval by the town manager all rules and regulations for department operation. The chief shall be in control of all town property used by the department and of all police officers. (MGL c. 41, §§ 97A, 98)


3-318 Procurement Officer, Chief

3-318.1 Establishment- The town manager shall be the chief procurement officer for the town. (Charter, §4-2-3)

3-318.2 Powers and Duties – The chief procurement officer shall be responsible for purchasing all supplies, material and equipment for all departments and activities of the town as provided in Chapter 30B of the General Laws. The chief procurement officer may, as provided in Chapter 30B, §19 of the General Laws, designate other procurement officers to serve the needs of town agencies.


3-319 Public Works, Director of

3-319.1 Establishment – There shall be a director of public works, appointed for a three year term by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, who shall be in charge of the public works department. (Charter, §4-2-4 and §6-1-3)

3-319.2 Powers and Duties – The responsibilities for highways, engineering, sewers, parks, maintenance of buildings and grounds, cemeteries, trees and forestry, insect pest control and other duties outlined in Sections 6-1-2 and 6-2-1 through 6-2-8 of the Town Charter shall rest with the director of public works.


3-320 Sealer of Weights and Measures

3-320.1 Establishment – There shall be a sealer of weights and measures appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4).

3-320.2 Powers and Duties – The sealer of weights and measures shall test, adjust and seal all devices used for the weighing and measuring of commodities and shall be responsible for the enforcement of all laws relating to weights and measures. (MGL c. 98, §§ 34-56C)


3-321 Treasurer, Town

3-321.1 Establishment – There shall be a town treasurer collector, appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council, who shall serve for a term of three years. (Charter §4-2-4; MGL c. 41, § 38A; MGL c. 41, § 35)

3-321.2 Powers and Duties – The town treasurer collector shall be responsible for billing and receiving all money due the town and for depositing such funds in appropriate accounts. The town treasurer collector shall maintain such records as may be required and perform such other duties as may be required by the town manager. Further, the town treasurer collector shall receive custody of all money belonging to the town. The town treasurer collector shall be responsible for the investment and disbursement of town funds and shall maintain such records and perform such other duties as the town manager may require. The town treasurer collector shall have all duties and responsibilities given to treasurers and collectors under the General Laws.


3-322 Veteran’s Services Director

3-322.1 Establishment – There shall be a veteran’s services director appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4) (MGL c. 115, § 10)

3-322.2 Powers and Duties – The veteran’s services director shall furnish information, advice and assistance to veterans relative to employment, education, medical care, pensions and other benefits to which they are or may be entitled. (MGL c. 115, §§ 10-14) The veteran’s services director shall also serve as a veteran’s agent (MGL c. 115, § 3), a veteran’s burial agent (MGL c. 115, § 7) and a veteran’s grave officer (MGL c. 114, § 46A).


3-323 Wire Inspector

3-323.1 Establishment – There shall be a wire inspector appointed by the Town Manager, subject to confirmation by the Town Council. (Charter, §4-2-4).

3-323.2 Powers and Duties – The wire inspector shall supervise every wire over, under or in streets or buildings and every wire within a building which is designed to carry electricity. (MGL c. 166, § 32)


CHAPTER 4 ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS

Section

4-101    Records and Reports of Administrative Activities

4-102    Records and Reports on Financial Matters

4-103    Publication and Distribution of Annual Town Report

4-201    Duties and Authority of the Town Manager

4-301    Ethical Standards of the Town of Southbridge

4-401    Town Vehicles to be Designated as Such

4-501    Town Seal


4-101 Records and Reports of Administrative Activities

All officers, boards and committees of the town shall cause records of their doings and accounts to be kept in suitable books. Said books shall be kept in their respective places in the town offices and shall not be removed there from. Said books shall, unless otherwise provided by law, be open to public inspection at any reasonable time, but shall remain during such inspection under supervision of the officer, board or committee having custody thereof. (Article VII, § 1; MGL c. 66)


4-102 Records and Reports on Financial Matters

All officers, boards, standing committees and special committees of the town having charge of the expenditure of town money shall annually report thereon in writing in such manner as to give the citizens a fair and full understanding of the objects and methods of such expenditures, referring however, to the report of the town accountant for statements in detail of receipts and payments, and may make therein such recommendations as they deem proper. Such reports shall include, in addition thereto, a report of attendance of all officers and numbers of such boards, standing and special committees. Such reports shall be submitted to the town manager for inclusion in the annual town report on or before the fifteenth day of July each year. (Article VII, § 2)


4-103 Publication and Distribution of Annual Town Report

The town manager shall have printed as many copies as deemed necessary of the annual town report, ready for distribution in accordance with the General Laws. The annual town report shall contain, in addition to the reports of officers, boards and committees as herein before provided, a detailed report of all moneys received into and paid out of the town treasury in the financial year next proceeding, showing separately payments made from the proceeds of loans as capital outlays, for permanent improvements, the report of the town collector, of receipts, payments and abatements; statements of all funds belonging to the town or held for the benefit of its inhabitants, a statement of the liabilities of the town on bonds, notes, certificates of indebtedness or otherwise, and of indebtedness authorized but not incurred, and the purpose thereof; a statement of transfers made to or from any appropriation; abstracts of the records of the meetings of the town held since publication of the last annual report; and such other matters as the said report is required by law to contain, or as may be inserted by the town manager under the discretion granted him by law. (Article VII, § 3; MGL c. 40, §§ 49, 50)


4-201 Duties and Authority of the Town Manager

4-201.1 In General – The town manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Town of Southbridge and shall have all of the power and authority that is conferred upon the town manager by the Southbridge Home Rule Charter.

4-201. 2 Control of Activities Not Otherwise Delegated –

Town Property – The town manager shall have control of all town property which is not specially assigned under the school committee or the airport commission and shall enforce the conditions and covenants of any lease or tenancy relating to said property.

Appointing Authority – The town manager shall appoint all town officers whose election by the voters or appointment by some other town board or official is not required by law or by these By-laws.

Residuary Authority – In addition to such other powers and duties as are conferred upon the office by charter, by this code, by custom or by any vote of the town council, the town manager shall have power to do any acts on behalf of the town which are not by law, these By-laws or some vote of the town delegated to some other board, committee or official, or reserved to the voters of the town.

Licensing Authority – With respect to licenses and permits, other than those relating to alcoholic beverages, the town manager shall grant all such licenses and permits and shall have all the powers and duties of a licensing authority under the General Laws, provided however, that the town council retains the power to delegate to one or more town agencies, the powers vested in the town council by the laws of the Commonwealth to grant and issue licenses and permits, and may regulate the granting and issuing of licenses and permits by any such town agency, and may in its discretion, rescind any such delegation without prejudice to any prior action which has been taken. (Charter § 9-2-1)

4-201.3 Authority over Legal Affairs, in General – The town manager, after consultation with the town attorney, may bring on behalf of the town any proceedings before any court, legislative committee, administrative agency or other public official or agency and may answer and defend any such proceedings brought against the town and may cause the town solicitor to appear on behalf of the town in any such proceedings instituted by others in which the town has an interest. The town manager, after consultation with the town attorney may prosecute such suits to final judgment, or may compromise any claims by and against the town on such terms as seem to the town manager and town attorney to be in the best interests of the town, whether or not such claims are in litigation.

The town manager shall have authority in the name of the town and through the town solicitor to prosecute, defend or compromise any and all claims or suits to which the town is a party and in relation to claims and suits whenever in the judgment of the town manager it is reasonably necessary, except actions otherwise provided for by statute or by By-law.

4-201.4 Authority to Settle Workmen’s Compensation Matters – All payments by the town for workmen’s compensation shall, on the approval of the town manager, be charged to the workmen’s compensation claims fund, or the damages and claims account as shall in each such case be deemed to be most appropriate.

4-201.5 Authority to Accept Deeds and to be in charge of Property – The town manager, with the approval of the town council, shall be authorized to accept deeds conveying an interest in real estate to the town. The town manager shall notify the town council whenever such acceptance occurs. All land owned by the town which is not by vote of the town specifically assigned to some particular town agency shall be deemed to be under the authority of the town manager. The town manager shall have general direction or management of the property and affairs of the town in all matters unless otherwise provided by law.

4-201.6 Authority to Manage Town Property and Affairs – The town manager shall have authority to sell or otherwise dispose of personal property and any real estate of which the town has possession or title by following the procedures established in Chapter 30B of the General Laws.

Whenever a town agency to which any land, easement, or other right or interest in land has been assigned determines that the land, easement, or other right or interest in land is no longer required by the agency it shall, forthwith, notify the town manager of such determination and shall identify, with specificity, the land, easement, or other right or interest in land which it has deemed to be no longer needed by the town agency.

The town manager upon receipt of any such determination may refer the matter to the planning board for a report and recommendation. If the matter is so referred, the planning board shall, after study and analysis, file a report containing its recommendations and the reasons for such recommendations, with the town manager.

Whenever any owned land, easement, or other right or interest in land is to be sold the town manager shall file a request to authorize such sale with the town council. The town council may, by a two-thirds vote, authorize the conveyance of such land, or a portion thereof, or the abandonment of an easement or other right or interest in the land. The town council may specify a minimum sum to be paid to the town for such conveyance or abandonment.

The town manager shall advertise and otherwise give notice of the offer to convey or abandon the land, easement, or other right or interest in land in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 30B of the General Laws and any other provisions of law as may be applicable. If the town council has specified a minimum amount, the town manager may, for such amount or any larger amount and on such other terms and conditions as the town manager may deem to be proper, convey said land, or part thereof, by deed, or declare such easement, or right, or other interest, or part thereof, be abandoned.

4-201.7 Policy Formulation for Departments – The town manager, acting through the directors of departments, shall be responsible for the overall supervision of the departments of the town government and for the establishment of priorities and policies to govern the operation of the town departments and agencies.


4-301 Ethical Standards of the Town of Southbridge

4-301.1 No officer or employee of the town shall in an official capacity make or pass upon or participate in making or passing upon, any sale, contract or agreement or the terms or amount of any payment in which the town is interested and in which such officer has any personal financial interests, direct or indirect, unless such participation is authorized in accordance with the provisions of MGL Chapter 268A, Section 19. (Article VI, § 1; MGL c. 268A)


4-401 Town Vehicles to be Designated as Such

All automobiles and other vehicles owned by the town shall be so designated by an approved label, as determined by the town manager, bearing the words "Town of Southbridge" with the exception of those vehicles exempted from this By-law by the town manager. (Article VI, § 8)


4-501 Town Seal

There shall be a town seal which shall include the words “Southbridge, Massachusetts, Incorporated February 15, 1816” and the words “The Eye of the Commonwealth” and be as follows:
[IMAGE]


The town seal shall be kept in the custody of the town clerk. Papers or documents issued from any office or board of the town may be attested to by affixing a copy of the town seal. (Article II, § 3; MGL c. 40, § 47)


CHAPTER 5 FINANCE

Section

5-101    Annual Audit

5-102    Denial or Revocation of Licenses, Permits, etc., of Delinquent Taxpayers

5-103    Due Dates for Payments to Town, Interest on Unpaid Balances

5-104    Fees and Charges by Municipal Agencies

5-105    Purchasing and Other Procurements

5-106    Trust Funds

5-107    Employee Off-Duty Work Details

5-108    Disposal of Surplus Property

5-109    Municipal Charges Lien


5-101 Annual Audit

The town manager shall, subject to confirmation by the town council, appoint an auditor who shall annually, in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards for governmental financial audits, audit all town accounts and financial statements with regard to compliance with applicable laws, regulations, contract provisions and/or grant agreements. The audits may be made by a certified public accountant, or firm of such accountants, who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the town. All documents and reports presented to the town or any employee thereof, by the auditor as a result of said audit shall, upon submission, be filed with the town clerk and shall be deemed public records. (Charter § 8-1-1; Article IV, § 1)


5-102 Denial or Revocation of Licenses, Permits, etc., of Delinquent Taxpayers

5-102.1 Sanctions to be Imposed – The town may, as authorized by MGL Chapter 40, Section 57, deny any application for, or revoke or suspend a building permit, or any local license or permit including renewals and transfers issued by any board, officer, department for any person, corporation or business enterprise, who has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges, including amounts assessed under the provisions of Section 21D of MGL Chapter 40 or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate whose owner has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal charges.

5-102.2 Notice of Tax Delinquency – The tax collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as the tax collector, shall annually furnish to each department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority, that issues licenses or permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, and that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the appellate tax board. (TCM 4/22/19)

5-102.3 Written Notice Required Before a Suspension or Revocation May Take Effect – The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the tax collector or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the tax collector; provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the tax collector, as required by applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party.

5-102.4 Hearing – The tax collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension.

5-102.5 Reissuance or Renewal of License or Permit – Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license authority receives a certificate issued by the tax collector that the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the date of issuance of said certificate.

5-102.6 Payment Agreement – Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit, provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.

5-102.7 Waiver by Town Manager – The town manager may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in Section 1 of Chapter 268A in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.

5-102.8 Exceptions – This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits:

	MGL Chapter 48, § 13	open burning;

	MGL Chapter 85, § 11A	bicycle permits;

	MGL Chapter 101, § 33	sale of articles for charitable purposes;

	MGL Chapter 131, § 12	fishing, hunting, trapping license;

	MGL Chapter 149, § 69	children work permits;

	MGL Chapter 140, § 21E	clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage licenses;

	MGL Chapter 140, § 137	dog licenses;

	MGL Chapter 140, § 181	theatrical events, public exhibition permits;

	MGL Chapter 207, § 28	marriage licenses.

(See Article IV, § 4)


5-103 Due Dates for Payments to Town, Interest on Unpaid Balances

Unless some other provision is made by law which permits a longer time for payment, all bills for the payment of any sum due to the town, for whatever purpose, shall be due on the thirty-first day following the date such bill has been issued.

Interest shall be added to any balance which remains unpaid after such thirty-first day at the same rate as is provided in Section 57 of Chapter 59 of the General Laws.


5-104 Fees and Charges by Municipal Agencies

Any municipal agency or officer otherwise authorized to issue a license, certificate or permit, or to render a service or to perform work for a person or class of persons, wherein the entire proceeds of the fee remain with the town,, may from time to time fix a reasonable fee for the license, certificate, permit or for rendering the service or for performing the work in the manner provided in MGL Chapter 40, § 22F. All elected officers or agencies, other than the school committee, shall consult with the town manager prior to establishing charges and fees pursuant to this section. No charge or fee established pursuant to this section by any municipal agency or officer appointed by the town manager shall take effect until approved by the town manager. A charge or fee established or revised pursuant to this section shall take effect only upon filing with the town clerk.

A fee or charge imposed pursuant to this section shall supersede fees or charges already in effect as of the date the Town Council’s acceptance of G.L. c.40, §22F takes effect, or any limitations on amounts placed thereon for such service, work, license, permit or certificate; provided, however, that this section shall not supersede the following provisions of the General Laws: Chapter.6A, §§31 to 77 inclusive, Chapter.138, Chapter 80, Chapter 140, §§ 121 to 131N inclusive; Chapter 83, Chapter 148, § 10A. Further, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any certificate, service or work required by Chapters 50 to 56, inclusive, or by Chapter 66 of the General Laws.

Transitional Provision

The fee or charge being collected on the date the town council accepts G.L. c.40, §22F for any license, permit, certificate, service or work shall be continued in effect and utilized until a new fee or charge is fixed under the authority of this section.


5-105 Purchasing and Other Procurements

The town manager shall be the chief procurement officer of the Town of Southbridge for purposes of MGL Chapter 30B and, in addition, shall have all of the powers of a purchasing agent, as provided in MGL Chapter 41, Section 103. The town manager, acting as chief procurement officer and as purchasing agent, may delegate all, or any portion of the responsibility for purchases and procurements to other officers and agencies, but, notwithstanding any such delegation shall retain the authority to supervise every purchase and procurement.


5-106 Trust Funds

The town treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds given or bequeathed to the town for any purpose and shall manage and invest such sums in the same manner and with the same restrictions as apply to how other municipal funds are managed and invested. The town treasurer shall annually file a report which shall be printed in the annual town report, which shows the beginning balance in each fund, the interest earned during the year just ended, the amount expended (and unless an account is given elsewhere, the purposes for which such funds were expended) and the ending balance in each such account.


5-107 Employee Off-Duty Work Details

All money received by the town as compensation for work performed by one of its employees on an off-duty work detail shall be deposited in the town treasury and kept in a fund separate from other municipal funds. As provided in MGL Chapter 44, Section 53C, the funds in such account may be used, without further appropriation, to compensate the employee for such services. A surcharge of ten percent of the cost of such services shall be added to the fee charged by the municipal agency for the service which shall be paid by the person requesting the service, and such surcharge shall be credited to the General Fund created by MGL Chapter 44, Section 53.


5-108 Disposal of Surplus Property

5-108.1 Personal Property – Subject to such regulations regarding such disposition as may be promulgated by the town manager, the disposal of surplus personal property shall be governed by the provisions of MGL Chapter 30B, Section 15.

5-108.2 Real Property – Subject to such regulations regarding such disposition as may be promulgated by the town manager, the disposal of surplus real property shall be governed by the provisions of MGL Chapter 30B, Section 16.


5-109 Municipal Charges Lien

A municipal charges lien shall take effect upon the recording of a list of unpaid municipal charges and fees by parcel of land and the name of the person assessed for the charge or fee in the Worcester County Registry of Deeds.

If the charge or fee secured by a municipal charges lien remains unpaid when the board of assessors is preparing a real estate tax list and warrant to be committed under Section 53 of Chapter 59 of the General Laws, the town collector shall certify such charge or fee to the assessors, who shall forthwith add such charge or fee to the tax on the property to which it relates and commit it with their warrant to the town collector as part of such tax. If the property to which such charge or fee relates is tax exempt, such charge or fee shall be committed as the tax. A lien imposed under MGL Chapter 40, Section 58 may be discharged by filing a certificate from the town collector that all municipal charges or fees constituting the lien, together with any interest or costs thereon, have been paid or legally abated. All costs of recording or discharging a lien under MGL Chapter 40, Section 58 shall be borne by the owner of the property.

The following municipal charges and fees have been voted as municipal charges liens under the provisions of MGL Chapter 40, Section 58:

1. Unpaid ambulance charges.

2. Unpaid charges imposed under the provisions of MGL Chapter 40, Section 21D as outlined in these By-laws.


CHAPTER 6 LICENSES AND LICENSING REGULATIONS

Section

6-100    SOLICITORS, JUNK DEALERS AND PAWNBROKERS

6-101    Licensing of Solicitors, Canvassers and Peddlers

6-102    Licensing of Dealers in Junk, Old Metals and Second Hand Goods

6-103    Special Fencing Regulation Affecting Certain Dealers in Salvage or Scrap Metals

6-104    Licensing of Pawnbrokers

6-200    KEEPING OF PETS

6-201    Licensing of Dogs

6-202    Rabies Control

6-203    Removal of Dog Litter

6-300    AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES

6-301    Licensing of Automatic Amusement Devices

6-400    OPERATION OF BICYCLES

6-401    Inspection and Registration of Bicycles


6-101 Licensing of Solicitors, Canvassers and Peddlers (Article XIV, § 1)

6-101.1 Application of Section – It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in this By-law to engage in such business within the Town of Southbridge without first obtaining a license therefore in compliance with the provisions of this By-law. The provisions of this By-law shall not apply to any person engaged in the pursuit of soliciting for charitable, benevolent, fraternal, religious or political activities, or for any other non-commercial purposes, nor to any person exempted by any other General Law, nor shall this By-law be construed to prevent persons having established customers to whom they make periodic deliveries from calling upon such prospective customers to solicit an order for future periodic deliveries.

6-101.2 Definitions – A solicitor or canvasser is defined as any person, who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, travels by foot, automobile or any other type of conveyance from place-to-place, from house-to-house, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale or lease of goods, wares, merchandise or services, or taking or attempting to take contributions for any purpose including without limiting, the selling, distributing, exposing for sale or soliciting orders for magazines, books, periodicals or other articles of a commercial nature, the contracting of all home improvements, or for services to be performed in the future whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for retail sale a sample of the subject of such sale, whether or not he is collecting advance payment on such retail sales.

6-101.3 Licensing Applications – Applicants for a license shall file with the chief of police on a form issued by him, a written application signed under the penalties of perjury, containing the following information:

(a)    Name of applicant.

(b)    Address of applicant (local and permanent address).

(c)    Applicant’s height, eye and hair color.

(d)    Applicant’s Social Security number.

(e)    The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.

(f)    A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.

(g)    The name and home office address of the applicant’s employer. If self-employed, it shall so state.

(h)    A photograph of the applicant, which picture shall be submitted by the applicant and be 2" x 2" showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.

(i)    A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor within ten years of the date of application, except violations of the motor vehicle law, and nature of the offense.

(j)    If operating a motor vehicle: the year, make, color, model, license plate number, registration number, state of registration, vehicle’s owner and address.

(k)    At the time of filing the application, each applicant shall the necessary fee to the Town of Southbridge. See current fee schedule for fee amount

6-101.4 Procedure for Processing Applications – Upon receipt of the application, the chief of police shall investigate the applicant’s reputation as to morals and integrity.

After an investigation of the applicant’s morals and integrity, the chief of police shall, not later than fourteen days from the submission of a completed application, approve or disapprove the application and notify the applicant of his decision. In the event that the application is approved, a license shall be issued. Any applicant shall have the right to appeal to the town manager. An applicant requesting a renewal of a license must apply in person for such license renewal, and provide such material as required by the chief of police.

6-101.5 Form of License – Such license, when issued, shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of said licensee, the date of issuance and the length of time the same shall be operative, as well as the license number. The chief of police shall keep a record of all licenses issued for a period of 6 years. Solicitors and canvassers shall be issued an identifying badge. See current fee schedule for Deposit Fee amount for each badge. This deposit will be refunded upon return of the badge to the chief of police. Each licensee is required to possess an individual license and badge.

6-101.6 Enforcement – The police officers of the Town of Southbridge shall enforce this By-law. No license shall be transferred.

The chief of police may revoke or suspend a license issued under this section as set forth in Section 6-101.10.

Each license issued under the provisions of this By-law shall continue in force for 6 months from the date of its issue, or for such lesser period of time as may be set forth in such license, unless sooner revoked.

An applicant requesting a renewal of a license must apply in person for such license renewal, and provide such material as required by the chief of police.

6-101.7 Hours of Operation – It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit before the hour of 8:00 A.M. of any day, or after the hour of 8:00 P.M. of any day except by appointment. (Article XIV, § 2)

6-101.8 Conduct Prohibited – It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor or any person pretending to be a peddler or solicitor for the purpose of peddling or soliciting or pretending to peddle or solicit to ring a bell or knock at any building whereon there is painted, affixed or otherwise displayed to public view any sign containing any or all of the following words, to wit: "NO PEDDLERS", "NO SOLICITORS" or "NO AGENTS" or which purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting on the premises. (Article XIV, § 3)

It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to represent by words, writing or action that he is some other peddler or solicitor, that he is a partner, employee or agent of any peddler or solicitor when in fact he is not the partner, agent or employee of such peddler or solicitor, or that he is the employee, representative, agent or partner of any person, when in fact he is not the employee, representative, agent or partner of such person. (Article XIV, § 4)

6-101.9 Exceptions – The provisions of this By-law shall not apply to salesmen or agents for wholesale houses, or firms who solicit orders from or sell to, retail dealers for resale, or to manufacturers for manufacturing purposes, or to bidders for public works or supplies or to any person engaged in solicitation for charitable, religious, fraternal, service and civic, or other non-commercial purposes. (Article XIV, § 5)

6-101.10 Revocation of Licenses/Permits – Permits issued pursuant to this By-law may be revoked by the chief of police of the Town of Southbridge, after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:

(a) Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statements made to the police department in furnishing the information required in Section 1 of this By-law.

(b) Any violation of this By-law.

(c) Conviction of the permit holder of any felony or crime involving morals, embezzlement and crimes of this nature.

(d) Conducting the soliciting or peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to be a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the people of the Town of Southbridge.

Notice of this hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given in writing stating the grounds of the complaint and the time and the place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permit holder at the address given on the registration, at least 5 days prior to the date set for the hearing.

Any person aggrieved by the decision of the chief of police shall have the right of appeal to the Town Council of the Town of Southbridge. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the town clerk a written statement of the grounds for the appeal within 14 days after notice of decision by the chief of police has been given.

The town council shall set the time and place for hearing such appeal, and notice of such time and place shall be given by the town clerk in the manner herein above provided for hearing of notice of revocation by the chief of police. (Article XIV, § 6)

Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the chief of police may suspend a license issued under Section 6-101 should the public safety so require. Notice of such suspension shall immediately be provided to the licensee. Notice of a revocation hearing shall thereafter be provided forthwith in accordance with this section.

6-101.11 Penalties for Violations – Every person violating any provision of this By-law is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine. Every violator of any provision of this By-law shall be guilty of a separate offense for every day such violation shall continue and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this section for each and every separate offense. This by-law may be enforced through non-criminal disposition in accordance with G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties A through C shall be applicable. (Article XIV, § 7)


6-102 Licensing of Dealers in Junk, Old Metals and Second Hand Goods (Article XIV, § 8)

6-102.1 License Required – No person shall carry on the business of a keeper of a shop or yard for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or second hand articles in the Town of Southbridge, unless he is duly licensed therefore by the town manager and in accordance with this section and any rules and regulations established by the town manager.

6-102.2 In General

(a) No person who is not himself the holder of a license issued under this section shall carry on the business of an act as an agent or intermediary of a person licensed to carry on a business pursuant to that By-law.

(b) All persons licensed under this section shall maintain books of record in which shall be accurately recorded the following information:

(1) The name, address, date of birth and driver’s license number, if any, and signature of any person from whom an article is purchased or otherwise acquired in the course of business.

(2) A description of the item purchased, or acquired, including the serial or other identifying number, if any.

(3) The date of acquisition of such item, and the price or other consideration paid for the item.

(4) The date of sale or other disposal of such item, and the name, address, date of birth and license number, if any, of the person acquiring the item from the licensed person.

6-102.3 Permanent Record to Be Kept

(a) Jewelry, diamonds, precious or semi-precious stones or gems; precious or semi-precious metals; watches and figurines shall be photographed or photocopied in reasonable detail. Said photograph shall accurately and clearly represent the article.

(b) With respect to secondhand articles, one clear copy of each transaction record and photograph (if applicable) shall be electronically delivered to the Southbridge Police Department no later than 12:00 Noon the following business day.

(c) All transaction records shall be open to inspection by the Chief of Police or any officer or person duly authorized by the Chief, or any other person authorized under law.

6-102.4 Public Inspection of Premises and Documents – Any licensed premises, and the account books required by these rules shall be open to the inspection of the town manager, the police chief, or the designee of either, during reasonable business hours, upon written request.

6-102.5 Enforcement – Violations of this By-law, and any regulations promulgated by the Town Manager hereunder, shall be enforceable through non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties A through C shall be applicable.

6-102.6 Holding Period Before Sale

(a) No secondhand article shall be sold, encumbered by sales contract, or otherwise disposed of, or altered in its appearance, within thirty (30) days of purchase unless the dealer is granted permission, in writing, from the Chief of Police or his designee, but in any case, not within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of purchase. With respect to any secondhand article for which permission is granted by the Chief of Police pursuant to this subparagraph, the person buying or otherwise receiving said article shall complete a transaction record upon a form approved by the Town Manager which provides the information required pursuant to Section 6-102.2(b) above as applicable to a person buying or receiving a secondhand article.

(b) All items purchased shall remain on the premises during the waiting period; items shall not be placed on the sales floor until the waiting period has expired, unless the item is clearly marked with the corresponding transaction number and the sales release date based on the time frame as specified in subparagraph (a) above.

(c) The following are exempt from the holding period required of this Section: Auction purchases, estate purchases from an executor or administrator where the purchase is accompanies by written proof of said position.

6-102.7 Notification to Police Regarding Possible Stolen Property – Secondhand articles, junk and old metal dealers shall immediately notify the Southbridge Police Department upon receiving an article which is questionable as to its status of being stolen or not, and shall make such article available for identification by an officer of the Police Department.

6-102.8 Receipt of Articles from a Minor – No secondhand, junk or old metal dealer or any employee or agent of such a dealer shall directly or indirectly purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange any secondhand articles, junk or old metals from a minor.

6-102.9 Examination and Removal of Articles

(a) Any shop described or governed by Chapter 6-100 and in all secondhand goods, old metals and/ or junk therein may at all times be examined by a person authorized in writing by the Chief of Police to make such examination.

(b) If the Southbridge Police Department determines that a secondhand good, old metal or junk article is needed for evidence in a criminal investigation, a Southbridge Police Officer may seize that evidence, subject to applicable criminal procedures, if any. The secondhand dealer, old metal dealer or junk dealer shall be issued a receipt for the article.

(c) The Southbridge Police Department may keep seized articles, subject to the court’s direction, if any, as long as necessary to permit the article to be used as evidence and for such reasonable time thereafter as needed to best determine, if possible, the person(s) lawfully entitled to said property.

6-102.10 Enforcement and Penalties – The provisions of this section may be enforced by any police officer of the Town of Southbridge, by any means available including, but not limited to, disposition pursuant to MGL Chapter 40, Sections 21 and 21D.

Each day a violation continues shall be a separate violation/ offense subject to another fine. The enforcement of this Bylaw by non-criminal disposition as described herein shall be added to the list of Bylaws so enforced and designated in these Bylaws.

(a) First offense within a 24-month period – $50.00

(b) Second offense within a 24-month period – $100.00

(c) Third and subsequent offenses within a 24-month period – $300.00

If any provision of this article is held invalid by any court or body of competent jurisdiction, it shall not affect the validity or application of the remainder of the article5.


6-103 Special Fencing Regulation Affecting Certain Dealers in Salvage or Scrap Metals

Any person owning a controlling property within the town where wrecked or demolished automobiles and/or any salvage or scrap materials are kept, is to build and maintain a properly painted fence, or other suitable natural screening which cannot be seen through at least 8 feet high, around such space as is used for this purpose.


6-104 Licensing of Pawnbrokers

The town manager may license suitable persons to carry on the business of pawnbrokers in the town, and may revoke such licenses, all as provided by MGL Chapter 140, Sections 70 to 85, and may promulgate regulations with regard thereto. Violations of such regulations shall be enforceable through non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties A through C shall be applicable.


6-201 Licensing of Dogs

6-201.1 Licenses and Fees – The owner or keeper of a dog 6 months old or older shall purchase a license from the town clerk, and shall attach the license to the collar or harness of said dog. If any such tag is lost, the owner or keeper shall secure a substitute tag from the town clerk. No license fee shall be charged for a dog certified to serve a blind or deaf person, provided the dog is actually in the service of a blind or deaf person. New residents bringing dogs 6 months old or older into the Town of Southbridge shall purchase a license from the town clerk within 60 days. No license fee or any part thereof shall be refunded because of subsequent death, loss, spaying or removal from the Town of Southbridge. If a dog owner provides the town clerk with a three year rabies certificate within 30 days of date of vaccination the dog owner may purchase a three year dog license if he or she so desires. Dog owners who renew their dog tags after June 1st or after 30 days from the date of rabies vaccination, or after 30 days from the date of maturing to the age of 6 months shall pay a penalty of $10.00.

Dog license fees shall be as follows:

	Male or Female	$20.00

	Neutered Male & Spayed Female	$10.00

	Male or Female three (3) year license	$40.00

	Neutered Male & Spayed Female 3 year license	$20.00

	Kennel License four (4) dogs or less	$25.00

	Kennel License ten (10) dogs or less	$50.00

	Substitute Tag	$2.00

	Transfer License	$4.00

6-201.2 Definition of Terms – As used in this By-law, unless the context otherwise indicates:

(a) "Dog" shall mean any animal of canine species, both male and female.

(b) “Owner or keeper" shall mean any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog, as herein defined.

(c) "Public nuisance" shall mean any dog which by biting, excessive barking, howling, "running-at-large" or in any other manner disturbs the quiet of the public.

(d) “Run-at-large” shall mean any dog free of restraint which is permitted to wander on private property of others or public ways at will.

(e) "Restraint" shall mean the dog will be on a leash or substantial chain and under the control of a person competent to control or restrain it so that it shall not be a threat to public safety. The mere muzzling of a dog shall not prevent it from being a public nuisance.

6-201.3 Prohibitions – No owner or keeper shall permit any dog whether licensed or unlicensed to become a public nuisance or to run-at-large within the Town of Southbridge anytime day or night.

6-201.4 Penalty – Violations of this by-law shall be enforceable by any police officer of the Town of Southbridge or any animal control officer through non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties A through C shall be applicable.

6-201.5 Notice to Owner and Redemption – If a dog is impounded, the animal control officer shall notify the owner, if known, within 24 hours. The owner may then reclaim the dog by reimbursing the Town of Southbridge for expenses, fines, and fees, for maintaining the impounded dog. In any event, the maintenance cost shall not exceed $5.00 for each 24 hour period, or any part thereof, plus $15.00 as an initial handling fee. However, as required by state law, all dogs 6 months of age or older must be current on rabies and licensed before the animal control officer may release it.

6-201.6 Disposition of Unclaimed Dogs – Any dog which has been impounded and not redeemed by the owner within 10 days shall be disposed of as provided by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 140, Section 151A, and any amendment thereto. All dogs adopted from the Southbridge Shelter shall be vaccinated for rabies prior to release. The adoption fees for stray or unclaimed dogs regardless of sex, breed, or age shall be as follows:

	Adoption fee	$20.00

	Spay or Neutered Deposit	$20.00

	Rabies vaccination	$20.00

6-201.7 Collection of Fines and Fees – All fines and fees collected by the animal control officer while enforcing the provisions of this By-law shall be collected in the form of personal check, money order or registered check and made payable to the Town of Southbridge. In no event shall the animal control officer accept cash.

6-201.8 Disposition of Funds – Any fines or fees collected by the animal control officer shall be accounted for and paid over to the town clerk at such time and in such manner as may be designated by the town treasurer.

6-201.9 Exceptions to Orders – A dog shall not be deemed a public nuisance or run-at-large when:

(a) such dog is attached to a restraining device and under the care and control of a person competent to restrain such dog so that it shall not be a threat to public safety, and the mere muzzling of such dog shall not satisfy the requirements of this order,

(b) such dog is being used as a so-called "hunting dog" and is being supervised by a person competent to restrain such dog so that it shall not be a threat to public safety.

(Article XV, Dog Control Law)


6-202 Rabies Control

Whoever is the owner or keeper of a dog or cat in the Town of Southbridge that is 6 months of age or older shall have it vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian and revaccinated in accordance with MGL Chapter 140, Section 145B. Unvaccinated dogs and cats acquired or moved into Southbridge shall be vaccinated within 60 days or upon reaching the age of 6 months, whichever occurs first.

Any dog or cat that is not currently vaccinated that bites and/or scratches any person shall be confined in an approved, adequate boarding facility for a period of not less than 10 days, at the owner’s expense.

Any dog or cat that is currently vaccinated and bites and/or scratches any persons shall be confined at the home of the owner for a period of not less than 10 days.

Any animal or pet owned or harbored within the Town of Southbridge, exposed to a confirmed rabid animal shall abide by the Southbridge Rabies Control guidelines.

It shall be the responsibility of the pet owner to vaccinate any pet that has been quarantined according to the Southbridge Rabies Control guidelines, and to send the animal inspector a copy of the rabies certificate within 7 days of vaccination.

Any veterinarian bills incurred for vaccinating, or preparing any pet for rabies testing shall be at the pet owner’s expense.

No rabies vaccine is licensed for use in wild animals or wild animals crossbred to domestic animals including wolf/dog hybrids and wild/domestic cat hybrids. They may be vaccinated with a killed virus vaccine by a licensed veterinarian that may or may not provide protection. If the animal bites or scratches a person or domestic animal, the wild animal or hybrid will be considered unvaccinated.

Whoever is the owner or keeper of any animal or pet in the Town of Southbridge, and who has received written notice of quarantine and does not comply with the quarantine order or, if the quarantined animal is found outside the approved enclosure of its owner or keeper and not under his immediate care, shall be subject to an immediate order to isolate or destroy.

Whoever is the owner or keeper of any animal or pet in the Town of Southbridge, and who has received written notice of quarantine, shall notify the board of health in writing prior to removing the animal or pet from Southbridge, giving the name, address and phone number as to where the animal is going to be housed.

Penalty: Violations of this by-law shall be enforceable through non-criminal disposition by any police officer of the Town of Southbridge or any animal control officer pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, the following penalties shall be applicable:

	First Offense	$25.00

	Second and Subsequent Offenses	$50.00

Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the animal inspector to investigate and enforce the provisions of this By-law and to give written notice to the board of health, police chief and the pet owner in regards to all quarantines.

Collection of Fines and Fees: All fines and fees collected by the animal inspector shall be accounted for and paid over to the town clerk at such time and in such manner as may be designated by the town treasurer.

(Article XV-A, Rabies Control)(TCM 11/7/94)


6-203 Removal of Dog Litter

If any dog shall defecate upon any property or area, as hereinafter defined, then the owner, keeper or person then walking or otherwise in charge of said dog shall immediately remove or cause to be removed from said property or area, all feces so deposited by said dog. Such owner, keeper or person must have in his immediate possession an appropriate device for scooping excrement and an appropriate depository for the transmission of excrement to a receptacle located upon property owned or possessed by such owner, keeper or person. This provision shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically handicapped. Unless said feces are removed, the owner, keeper or person then walking or otherwise in charge of said dog (or if said owner, keeper or person shall be a minor, then the parent or guardian) shall each be deemed to have committed a punishable offense.

As used in this By-law, “property or area” shall mean any public property or the common areas of any privately owned property owned or occupied by any person or persons who are not members of the family of the owner or keeper of or the person then walking or otherwise in charge of the dog.

The provision of this By-law shall not apply to a guide dog, hearing dog or service dog accompanying any person with a disability.

The commission of any offense punishable under this section shall be punishable by a fine not less than $25.00 or more than $100.00. Further, any violation of this by-law shall be enforceable through non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws by the animal control officer or board of health, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties A through C shall be applicable.

(Article XV-B, Proposed Pooper Scooper By-law)


6-301 Licensing of Automatic Amusement Devices

6-301.1 Definitions – For the purpose of this section, an "automatic amusement device" shall mean any mechanism whereby, through the insertion of a coin or token, any apparatus is released or set in motion or is put in a position where it may be set in motion for the purpose of playing any game, involving, in whole or in part, the skill of the player, including, but not exclusively, such devices as are commonly known as pinball machines, including free play pinball machines.

6-301.2 License Required – It shall be unlawful for any person having title to or responsibility for the maintenance or operation of any restaurant, public hall, store, place of amusement or any other place to which members of the public may resort, to maintain, operate or permit to be operated or maintained in said premises, any automatic amusement device without having first obtained a valid license from the licensing authority pursuant to the provisions of this By-law.

6-301.3 Gambling Devices Not Permitted – Nothing in this By-law shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

6-301.4 Application – Application for such license shall be made out in duplicate and submitted to the licensing authority upon a form to be supplied by the licensing authority for that purpose. The application for such license shall contain the following information:

(a) Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth.

If said applicant is a corporation, partnership, association, or other business entity, said application shall include certified documentation sufficient to prove the applicant’s existence, principal business address, person or officer upon whom service of process may be served, and the names and addresses of all directors, partners, or if an association, of all members of said association.

(b) Prior criminal convictions, if any, of applicant or its directors, partners or members as specified in (a) above.

(c) Place where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and the business conducted at that place.

(d) Description of machine or machines to be covered by the license, mechanical features, name of manufacturers, serial numbers(s).

(e) A floor plan of the business premises intended to be used for the housing of automatic amusement devices for play by members of the public. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "business premises" shall include the entire building or structure housing said automatic amusement devices, and open for public access. Said floor plan shall clearly indicate the total square foot area of said business premises and shall indicate the intended position of said automatic amusement devices. The scale of said plan shall be established by regulation of the licensing authority.

(f) An approved certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector for the business premises intended to be used for the housing of automatic amusement devices for play by members of the public.

(g) A certificate of approval issued by the town electrical inspector verifying that the electrical installation in said premises is adequate for the uses intended and is in conformance with the Massachusetts Electrical Code (Form FPR-11) as amended.

(h) The names and residential addresses of all persons who have any equitable interest in, or who have otherwise contributed valuable consideration to the applicant’s business or to the applicant personally, insofar as said interest or consideration relates to the procurement, maintenance, operation or display of automatic amusement devices.

(i) Documentation sufficient to provide that the automatic amusement devices sought to be licensed are lawfully in the possession of the applicant.

6-301.5 Age of Applicant – No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she shall be over 20 years of age, and provide proof of United States citizenship or legal residence status as an alien. This provision shall similarly apply to any applicant acting as the authorized agent of a corporation, partnership, association or other business entity.

6-301.6 Consideration of Application – The licensing authority shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of MGL Chapter 39, Section 23B, within 30 days from the date of receipt by the licensing authority of a properly completed application as set forth above, to consider said application.

The licensing authority shall grant a license under the provisions of this By-law unless it specifically finds and states in writing within 30 days from the date of said public hearing that (a) the applicant is not a person of good moral character, or (b) that the granting of said license at the premises intended would lead to the creation of a nuisance or otherwise endanger the public health, safety, morals, order or general welfare by:

(1) unreasonably increasing pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the area in which the premises are located, or

(2) increasing the incidence of illegal or disruptive conduct in the area in which the premises are located, or

(3) unreasonably increasing the level of noise in the area in which the premises are located, or

(4) otherwise significantly harming the legitimate protectable interests of the affected citizens of the town.

No application shall be denied if the anticipated harm is not significant or if the likelihood of its occurrence is remote.

6-301.7 License Fee – Every applicant before being granted a license shall pay $100.00 as the annual license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each automatic amusement device as defined in Section 6-301.1. The license fee shall be prorated based on the date of issuance. Each license shall expire on December 31st and may automatically be renewed upon payment of the annual licensing fee. A license shall not be transferable from person to person or place to place, and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated in the license.

A license may be transferred from one device or devices to another similar device or devices upon application to the licensing authority to such effect and the giving of a description and the serial numbers of the devices involved in the transfer.

If the place of business of the licensee shall move to another location within the Town of Southbridge, the license may be transferred to such new location only upon reapplication to the licensing authority in accordance with the provisions of Sections 6-301.4, 6-301.5 and 6-301.6 of this By-law. No new licensing fee need be paid upon transfer.

6-301.8 Display of License – The license herein provided for shall be posted permanently and conspicuously in the premises wherein said device or devices are to be operated or maintained to be operated.

6-301.9 Revocation of License – Every license issued under this By-law is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly or indirectly, permit the operation of any automatic amusement device contrary to the provisions of this By-law, the By-laws of the Town of Southbridge, or the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts after written notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the By-law or law violations with which the licensee is charged, if after a hearing, the licensee is found to be guilty of such violations. Ten days notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee. At such hearing the licensee and his attorney may present and submit evidence of witnesses in his defense.

6-301.10 Seizure and Destruction of Device – If the chief of police shall have reason to believe any mechanical device or devices are used as gambling devices, he shall, upon a validly issued search and seizure warrant cause said device or devices to be seized and impounded and if upon trial of the exhibitor for allowing said device or devices to be used as a gambling device, said exhibitor be found guilty, such device or devices shall be destroyed by the police, upon proper order by the court. However, if the device has been leased and the lessor has not been found guilty of any criminal violations, said device shall be returned to the lessor.

6-301.11 Prohibitions –

(a) No person holding a license under this By-law nor any employee or agent of such person shall permit persons under 20 years of age to play or operate any automatic amusement device located in an establishment also holding a license under the provisions of MGL Chapter 138, Sections 12 to 14, unless said person is accompanied by a parent. The licensee shall post permanently and conspicuously at the location of the device or devices so licensed in premises so licensed, a sign warning persons less than 20 years of age of this prohibition.

(b) All automatic amusement devices situated on business premises for play by members of the public shall be so installed as to afford an open and accessible space of 18 inches between each device and any adjacent device. Each device shall be installed in such manner as to afford a direct and unobstructed means of entrance and exit from the business premises by means of a corridor or system of corridors of no less than 36 inches in width.

(c) Any business establishment which utilizes more than a total of 150 square feet of open and accessible space between said devices and for use as corridors between or adjacent to said devices as detailed in the immediately preceding paragraph, or any business establishment which displays on its premises a number of automatic amusement devices available for play by the public, which devices if played simultaneously could accommodate an aggregate of fifty or more players, shall be deemed a place of public assembly and shall be subject to all regulations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Building Code governing places of public assembly as set forth herein.

(d) It shall be unlawful for any licensee or permit holder to operate any establishment without an attendant on the premises; that is at least one employee in attendance at all times.

(e) In establishments not included under Section 6.301.11(a) it shall be unlawful for a licensee to allow any person under the age of 18 years of age to play an automatic amusement device during the hours of 8:00 A.M. to 3:00 P.M. when that person’s school is in session.

(f) All suppliers or distributors of automatic amusement devices shall notify the licensing authority in writing prior to installation of an automatic amusement device in any establishment in the Town of Southbridge.

6-301.12 Rules and Regulations of Licensing Authority – The licensing authority shall issue rules and regulations for the use of such automatic amusement devices, but said rules and regulations may only relate to compliance with applicable laws or By-laws, or to public safety, health order or welfare, or to steps required to be taken to guard against creation of a nuisance or to insure adequate safety and security for patrons or the affected public. The licensing authority may also require from time to time the furnishing of reports concerning the ownership of such devices or other interest therein, and any other information which it may deem pertinent concerning such devices and their use and operation.

6-301.13 Operation – Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this By-law, in addition to the revocation of his or its license, shall be liable to a fine or penalty of not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00 for each offense. Every day that the offense continues shall be considered a separate violation. Violations of this by-law shall be enforceable through non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties A through C shall be applicable.

6-301.14 Separability of Provisions – It is the intention of the town council that each separate provision of this By-law shall be deemed independent of all other provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the town council that if any provision of this By-law be declared invalid, all other provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.

(Article XVI, Regulations for Automatic Amusement Devices)


6-401 Inspection and Registration of Bicycles

6-401.1 Bicycles to be Inspected and Registered – No resident of the Town of Southbridge shall operate a bicycle on a public way in the Town of Southbridge without first having that bicycle safety inspected and numerically registered by the police department and unless the registration plate or decal issued therefore is attached to such bicycle.

6-401.2 Safety Inspection – The safety inspection shall include checks or tests on the following bicycle equipment: frame, wheels, brakes, handlebars, reflectors and seat.

6-401.3 Application for Registration – The application for registration shall contain the name, address, age of the owner, the make of the bicycle and serial number, if any affixed by the maker, or any other identifying marks.

6.401.4 Registration Number – The certificate of registration will include a numeric adhesive label assigned to the owner and attached by the police department. This will be recorded in a permanent log kept at the police department and will be in effect, unless suspended as hereinafter provided, so long as such registrants own said bicycles or five years from the original date of registration. The fee for this inspection will be $1.00.

6-401.5 Sale or Transfer of a Registered Bicycle – Upon the sale or other transfer of a registered bicycle, the registrant shall remove the registration plate or decal and surrender the same to the police department, or may, upon application but without payment of additional fee, have a new plate or decal assigned to another bicycle owned by the applicant.

6-401.6 Provisions Applicable to Bicycle Rental Agencies – A bicycle rental agency in the Town of Southbridge shall not offer any bicycle for rent unless the bicycle is registered and a registration plate or decal is attached thereto as provided herein

6-401.7 Impoundments of Bicycles – A bicycle operated by any resident under the age of eighteen in violation of this section may be impounded by the police department for a period not to exceed 15 days. In order to recover possession of the impounded bicycle, proof of ownership must be provided within this 15-day period, and the bicycle must be registered.

6-401.8 Provisions Applicable to Bicycle Rental Agencies, Enforcement of Section – Violations of this By-law shall be under Clause 16B of Section 21 of Chapter 40, non-criminal disposition, with a fine of $20.00, enforcement shall be by the police department.

(Article XXIV – "The Safe Operation and Registration of Bicycles”)(See MGL c. 85, §§ 11A-11D)


CHAPTER 7 PRESERVATION OF THE PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER

Section

7-100    ISSUANCE OF LICENSES OR PERMITS

7-101    Permits, In General

7-102    Regulation of Overhanging Objects/Devices

7-103    Obstructions in Public Way

7-104    Regulation of Leaves, Garden Trimmings, etc., in Public Way

7-105    Painting, Printing, etc., Figures or Pictures on Sidewalk or Street

7-106    Distribution of Certain Materials in Public Ways

7-107    Restrictions on Playing Musical Instruments, Public Gatherings in Public Ways

7-108    Regulation of Digging in Public Ways

7-109    Regulation of Use of Public Areas for Assembly, Parades, etc.

7-110    Regulation of Use of Sound Trucks, etc.

7-111    Restrictions on Use of Vehicles in/on Certain Town Owned Land

7-112    Repair or Removal of Buildings Abutting Public Way

7-113    Hoisting Materials over Public Ways

7-200    OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES

7-201    No Parking During Street Sweeping Operations

7-202    Inoperable Motor Vehicles in Public Ways

7-203    Parking of Vehicles in Excess of Certain Width/Height on Public Ways

7-204    Moving Buildings

7-205    Motor Scooters

7-206    Traffic Rules and Regulations

7-300    PEDESTRIANS AND PERSONS ‘ON FOOT’

7-301    Use of Pubic Ways by Pedestrians

7-302    Prohibition of Possession of Intoxicating Liquors and Medical Marijuana in Public Places

7-303    Regulation of Coasting in Public Ways

7-304    Prohibition of Use of Certain Articles/Devices on Sidewalks

7-305    Prohibition of Play, Games, Sport, Other Activities in Public Ways

7-400    OWNERS/OCCUPANTS OF PROPERTY

7-401    Care of Public Property, Buildings and Water Bodies

7-402    Regulation of Swinging Objects/Devices

7-403    Notice of Intent to Do Work in Public Ways to be Given

7-404    Town Boundary Markers to be Respected

7-405    Street Lights, Warning Lights to be Respected

7-406    Owners/Agents of Property Abutting Sidewalks Required to Remove Snow

7-407    No Snow, Ice or Water to be Discharged into Public Way

7-500    MISCELLANEOUS

7-501    Youth Protection Curfew

7-502    Disorderly Actions

7-503    Noise Control

7-504    Alarm Systems

7-505    Fire Regulations

7-506    Prohibition of “Camping”

7-507    Sex Offender Residency

7-508    Graffiti

7-509    Marijuana


7-101 Permits, In General

In all cases in which these By-laws require a permit to be issued, the permit shall be applied for, and issued prior to the commencement of any work or activity for which the permit is required.. As appropriate, the issuing authority may require a bond to be posted to assure compliance with standards imposed and the protection and preservation of public property. The issuing authority may, in appropriate circumstances, suspend any permit to the extent that the public health and safety so require, and may revoke said permit after a hearing.


7-102 Regulation of Overhanging Objects/Devices

No person shall place or maintain any sign, awning, canopy, shade, or frame for the same, in or over any street without first obtaining a permit from the town manager to do so. In no case shall any sign, awning, canopy, shade or frame be less than seven feet above the sidewalk, nor extend into the street beyond the line of the sidewalk. The town manager may require a bond to insure performance. (Article VIII, § 1)


7-103 Obstructions in Public Way

7-103.1 No person shall place an obstruction, or cause an obstruction to be placed in any of the public streets or squares, or upon any public sidewalk, without first obtaining a written permit for a specified time from the chief of police. (Article VIII, § 3)

7-103.2 No person shall erect, set up or maintain any fence, portico, roof, platform, or doorstop extending into or over any public highway or street without first obtaining a written permit for a specified time from the chief of police. (Article VIII, § 14)


7-104 Regulation of Leaves, Garden Trimmings, Rubbish, etc., in Public Way

7-104.1 No person shall sweep, rake or throw, or place any rubbish, leaves or other like substance upon any sidewalk or street in the town without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police. (Article VIII, § 4) (TCM 2/25/08)

7-104.2 No person shall place any leaves, garden trimmings or other like substance upon any sidewalk or street in the Town except in officially approved containers for the sole purpose of collection by employees or designated agents of the Town during designated period of collection. Such placements, conforming to these guidelines, shall be exempt from the provisions of Section 7-104.1 of these bylaws. Such containers shall not remain upon any sidewalk or street in the town for longer than 24 hours before or after the collection period. (TCM 2/25/08)


7-105 Painting, Printing, etc., Figures or Pictures on Sidewalk or Street

No person shall place, paint, print or work figures or pictures on any public sidewalk or street without a permit to do so issued by the chief of police. (Article VIII, § 4) (TCM 12/2/91)


7-106 Distribution of Certain Materials in Public Ways

No person shall post any posters, handbills, placards, signs, notices or similar material upon any sidewalk, street, public building or other public property in the town; provided, however, that the town manager may designate particular locations where such materials may be posted. (Article VIII, § 6)


7-107 Restrictions on Playing Musical Instruments, Public Gatherings in Public Ways

No person shall play upon any musical instrument or form any public gathering in any street or public place in the town without a written permit therefore from the town manager. (Article VIII, § 8)


7-108 Regulation of Digging in Public Ways

No person, except the town manager and the director of the DPW in the lawful performance of their duties, or those acting under their orders, or those who are otherwise properly authorized, shall break up or dig in any street or public way in the town without first obtaining a written permit from the town manager, which permit shall state the regulations under which such excavation and restoration shall be done. All persons acting under such a permit shall put up, erect, and maintain a suitable railing or fence, or pedestrian walk around the part of the street so excavated, so long as the same shall remain unsafe and inconvenient for travelers, and sufficient lights shall be attached to such railings or fence from sunset to sunrise so as to protect all travelers from injury until the work is completed. The work or excavation done under said permit must be in accordance with such regulations and, upon the completion of said work, the surface of said street or way shall be promptly restored as specified in the permit. (Article VIII, § 9)


7-109 Regulation of Use of Public Areas for Assembly, Parades, etc.

The town manager shall have control of the public streets, sidewalks and grounds of the town for all purposes of public gatherings, and no public assembly or parade on such places within the town shall be permitted unless a written permit stating the time, place, and purpose of such event has been issued by the town manager. (Article VIII, § 26)


7-110 Regulation of Use of Sound Trucks, etc.

It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation either as principal, agent, or employee to plan, use or operate for advertising purposes, or for any other purpose whatsoever, on or upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, or thoroughfares in the Town of Southbridge, any device known as a sound truck loudspeaker or sound amplifier or radio or phonograph with a loudspeaker or sound amplifier, or any other instrument known as a calliope, or any instrument of any kind or character which emits there from loud and raucous noises and is attached to and upon any vehicle or any individual car operated or standing upon said streets or public places aforementioned unless a written permit stating the time, place and purpose of such event has been issued by the town manager. (Article VIII, § 27)


7-111 Restrictions on Use of Vehicles in/on Certain Town Owned Land

No person shall drive, ride, push or tow any motor vehicle including, but not limited to, motorcycles, recreational vehicles as defined by MGL Chapter 90B, automobiles, mopeds, or other motorized conveyances upon any park, playground, cemetery, conservation land, school yard or any other land of the town, except as otherwise permitted by the town manager. No owner and no other person in custody or control of any of the above-described vehicles shall allow another person to drive, ride, push or tow said vehicle upon any of the lands above-described.

Any person who violates this By-law shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00 for the first offense in any calendar year or by a fine of $50.00 for any subsequent offense in a calendar year.

Any police officer who observes a violation of this By-law may, as an alternative to initiating criminal proceedings, give to the offender a written notice to appear before the Clerk of the District Court having jurisdiction of the offense, at any time during business hours, not later than 21 days after the date of such notice. Such notice shall be prepared in triplicate, on a form which complies with the requirements of MGL Chapter 40, Section 21D, as amended, and shall be delivered to the offender in a manner consistent therewith. Whenever practicable, said notice shall be signed by the offender, as an acknowledgement of the receipt thereof. The disposition of all such offenses shall follow the procedure established by MGL Chapter 40, Section 2lD, as amended. (Article VIII, § 33)


7-112 Repair or Removal of Buildings Abutting Public Way

7-112.1 Any person who intends to repair or take down any building on land abutting on any way which the town is required to keep in repair and intends to make use of any portion of said way for the purpose of placing thereon building materials or rubbish shall give notice thereof to the town manager. Thereupon, the town manager may grant a permit to occupy a portion of said way to be used for such purposes as in the judgment of the town manager the necessity of the case and security of the public require. Such permit, in no event to exceed a period of more than 90 days, shall contain such conditions as the town manager may require. Sufficient lights shall be so placed from sunset to sunrise as to protect all travelers from injury. (Article VIII, § 12)

7-112.2 The town manager may, before granting such permits, require such persons to furnish a satisfactory bond to save the town harmless from any damages that may arise from such obstructions in the street and to insure the faithful compliance with the conditions of said permit. (Article VIII, § 13)


7-113 Hoisting Materials over Public Ways

No person shall hoist any material from any street or sidewalk into a building adjoining same so that said material by being hoisted shall overhang any part of the street or sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police. (Article VIII, § 22)


7-201 No Parking During Street Sweeping Operations

During street sweeping operations, there shall be no parking on streets designated by the town manager or the director of public works. Any vehicle parked in violation of this By-law shall be removed by order of the town manager, chief of police or director of public works or their authorized representatives. If the vehicle is removed for the purpose of street sweeping operations, towing and storage charges may also be imposed, as otherwise provided by law. A record of registration numbers of each vehicle so removed shall be kept that also states the place to which it was removed, and within 12 hours, the police department shall notify the owner or his agent. Before the owner or his agent shall be permitted to claim a vehicle which has been removed as aforesaid to a garage or other convenient place, he shall furnish satisfactory evidence to the owner or person in charge of said garage, or the chief of police, of his identity and ownership or right to the possession of said vehicle. (Article VIII, § 34)


7-202 Inoperable Motor Vehicles in Public Ways

No person owning, possessing or having charge of a motor vehicle that is inoperable shall allow said vehicle to remain out of use upon any street or way, except in case of emergency.

No person shall perform any work including, but not limited to, repair work, maintenance work, changing parts, etc., on any motor vehicle on any public street, public way or public parking lot, except such emergency repair work as is necessary to remove said vehicle from the said street, way or parking lot. (Article VIII, § 35) (TCM 9/24/84)


7-203 Parking of Vehicles in Excess of Certain Width and Height on Public Ways

No person shall park any vehicle in excess of 7 feet in width or 8 feet in height on any public way for a period of longer than 20 minutes, unless for some purpose incidental to the operation of the vehicle, loading or unloading of the vehicle, or the performance of a service during a normal working day. (Article VIII, § 36)(TCM 10/26/87)


7-204 Moving Buildings

No person shall move a building in a public way without a permit. Such permit may be issued by the town manager, upon such terms as public safety may require, and any person to whom a permit is granted shall execute a bond to the town in such a sum as the town manager deems appropriate.


7-205 Motor Scooters

7-205.1 Definitions – As used in this section, the term “motor scooter” shall mean any wheeled device designed to transport one or more persons which is powered by any type of motor, except:

(a) any “motorcycle” or “motorized bicycle” as defined in MGL Chapter 90, Section 1;

(b) any vehicle registered as a motor vehicle by the registrar of motor vehicles or lawfully exempt from registration;

(c) any wheelchair used by a person with physical disabilities, or any similar mobility–assisting device used by a person whose ambulatory mobility has been impaired by age, illness, or physical ailment; or

(d) any vehicle owned or leased by the Town of Southbridge.

7-205.2 Prohibited Conduct – No person shall operate any motor scooter on any portion of any public street or private street without permission of the owner(s) as shown on the official map of the town, including the sidewalk area of any such street, or on any other public property including schools, playgrounds, and parks, within the Town of Southbridge.

No person shall ride as a passenger on any motor scooter operated by another person in violation of the above restrictions.

7-205.3 Exception – Notwithstanding the prohibitions of Section 7-205.2, this By-law shall not prohibit the operation of any electric vehicle not capable of speeds in excess of 12 ½ miles per hour on any paved sidewalk or marked pedestrian crosswalk.

7-205.4 Enforcement – The provisions of this section may be enforced by any police officer of the Town of Southbridge, by any means available including, but not limited to, disposition pursuant to MGL Chapter.40, Sections 21 and 21D. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.

When enforced through non-criminal disposition the penalties shall be as follows:

For operating a motor scooter in violation of Section 7-205:

	First violation:	$ 25.00

	Second violation:	$ 50.00

	Third and subsequent violations:	$100.00

For riding as a passenger on a motor scooter operated by another person in violation of Section 7-205:

	First violation:	$ 25.00

	Second violation:	$ 50.00

	Third and subsequent violations:	$100.00


7-206 Traffic Rules and Regulations

(a) In General – The traffic and parking commission established in Section 3-221 of these By-laws, and in conformity with the provisions of said section, shall have authority to adopt, amend, alter, and repeal rules and regulations relative to vehicular traffic in the town, and to the movement, stopping or standing of vehicles on, and their exclusion from, all or any streets, ways, highways, roads and parkways, under the control of the town.

(b) Penalties for Violations – The traffic and parking commission may prescribe penalties for violations of the provisions of any By-law regulating traffic or parking, and for violations of the rules and regulations of the traffic and parking commission, pursuant to MGL Chapter 40, Sections 20 and 21D.

(c) Enforcement – Police officers of the Town of Southbridge shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this By-law and any rules, regulations or orders of the traffic and parking commission.

(d) Procedure for Public Suggestion to the Traffic and Parking Commission – Ten residents of the town who are eighteen years of age or older may petition the traffic and parking commission relating to any rule or regulation adopted, or proposed to be adopted, by the commission relating to traffic or parking.

The commission shall hold a public hearing concerning any petition addressed to it by residents within 30 days after the filing with the commission of such petition. If a public hearing shall be held pursuant to this section on any proposed rule or regulation, the proposed rule or regulation shall not be adopted until the public hearing has been concluded. After the public hearing has been held, any vote on the subject matter must be passed by a majority of the entire membership of the commission. Petitioners may be represented by any interested party or legal representative.


7-301 Use of Public Ways by Pedestrians

7-301.1 Definitions – For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

(a) “Crosswalk” means that portion of the roadway included within the prolongation of the sidewalk lines at street intersections.

(b) “Curb” means the lateral boundary of the roadway whether such curb is marked by curbing construction, or not so marked.

(c) “Driver” means every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.

(d) “Handicapped Person” means any person so severely handicapped that he is unable to move from place to place without the aid of a mechanical device, wheelchair, walker, cane or canes, crutch, invalid tricycle or any similar device intended for and used by such person.

(e) “Pedestrian” means any person afoot.

(f) “Right-of-Way” means the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.

(g) “Roadway” means that portion of the street or highway located between the curb lines.

(h) “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb line or roadway and the adjacent property line designated for pedestrian use.

(i) “Stop” means, when required, complete cessation of movement.

(j) “Street or Highway” means the entire width between property lines or every way or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter or right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.

(k) “Traffic” means pedestrians, vehicles and other conveyances whether single or together while using any highway for the purpose of travel.

(l) “Vehicle” means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway.

7-301.2 Right-of-Way – Where traffic control signals or pedestrian control signals are not in place or in operation, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to a pedestrian crossing the roadway or street within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk.

Whenever stop signals or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection or a marked crosswalk between intersections, the pedestrian shall have the right-of-way over drivers of vehicles, and at such marked places drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk and any pedestrian within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of the roadway shall have the right-of-way over any vehicle so stopped.

The driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering any crosswalk when any vehicle proceeding in the same direction is stopped at such crosswalk for the purpose of permitting a pedestrian to cross.

7-301.3 Pedestrians Crossing Roadway –

(a) At no place shall a pedestrian cross any roadway other than by the most direct route to the opposite curbing, and when crossing at any place other than a crosswalk he shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway. No person shall stand or loiter in any roadway other than in a safety zone, if such act interferes with the lawful movement of traffic.

(b) Signals – At intersections where traffic is directed by a policeman or by a stop and go signal, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to cross the roadway other than with released traffic, if such crossing interferes with the lawful moving of traffic.

(c) Standing on Sidewalk – It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to stand on any sidewalk except as near as reasonably possible to the building line or curb line, if such standing interferes with the use of said sidewalk by other pedestrians.

(d) Pedestrian Crossing -

(1) Between adjacent intersections at which traffic control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.

(2) In a business district, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk.

(e) Pedestrians Walking Along Roadways -

(1) Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.

(2) Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing traffic, and upon meeting a vehicle shall step off to the left.

(3) No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride from the driver of any vehicle.

(4) No person shall push a shopping cart in the roadway.

(f) Blind Pedestrians – Right-of-Way – Any blind person who is carrying in a raised or extended position a cane or walking stick which is white in color or white tipped with red, or who is being guided by a dog shall have the right-of-way in crossing any street or highway, whether or not traffic on such street or highway is controlled by traffic signals.

The driver of any vehicle approaching the place where a blind person, so carrying such a cane or walking stick or being so guided, is crossing a street or highway shall bring the vehicle to a full stop and before proceeding shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid injury to the blind person. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a blind person who is not carrying such a cane or walking stick or is not guided by a dog, but the other provisions of this chapter relating to pedestrians shall be applicable to such person. However, the failure of a blind person to so use or so carry such a cane or walking stick or to be guided by a guide dog when walking on streets, highways or sidewalks shall not be considered evidence of contributory negligence.

(g) Handicapped Persons – Right of Way – Handicapped persons utilizing wheelchairs and invalid tricycles may go on a public street to cross in a crosswalk or to cross at any intersection where pedestrian crossing is not prohibited. The operator shall observe all laws and By-laws concerning pedestrians.

No person shall interfere with any handicapped person using a wheelchair or invalid tricycle in accordance with the terms of this By-law.

Violations of this by-law shall be enforceable by any police officer of the Town of Southbridge pursuant to MGL Chapter 40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties A through C shall be applicable. (Article VIII, § 40)(TCM 4/26/93)


7-302 Prohibition of Possession of Intoxicating Liquors and Medical Marjiuana in Public Places

No person shall have in their possession an open container containing any intoxicating liquor, or smoke and ingest marijuana, in any park, playground, cemetery, conservation land or other public place in the Town of Southbridge, except as otherwise permitted by the town manager. Any person violating this By-law shall be punishable as provided in Section 1-111 of this code. (Article VIII, § 31.1)(TCM 11/29/74, 7/8/75)


7-303 Regulation of Coasting in Public Ways

No person shall coast upon any sidewalk or upon any street except at such times, and in such places as may be designated by the town manager. A skateboard, scooter or any other device used to coast in violation of this section may be impounded. (Article VIII, § 5)


7-304 Use of Certain Articles/Devices Prohibited on Sidewalks

No person shall drive, wheel, or draw any cart, bicycle, wheelbarrow, handcart, or wagon, except children’s carriages or shopping carriages drawn by hand, upon any sidewalk in the town. This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the use of any means of conveyance by a person who is handicapped or disabled and who is subject to the protection of federal or state law applicable to such persons. (Article VIII, § 16)


7-305 Play, Games, Sport, Other Activities Prohibited in Public Ways

No person shall, in any street or way, throw stones, snowballs, sticks or other missiles, nor play ball, kick a football, nor play any other games which interfere with the free, safe and convenient use of said street or way by any person traveling or passing along on same. (Article VIII, § 21)


7-401 Care of Public Property, Buildings and Water Bodies

No person shall in any manner remove, deface or injure any public property, public building or public grounds of the town, nor shall any person throw or place any substance into the same or into any of the public waters of the town. (Article VIII, § 7).

Any violation of this section shall be enforceable by any police officer of the Town through non-criminal disposition pursuant to MGL Chapter 40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties A through C shall be applicable.


7-402 Regulation of Swinging Objects/Devices

No person shall allow any gate or door belonging to premises under their control, and adjoining any public way, to swing on, over or into said public way. (Article VIII, § 2)


7-403 Notice of Intent to Do Work in Public Ways to be Given

Whenever a department of the town is about to construct or repair any street or way, it shall, before beginning the work, give reasonable notice of such intention to other departments and corporations affected thereby and to all abutting owners. After such notice has been given and work completed, no department, corporation or person shall for a space of one year break up or disturb the surface of said street or way within the area so constructed and repaired except in the case of emergency. (Article VIII, § 10)


7-404 Town Boundary Markers to be Respected

No person shall break, remove, deface or otherwise injure any marker or bound which marks a street, line or public way on town land. (Article VIII, § 17)


7-405 Street Lights, Warning Lights to be Respected

No person shall extinguish any street light, nor extinguish or remove any light placed to denote an obstruction or defect in any street or way, without proper authority. (Article VIII, § 19)


7-406 Owners/Agents of Property Abutting Sidewalks Required to Remove Snow

No owner or agent of an owner of premises abutting upon brick, concrete or other curbed or other finished sidewalk shall place or suffer to remain for more than 12 hours upon cessation of the snow storm any snow upon such sidewalk. Snow must be cleared to a minimum width of 36". Any packed snow or ice must be melted, covered with sand, sawdust or ashes, to prevent slipping. Such snow or ice may be removed from the sidewalk to the street, provided, however, that the same is windrowed at the gutter at the time of removal. No owner or owner’s agent of premises abutting on a public way shall allow any fire hydrant close to the property to be obstructed by snow. No owner or owner’s agent shall place any snow or ice removed from private property on a public way. Each owner or agent of premises in which he/she does not reside, must furnish a name, address and telephone number of the person designated by the owner or agent to comply with the provisions of this By-law. Said information shall be furnished to the department of public works on or before November 1 of each year and the director of public works shall be notified immediately upon a change of designation. Violations of this By-law, including failure to furnish information as required herein, shall be enforceable pursuant to General Laws Chapter 40, §21D.

The following schedule of penalties shall apply to violations of this section:

For a first offense in any one calendar year: $100;

For a second offense in any one calendar year: $150;

For a third offense and any subsequent offense in any one calendar year: $200.

If the owner, agent, or designee shall fail to properly clear the sidewalk and/or otherwise neglects or violates the duties imposed by this By-law, the town may, in addition to any other penalties available in law or in equity, perform or cause to be performed such duties at the expense of the owner. Such expense may be imposed as a municipal charges lien under the provisions of MGL Chapter 40, Section 58 and Section 5-109 of these By-laws. (Article VIII, § 23)(TCM 11/13/95, 8/24/15)


7-407 No Snow, Ice or Water to be Permitted to Fall or be Discharged into Public Way

No owner or person having care of a building abutting upon any curbed or finished sidewalk, the roof of which slants toward such sidewalk, shall permit such building to be without a barrier, snow guard, or other device to prevent the falling of snow or ice from such roof to the sidewalk, nor shall the owner or person having care of any such buildings permit water to discharge on any sidewalk from such building in such a manner as to flow over the sidewalk. (Article VIII, § 29)


7-501 Youth Protection Curfew

7-501.1 Purpose and Findings – Town Council may invoke and remove the Youth Protection Curfew at their discretion.

7-501.2 Definitions – For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

(a) “Curfew hours” means 11:00 P.M. until 5:00 A.M. on any and all seven days of the week.

(b) “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

(c) “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

(d) “Guardian” means -

(1) a person who, under court appointment, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or

(2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

(e) “Minor” means any person less than 17 years of age.

(f) “Operator” means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.

(g) “Parent” means a person who is -

(1) a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person, or

(2) at least 18 years of age and authorized, in writing, by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

(h) “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, parks, playgrounds and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, commercial or industrial buildings, transport facilities, shops and businesses.

(i) “Remain” means to -

(1) linger or stay; or

(2) fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.

7-501.3 Offenses -

(a) A minor commits an offense if he/she remains, either on foot or in a vehicle, in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the Town of Southbridge during youth protection curfew hours.

(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain, either on foot or in a vehicle, in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the town during youth protection curfew hours.

(c) The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during youth protection curfew hours.

7-501.4 Defenses -

(a) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 7-501.3(a) and (b) that the minor was:

(1) accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian,

(2) on an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without any detour or stop,

(3) in a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel,

(4) engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without detour or stop,

(5) involved in an emergency,

(6) on the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor’s presence,

(7) attending an official school, religious, or other activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the Town of Southbridge, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the Town of Southbridge, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor,

(8) exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly, or

(9) married or had been married and was in compliance with the provisions of MGL Chapter 207, Sections 7 and 25, as amended.

(b) It is a defense to prosecution under Section 7-501.3(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during youth protection curfew hours and refused to leave.

7-501.5 Enforcement – Enforcement for violation of this section shall be by non-criminal disposition as hereinafter provided. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of an establishment. The officer shall not issue a notice to appear under Section 7-501.6 for a violation of this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that based on any response and other circumstances, no defense under Section 7.501.4 is applicable.

7-501.6 Penalty

(a) Non-Criminal Disposition – Any person who violates any provision of this section may be penalized by a non-criminal disposition as provided for under MGL Chapter 40, Section 21D, as amended. This section shall be enforced by a police officer of the Town of Southbridge who shall issue a "Notice to Appear" in court. The penalty for each violation shall be under Schedule of Penalties A through C, for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. A copy of the "Notice to Appear" in court which is given to a minor shall be forwarded to the parent(s) or guardian(s) of said minor for informational purposes.

7-501.7 Conclusion – The Youth Protection Curfew By-law is a tool established for the protection of children. Judgment and discretion should be used fairly and equally in enforcing this By-law. Juveniles who are contacted in violation of the curfew By-law can be warned, directed to go to their home, may be taken to their home, summonsed to court, arrested and taken into custody, or issued a non-criminal violation notice to appear. The officer should choose an appropriate enforcement option based upon all the circumstances encountered.

7-501.8 Construction and Severability – Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this By-law. If any provision, including inter alia, any exception, part, phrase or term or the application of a provision to any person or circumstances is held to be invalid, other provisions or the application of a provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. It is intended that the By-law would not be applied where its application would be unconstitutional.

(Article XXIII, Youth Protection Curfew for Minors, Adopted TCM 6/10/96)


7-502 Disorderly Actions

7-502.1 A person is guilty of disorderly actions if a person knowingly or purposely creates a condition which is hazardous to him or another in a public place by:

(a) Engaging in fighting or violent, tumultuous or threatening behavior in a public place; or

(b) Directing at another person in a public place obscene, derisive, or offensive words which are likely to provoke reaction on the part of any ordinary person; or

(c) Obstructing vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any public street or sidewalk or the entrance to any public building; or

(d) Engaging in conduct in a public place which substantially interferes with a criminal investigation, a firefighting operation, the provision of emergency medical treatment, or the provision of other services when traffic or pedestrian management is required; or

(e) Knowingly refusing to comply with a lawful order of a peace officer to move from any public place.

7-502.2 A person is guilty of disorderly actions if a person knowingly or purposely causes a breach of the peace, public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creates a risk thereof by:

(a) Making loud or unreasonable noises in a public place, or making loud or unreasonable noises in a private place which can be heard in a public place or other private places, which noises would disturb a person of average sensibilities; or

(b) Disrupting the orderly conduct of business in any public or governmental facility; or

(c) Disrupting any lawful assembly or meeting of persons without lawful authority; or

(d) Continuing, or causing or allowing to be made or continued any action under the foregoing subsections (a), (b), (c).

7-502.3 Definitions – In this section, "Lawful Order" means:

(a) a command issued to any person for the purpose of preventing said person from committing any offense when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that said person is about to commit any such offense, or when said person is engaged in a course of conduct which makes his commission of such an offense imminent; or

(b) a command issued to any person to stop him from continuing to commit any offense when the officer has reasonable grounds to believe that said person is presently engaged in conduct which constitutes any such offense.

"Public Place" means any place to which the public or a substantial group has access. The term includes, but is not limited to, public ways, sidewalks, schools, hospitals, government offices or facilities, and the lobbies or hallways of apartment buildings, dormitories, hotels or motels.

Violations of this by-law shall be enforceable through non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, the following penalties shall apply:

	First offense in a calendar year	$50.00

	Second offense in a calendar year	$75.00

	Third and subsequent offenses in a calendar year	$100.00

(Article XXV, Disorderly Actions, Adopted TCM 10/6/97)


7-503 Noise Control

7-503.1 Unlawful Noise – Declaration of Nuisance – It is hereby found and declared that the making, creation, or maintenance of excessive, unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noise, which is prolonged, unusual, and unnatural in its time, place and use, and constitutes an annoyance to a person of ordinary sensibility to sound, is hereby declared unlawful noise:

7-503.2 General Noise Prohibition -

(a) No person within the town shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any unlawful noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any reasonable person, of normal sensitivity, residing in the area.

(b) The characteristics, standards, and conditions to be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

(1) The volume of the noise.

(2) The intensity of the noise.

(3) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.

(4) Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.

(5) The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any.

(6) The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.

(7) The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.

(8) The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates.

(9) The time of the day or night the noise occurs.

(10) The duration of the noise.

(11) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.

(12) Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or non-commercial activity.

(c) The following acts, among others, are declared to be unlawful noises in violation of this By-law, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:

(1) Motor Noises: Any noise made by the motor of any automobile, truck, tractor, and motorcycle, not reasonably required in the operation thereof under the circumstances including, but not limited to, backfiring, motor racing, and screeching of tires because of rapid acceleration or excessive speed.

(2) Horns, Signaling Devices: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place of the town, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.

(3) Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noise there from. No person while on a public or private highway, street or road shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle with the muffler or baffles cut out or removed.

(4) Defect in Vehicle or Load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.

(5) Rails, Pillars and Columns, Transportation Thereof: The transportation of rails, pillars, or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts, trays, cars, trucks, or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places.

(6) Loading, Unloading, Opening Boxes: The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers.

(7) Power Tools and Equipment: The use and operation between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M. of any power tool, saw, poser planer, or other power tool or appliance, such as a lawn mower, and non-power tools, such as a saw or hammer, so as to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any dwelling hotel, motel, apartment, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity.

(8) Pile Drivers, Hammers: The operation between the hours of 10 P.M. and 7 A.M. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.

(9) Blowers: The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, between the hours of 10 P.M. and 7 A.M., the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noises from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise.

(10) Construction or Repairing of Buildings: The erection (including excavation), demolition, external alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7 A.M. and 10 P.M. except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the inspector of buildings, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 3 days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of 3 days or less while the emergency continues. If the inspector of buildings should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 10 P.M. and 7 A.M., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 10 P.M. and 7 A.M., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work.

(11) Hawkers and Peddlers: The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.

(12) Yelling and Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 10 P.M. and 7 A.M. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. Noise that disturbs two or more residents who are in general agreement as to the times and durations of the noise, and who reside in the immediate vicinity of the property from which the noise emanates, shall be prima facia evidence of a violation of this section.

(13) Animals and Birds: The keeping, or allowing to be kept, of any animal or bird, which by any frequent or long continued noise shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitivity. The noise of any such animal or bird that disturbs two or more residents who are in general agreement as to the times and durations of the noise, and who reside in the immediate vicinity of property on which the subject animal or bird is kept, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.

(14) Radios and Other Such Devices: The use, operation or permitting to be played, used, or operated, any sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drums, stereo, television set, loudspeakers, sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in any dwelling, hotel, hospital or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity thereof. The operation of any such sound producing device between the hours of 10 P.M. and 7 A.M. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle from which the sound emanates shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.

(15) Loud Speakers, Amplifiers for Advertising: The using, operating or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure unless permitted.

7-503.3 Exemptions – The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the noise prohibitions described in Sections 7-503.1 and 7-503.2 of this By-law:

(a) noises of safety signals, warning devices, and emergency pressure relief valves;

(b) warning devices: any alarm, siren, bell, or whistle required by OSHA or other state or federal safety regulations;

(c) noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency, or in connection with official police or fire business;

(d) noises resulting from emergency work as necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger, such as the removal of snow or debris after a storm;

(e) ambient traffic noise generated by vehicles traveling on federal interstate highways or state defined primary or major secondary highways;

(f) any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law, federal air regulations, and air traffic control instruction used pursuant to and within the duly adopted federal air regulations. Moreover, any aircraft operating under technical difficulties, in any kind of distress, under emergency orders of air traffic control or being operated pursuant to and subsequent to the declaration of an emergency under federal air regulations;

(g) all noises, resulting from normal operations of railroad trains are exempt, provided, however, that excessive use of railroad train signaling devices are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises;

(h) any sound, such as tire screeching, resulting from emergency braking;

(i) highway and utility maintenance and construction of, or repairs to bridges, streets or highways or any public utility installation by or on behalf of the town or any public utility, or any agency of the state.

(j) construction operations for which building permits have been issued, or construction operations not requiring permits due to ownership of the project by an agency of the government, provided such equipment is operated with the manufacturing mufflers and noise reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition;

(k) farming equipment or farming activity;

(l) the reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers for public addresses which are noncommercial in nature;

(m) any non-amplified crowd noises resulting from legal activities, such as scheduled sporting events at publicly-owned arenas, stadiums or similar facilities, as well as public concerts, parades, fairs, shows and celebrations which have been properly permitted and licensed;

(n) any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefore has been granted by the town.

7-503.4 Enforcement – The police department shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this By-law including, but not limited to, the following duties and responsibilities:

(a) Investigation of complaints of unlawful noise.

(b) Documentation of violations of this By-law.

(c) Issuance of written warnings for violation of this By-law.

(d) Violations of this by-law shall be enforceable through non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, refer to Fee Schedule.

7-503.5 Responsible Party – If the person or persons responsible for any activity which violates this By-law cannot be determined, the person in lawful custody and/or control of the premises, including, but not limited to, the owner, lessee or occupant of the property on which the activity is located, shall be deemed responsible for the violation. The responsible person may be prosecuted under this By-law and shall be subjected to the penalties outlined in Section 7-503.4.

(Article XXVI, “Noise Control)(TCM 9/22/97)


7-504 Alarm Systems

7-504.1 Definitions – For the purpose of this By-law, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words used in the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.

(a) The term "alarm system" means an assembly of equipment and devices, or a single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly into a 110 volt AC line, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. Fire alarm systems, alarm systems on motor vehicles and alarm systems which monitor temperature, smoke, humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery at a premises are specifically excluded from the provisions of this By-law.

(b) The term "alarm user" or "user" means any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the town. Excluded from this definition are:

(1) Municipal, county, state and federal agencies;

(2) Central station personnel;

(3) Persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt. However, if such an alarm system employs an audible signal or a flashing light outside the premises, the user of such an alarm system shall be within the definition of "alarm user" and shall be subject to this By-law.

(c) The term "central station" means an office to which remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are connected, where operators supervise circuits or where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.

(d) The word "town" means the Town of Southbridge.

(e) The term "false alarm" means 1) the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or negligence of the user of an alarm system or of his employees or agents; or 2) any signal or oral communication transmitted to the police department requesting, or requiring or resulting in a response on the part of the police department when in fact there has been no unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion into a premises or no attempted robbery or burglary at a premises. Excluded from this definition are activations of alarm systems caused by power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and similar conditions.

(f) The term "police chief" means the chief of police of the Town of Southbridge or his designated representative.

(g) The term "police" or "police department" means the Town of Southbridge police department, or any authorized agent thereof.

(h) For the purposes of this By-law, the term "public nuisance" means anything which annoys, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of any person(s) or of any community or neighborhood.

7-504.2 Reserved

7-504.3 Control and Curtailment of Signals Emitted by Alarm Systems -

(a) Every alarm user shall submit to the police chief the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the user and at least two other persons who can be reached at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system, and who can open the premises wherein the alarm system is installed. The list of names, addresses and telephone numbers of the responders must be kept current at all times by the alarm user and shall be submitted during the first month of each fiscal year (July 1st).

(b) All alarm systems which use an audible bell or horn shall be equipped with an automatic shut off device which will deactivate the alarm system within 10 minutes. All alarm users with an audible bell or horn must comply with this section within 90 days of the adoption of this By-law.

(c) Any alarm system which fails to comply with the above paragraph (b) and emits a continuous and uninterrupted signal for more than 30 minutes which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed due to the absence or unavailability of the alarm user or those persons designated by him under paragraph (a) of this section, and which disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of a community, or a neighborhood of the area where the alarm system is located, shall constitute a public nuisance. Upon receiving complaints regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted signal, the police chief shall endeavor to contact the alarm user, or members of the alarm user’s family, or those persons designated by the alarm user under paragraph (a) of this section in an effort to abate the nuisance. The police chief shall record the time each complaint was made.

In the event that the police chief is unable to contact the alarm user, or members of the alarm user’s family, or those persons designated by the alarm user under paragraph (a) of this section, or if the aforesaid persons cannot or will not curtail the audible signal being emitted by the alarm system, and if the police chief is otherwise unable to abate the nuisance, he may direct a police officer or a firefighter or a qualified alarm technician to enter upon the property outside the home or building in which the alarm system is located and take any reasonable action necessary to abate the nuisance.

After an entry upon property has been made in accordance with this section and the nuisance abated, the police chief shall have the property secured, if necessary. The reasonable costs and expense of abating a nuisance in accordance with this section may be assessed to the alarm user, said assessment not to exceed $50.00.

7-504.4 Testing of Equipment – No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the police department shall be worked on, tested or demonstrated without obtaining permission from the police department communications section. Permission is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting emergency messages directly to the police department. An unauthorized test constitutes a false alarm.

7-504.5 Penalties – The following acts and omissions shall constitute violations of this By-law punishable by the fines as herein provided:

(a) An alarm user whose alarm system transmits or otherwise causes three or more false alarms in a 12 month period shall be assessed a fine of $25.00 for the third false alarm in any 12 month period, $50.00 for the fourth false alarm in any 12 month period, and $100.00 for each subsequent false alarm in any 12 month period.

(b) An alarm user who fails to comply with any of the requirements of Section 504.3 of this By-law relative to control and curtailment of signals emitted by alarm systems shall be punished by a fine of $25.00.

(c) An alarm user who fails to comply with any of the requirements of Section 7-504.4 of this By-law relative to the testing of equipment shall be punished by a fine of $25.00.

7-504.6 Severability – If any clause, sentence, paragraph, or part of this local By-law or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall for any reason be adjudged by a court to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder and the application thereof to other persons or circumstances but shall be confined in its operation to the clause, sentence, paragraph or part thereof directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment shall have been rendered and to the person or circumstances involved. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Town of Southbridge that this enactment would have been adopted had such invalid provisions not been included therein.

(Article XXII, Alarm Systems Regulations)(TCM 3/28/94)


7-505 Fire Regulations

7-505.1 Entry to Property to Make Inspections – The chief of the fire department, or any member of said department authorized by the chief as an inspector, may at all reasonable hours enter any building or premises for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of a town By-law, state law, rule or regulation, the fire department may be authorized to make. (Article IX, § 1)

7-505.2 Dangerous or Hazardous Conditions – Whenever the chief or any inspector of the fire department shall find in any building or upon any premises dangerous or hazardous conditions as hereinafter defined, such conditions shall be removed or remedied in any reasonable manner and within such time as ordered by the chief of the fire department:

(a) dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible or explosive matter;

(b) hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly installed equipment for handling or using combustible or explosive matter;

(c) dangerous accumulations of rubbish, waste paper, boxes, shavings or other highly flammable materials;

(d) accumulations of dust or waste material in air conditioning systems or of grease in kitchen exhaust ducts;

(e) obstructions, including motor vehicles, to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, which may interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire;

(f) any building or other structure which, for want of repairs, lack of exit facilities, or dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, creates a fire hazard.

The service of such orders as mentioned in this section may be made upon the owner or occupant either by delivering a copy to him personally, or in the case where no such person is found, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on said premises, or by mailing such copy by registered mail to the owner’s last known post office address as appearing on the assessors’ records. (Article IX, § 2)

7-505.3 Fire Detection and Suppression Systems – The chief of the fire department, or a fire inspector, shall inspect each business, mercantile and manufacturing establishment, school, place of assembly, hospital, place of detention, rooming house, motel, hotel, nursing home, rest home, and multi-family house and shall specify suitable fire detecting devices or extinguishing appliances which shall be provided, in or near furnace rooms, kitchens of restaurants and like establishments, storage rooms containing combustible material, rooms in which hazardous manufacturing processes are conducted, garage sections, and other places of a generally hazardous nature. Such devices or appliances may be approved by the chief of the fire department. In especially hazardous processes or storage, appliances of more than one type or special systems may be required.

Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, fire alarm systems and other fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed in compliance with this By-law shall be maintained in operative condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection so required, except that this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations or additions. The chief of the fire department shall be notified before such tests, repairs, alterations or additions are started, unless the work is to be continuous until completion. (Article IX, § 3)

7-505.4 Fires in Public Places Prohibited – No person shall make a fire in any public place, without first having obtained in writing the permission of the chief of the fire department or his authorized representative. (Article IX, § 4)

7-505.5 Fires in Other Places Prohibited – No person shall allow a fire to burn or smolder between sunset and sunrise, regardless of whether it be in barrels, containers, or open air, unless special permission is allowed by the fire chief. (Article IX, § 5)

7-505.6 Fire Lanes – No person shall park any vehicle within the limits of any private way or right-of-way which furnishes a means of access for fire apparatus to any building. The fire chief, or his designee, or the owner of property abutting such a way, with the approval of the fire chief, may post signs sufficient to warn drivers that parking is prohibited in a designated area. The registered owner of a vehicle shall be conclusively presumed, for the purpose of this By-law, to be responsible for the parking of a vehicle in violation hereof. The police department may enforce this By-law by use of the procedures set forth in MGL Chapter 90, Section 20A. Each violation of this section shall be punished by a fine as provided for in Section 7-206 of these By-laws. (Article IX, § 6) (TCM 11/24/80, 10/26/87)


7-506 Camping Fine

It shall be unlawful for any person to camp or occupy camp facilities in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by Town by-law: (a) Any park; (b) Any public street or way; (c) Any publicly owned parking lot or publicly owned area, improved or unimproved.

For purposes of this regulation, the following definitions are applicable:

(1) “Camp” shall mean to pitch, erect or occupy camp facilities for the purpose of or in such a way as will permit remaining overnight, or parking a trailer, camper or other motor or non-motor vehicle for the purpose of remaining overnight. This shall not include the lawful parking or storage of a recreational vehicle that is not being occupied.

(2) “Camp facilities” shall include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, temporary shelters, or any motor or non-motor vehicle.

(3) “Overnight” shall mean any period of time between 12:00 midnight and 4:00 AM.

Any vehicle parked in violation of this Regulation may be towed away at the direction of any Police Sergeant, for the cost of which towing charges the owner will be liable. In addition to such towing charges, the owner may be liable to pay storage charges and fines for violation of these regulations.

Violations of this regulation shall be punishable by a fine of $50.00. This regulation may also be enforced by noncriminal disposition in accordance with G.L. c.40, Section 21D and Section 1-111 of the Town of Southbridge, Code of By-laws. For noncriminal disposition, the enforcing agent shall be the police Department and the Fine Schedule shall be A,B and C as set forth in Section 1-111.


7-507 Sex Offender Residency

7-507.1 Definitions – For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

(a) “PARK” means public land designated for active or passive recreational or athletic use by the Town of Southbridge, the commonwealth of Massachusetts or other governmental subdivision, and located within the Town of Southbridge.

(b) “SCHOOL” means any public or private educational facility that provides services to children in grades kindergarten-12.

(c) “DAY CARE CENTER” means an establishment, whether public or private, which provides care for children and is registered with and licensed pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts by the Office of Child Care Services.

(d) “ELDERLY HOUSING FACILITY” means a building or buildings on the same lot containing four or more dwelling units restricted to occupancy by households having one or more members fifty-five years of age or older.

(e) “PLACE OF WORSHIP” means a structure used for religious worship or religious education purposes on land owned by, or held in trust for the use of, any religious organization.

(f) “SEX OFFENDER” means a person who resides, works, or attends an institution of higher learning in the commonwealth and who has been convicted of a sex offense or who has been adjudicated as a youthful offender or as a delinquent juvenile by reason of a sex offense or a person released from incarceration or parole or probation supervision or custody with the Department of Youth Services for such a conviction or adjudication or a person who has been adjudicated a sexually dangerous person under G.L. c. 123A, §14, as in force at the time of adjudication, or a person released from civil commitment pursuant to section 9 of said chapter 123A, whichever last occurs, on or after August 1, 1981.

(g) “SEX OFFENDER REGISTRY” means the collected information and data that is received by the criminal history systems board pursuant to Sections 178C to 178P, inclusive.

(h) PERMANENT RESIDENCE” means a place where a person lives, abides, lodges, or resides for five (5) or more consecutive days or fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year.

(i) “TEMPORARY RESIDENCE” means a place where a person lives, abides, lodges, or resides for a period of less than five (5) consecutive days or fourteen (14) days in the aggregate during any calendar year, which is not the person’s permanent address or place where the person routinely lives, abides, lodges, or resides and which is not the person’s permanent residence.

(j) “ESTABLISHING A RESIDENCE” means to set up or bring into being a dwelling place or an abode where a person sleeps, which may include more than one location, and may be mobile or transitory, or by means of purchasing real property or entering into a lease or rental agreement for real property (including a renewal or extension of a prior agreement whether through written execution or automatic renewal).

7-507.2 Sexual Offender Residence Prohibition – It is unlawful for any sex offender who is finally classified as a level 2 or 3 offender pursuant to the guidelines of the Massachusetts Sex Offender Registry Board, to establish a permanent residence within five hundred (500) feet of any school, daycare center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship. For purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent residence to the nearest outer property line of a school, day care center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship.

7-507.3 Notice to Move – Any registered level 2 or level 3 sex offender who established a permanent residence within five hundred (500) feet of any school, day care center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship shall be in violation of this section and shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of written notice of the sex offender’s non-compliance with this chapter, move from said location to a new location, but said location may not be within five hundred (500) feet of any school, day care center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship. It shall constitute a separate violation for each day beyond the thirty (30) days the sex offender continues to reside within five hundred (500) feet of any school, day care center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship. Furthermore, it shall be a separate violation each day that a sex offender shall move from one location in the Town of Southbridge to another that is within five hundred (500) feet of any school, day care center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship.

7-507.4 Penalties – Violation of this bylaw, or of any regulations adopted hereunder, may be enforced through lawful means in law or in equity by the Board of Selectmen, The Town Manager, or their duly authorized agents, or any police officer of the Town of Southbridge including, but not limited to, enforcement by non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c. 40, §21D. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. The penalties shall be as follows:

(a) First Offense: Notification to offender that he/she has thirty (30) days to move.

(b) Subsequent Offense: Non-criminal fine of $300 and notification to the offender’s landlord, parole officer and/or probation officer and the Commonwealth’s Sex Offender Registry Board that the person has violated a municipal ordinance. Such a subsequent offense constitutes a breach of the peace for which the offender is also subject to immediate arrest.

7-507.5 Exceptions – A person residing with five hundred (500) feet of any school, day care center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply:

(a) The person established the permanent residence and reported and registered the residence, in accordance with the regulations of the Massachusetts Sex Offender Registry Board, prior to the effective date of this by-law.

(b) The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult.

(c) The person is a minor.

(d) The school, day care center, park, elderly housing facility or place of worship within five hundred (500) feet of the personal permanent residence was established after the person established the permanent residence and reported and registered the residence pursuant to the Sex Offender Registry Law.

(e) The person is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution or facility.

(f) The person is admitted to and/or subject to an order of commitment at a public or private facility for the care and treatment of mentally ill persons pursuant to G.L. c. 123.

(g) The person is a mentally ill person subject to guardianship pursuant to G.L. c. 201, §6 or a mentally retarded person subject to guardianship pursuant to G.L. c. 201, §6A, residing with his or her guardian or residing within a group residence that is professionally staffed and supervised 24 hours a day. (TCM 09/24/07)


7-508 Graffiti

Section 7-508.1 Removal of Graffiti – Graffiti is defined as : Any word, figure or painted design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to or any surface, regardless of the nature of material of that structural component, to the extent the same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof.

Section 7-508.2 Property Owner Responsibility

a) The removal of graffiti shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property.

b) The owner of said property shall be required to remove the graffiti within 14 days of written notice from the Board of Health, or its authorized agent, served upon the owner or the owner’s authorized agent. The notice given to the property owner, or its authorized agent, shall be in writing and contain an order to remove the graffiti. The notice to the property owner or authorized agent shall contain the following information:

1) The location of property that has been vandalized.

2) A clear description of the graffiti

3) A statement that the graffiti must be removed within fourteen (14) days after receipt of notice.

4) A statement of explaining if graffiti is not removed within the allotted fourteen (14) days, the property will be subject to the removal, cost and penalty provisions of (Section 7-503.2)

5) Notification of an owner’s right to a hearing pursuant to (Section 7-503.2)

*Copies of all referenced sections of the By-law shall be attached to said notice.

Section 508.3 – Failure to Remove Graffiti

a) The property owner or its authorized agent has a right to a hearing before the Board of Health or its authorized agent within seven (7) days after receipt of such notice.

b) If an owner or the owners authorized agent has not requested a hearing within seven (7) days after receiving notice, and fails or refuses to remove graffiti within the given time frame provided in (Section 7-503.3), the property owner will be subject to a fine of $150.00

c) If an owner or the owner’s authorized agent has been ordered to remove said graffiti after a hearing and fails to comply with said order within fourteen (14) days, the property owner will be subject to a fine of $150.00

Section 7-508.4 Applicable Laws

Nothing in this by-law shall be construed to limit in any way the Town of Southbridge’s authority to order the abatement of a nuisance as set forth in MGL c. 111, § 123 (as noted below) or any other general laws.

i.    Section 123. Said board shall order the owner or occupant of any private premises, at his own expense, to remove any nuisance, source of filth or cause of sickness found thereon within twenty-four hours, or within such other time as it considers reasonable, after notice; and an owner or occupant shall forfeit not more than one thousand dollars for every day during which he knowingly violates such order.


7-509 Marijuana

7-509.1 Statement of Intent – On November 8, 2016, the voters of the Commonwealth approved a law regulating the cultivation, processing, distribution, possession and use of marijuana for recreational purposes (new Massachusetts General Law (MGL) c. 94G). Under MGL c. 94G, § 3(a)(2)(i) allows a city or town to limit the number of marijuana establishments in the city or town, except that a city or town may only adopt an ordinance or bylaw by a vote of the voters of that city or town if the ordinance or bylaw prohibits the operation of one or more types of marijuana establishments within the city or town, whereas in our community:

a) On June 13, 2017, the citizens of Southbridge voted 1,159 to 989, in the affirmative to Question 2, stating that the town shall prohibit the operation of marijuana retailers, as that term is defined in MGL c. 94G, § 1, within the town of Southbridge.

b) On June 13, 2017, the citizens of Southbridge voted 1,150 to 990, in the affirmative to Question 3, stating that the town shall prohibit the operation of marijuana cultivators, as that term is defined in MGL, c. 94G, § 1, within the town of Southbridge.

c) On June 13, 2017, the citizens of Southbridge voted 1,109 to 1,029, in the affirmative to Question 4, stating that the town shall prohibit the operation of marijuana testing facilities, as that term is defined in MGL, c. 94G, § 1, within the town of Southbridge.

d) On June 13, 2017, the citizens of Southbridge voted 1,153 to 979, in the affirmative to Question 5, stating that the town shall prohibit the operation of marijuana product manufacturers, as that term is defined in MGL c. 94G, § 1, within the town of Southbridge. (TCM 1/29/18)

7-509.2 Definition – For the purpose of this section, a “marijuana establishment” shall mean a marijuana cultivator, independent testing laboratory, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business for the retail recreational market. (TCM 1/29/18)

7-509.3 Statement of Bylaw (Prohibition of Marijuana Establishments) – In accordance with MGL c. 94G, § 3(a)(2)(i), all types of marijuana establishments, as defined in MGL c. 94G, § 1, and as may otherwise be defined by Massachusetts law or regulation to include, without limitation, all marijuana cultivators, marijuana testing facilities, marijuana retailers, or any other type of licensed marijuana-related businesses, shall be prohibited within the town of Southbridge. This prohibition shall not be construed to affect the medical use of marijuana as expressly authorized by the provisions of Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012 and 105 CMR 725.000 (as the same may be amended from time to time), or the ability for households to grow for personal use, as defined under MGL c. 94G, § 2. (TCM 1/29/18)


CHAPTER 8 PUBLIC WORKS

Section

8-100    STREETS AND SIDEWALKS

8-101    Standards for Street Layout or Acceptance as Public Ways

8-102    Standards for Repairs to Private Ways

8-103    Procedures for Curb Cut Permits

8-104    Buildings to be Assigned Street Numbers

8-200    DRAINAGE AND EROSION CONTROL

8-201    Drainage and Erosion Control

8-300    SANITARY SEWERS

8-301    Sewer Regulations

8-400    WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION

8-401    Water Regulations


8-101 Standards for Street Layout or Acceptance as Public Ways

All streets hereafter laid out or accepted by the town as a street or public highway shall be at least 50 feet in width, unless otherwise determined by the town manager, and shall not be accepted unless a plan showing in detail the location and proposed grade of such way is placed on file with the town clerk 7 days, at least, before the date of the town council meeting at which the acceptance of such way as a street or public highway is requested, and unless the construction of such way is in accordance with planning board subdivision regulations outlining street construction, and conforming to the grade set forth in said plan by the land owner or owners proposing the acceptance of such street or way. (Article VIII, § 18)


8-102 Standards for Repairs to Private Ways

The town may make temporary repairs on private ways which have been opened to public use for a period of six years or more, provided the repairs are for the protection of the health and safety of the general public using such roads.

Such repairs shall include the filling of holes in the subsurface of such ways and repairs to the surface materials thereof. Materials for such repairs, where practical, should be the same as, or similar to, those used for the existing surfaces of such ways, but may include surfacing the ways with bituminous materials, including but not limited to bituminous concrete.

Drainage determined to be necessary as a result of the repairs by the director of public works may also be done. Drain repairs shall be made only if petitioned for by all the abutters who own frontage on such ways with the approval of the land owner, if necessary, and if the town council declares that they are required by the public necessity and convenience to make such repairs based on the recommendation of the town manager and an advisory opinion of the director of public works. Drainage easements, if necessary, shall be the responsibility of the petitioners. The cost of such repairs shall be paid by the abutters by a cash deposit as herein provided.

No repairs shall be commenced unless and until a cost deposit equal in amount to the estimated cost of such repairs, as determined by the director of public works, is paid over to the town and the town council has voted its approval of the project. No betterment charges shall be assessed.

The town shall not be liable on account of any damage whatsoever caused by such repairs and Section 25 of Chapter 84 shall not apply. The town shall require an indemnity agreement executed by the petitioning abutters, indemnifying the town for all claims and damages which may result from making such repairs.

The town may, subject to the approval of the town council and based on the recommendation of the town manager and an advisory report from the director of public works, make temporary minor repairs to private ways not to exceed $500.00 in total, provided the private way has been open to public use for a period of six years or more. The repairs shall be limited to minor work such as filling, patching, and grading or scraping not more than twice per year.

No such repairs shall be done unless there is unanimous agreement by all abutters that the work shall commence and the town of Southbridge shall be held harmless from any and all damages or claims arising out of such repairs. MGL Chapter 84, Section 25 shall not apply. (Article VIII, § 39) (TCM 12/17/90)


8-103 Procedures for Curb Cut Permits

Every curb cut onto a public way shall be made in conformity with standards and procedures established by the Town Manager.

The director of public works shall from time to time propose to the Town Manager adoption, amendments or revisions to reasonable rules and regulations governing the location and installation of curb cuts onto town ways not inconsistent with the subdivision control law or with any other provisions of a statute or of any valid by-law or By-law of the town. Curb cut rules and regulations may prescribe the size, form, contents, style and number of copies of plans and the procedure for the submission and approval thereof, and shall set forth the design requirements and methods of construction to satisfy the town’s standards. A true copy of the rules and regulations, with their most recent amendments, shall be kept on file available for inspection in the office of the inspector of buildings, in the office of the director of public works and in the office of the town clerk.

Prior to promulgating amendments or revisions to such rules or regulations, the Town Manager, or the Town Manager’s designee, shall first publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once in each of two successive weeks notice that a public hearing will be held concerning adopting, amending or revising such rules and regulations with information concerning the scope of the proposed action to be taken sufficient for public understanding; the first publication to be not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing. Following the promulgation of amendments or revisions to such rules and regulations, they shall forthwith be filed with the inspector of buildings, the office of the director of public works and the office of the town clerk.

Transitional Provision

The Curb Cut Regulations in existence on the effective date of this By-law shall remain in effect until amended or revised in accordance with this section.


8-104 Buildings to be Assigned Street Numbers

Every building including, but not limited to, dwellings, apartment buildings, condominiums, and business establishments shall have affixed thereto a number representing the address of such building. Said number shall be of a nature and size and shall be situated on the building so that, to the extent practicable, it is visible from the nearest street or road providing vehicular access to such building. (Article VIII, § 11, MGL c. 148, § 59)


8-201 Drainage and Erosion Control

8-201.1 Conduct Prohibited – No person shall dump, move, place, grade, excavate, fill or by any action cause or permit any soil, earth, sand gravel, rock, stone, or other material or water or liquid to be deposited or to roll, flow, or wash upon or over any public street, street improvement, road, sewer, storm drain, water course, or right-of-way, or any public property in a manner to damage or to interfere with the use of such property.

8-201.2 Covering Required When Certain Materials are Transported – When hauling soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other material over any public street, road, alley or public property, such materials shall be covered, bound, or secured so that the materials will not blow or spill over and upon such street, road, alley or public property or adjacent private property. (Article VIII, § 20)

8-201.3 Penalty for Violation of Section 8-201.1 or 8-201.2 – If any soil, earth, sand, gravel, rock, stone or other material or water or liquid is caused to be deposited upon or to roll, flow or wash upon any public property or right-of-way in violation of sections 8-201.1 or 8-201.2, the person responsible shall be notified and shall cause the same to be removed from such public property or way within 36 hours. In the event of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, notice shall be given by the most expeditious means and the material or liquid shall be removed immediately. In the event it is not so removed, the department of public works shall cause such removal and the cost of such removal by the department of public works shall be paid to the town by the person who failed to so remove the material and shall be a debt due the town. The cost of such removal shall be a lien upon all property and all rights to property, real or personal, of any person liable to pay the same from and after the time said cost is due and payable.

8-201.4 Approval of the Director of Public Works Required – Approval of the director of public works shall be required for any connection to an existing storm drainage system located on public property within the town.

8-201.5 Enforcement – The town manager shall enforce this By-law and shall take any other suitable measures to assure compliance with this By-law. (Article VIII, § 30)


8-301 Sewer Regulations

Every connection to the town sanitary sewer system shall be made in conformity with standards and procedures established by the Town Manager.

The director of public works shall from time to time propose to the Town Manager adoption of, or amendments or revisions to, reasonable rules and regulations relative to connections to the sanitary sewer system and regulating the discharge into said system. Sanitary sewer rules and regulations may prescribe the size, form, contents, style and number of copies of plans and the procedure for the submission and approval thereof, and shall set forth the design requirements and methods of construction to satisfy the town’s standards. A true copy of the rules and regulations, with their most recent amendments, shall be kept on file available for inspection in the office of the inspector of buildings, in the office of the director of public works and in the office of the town clerk.

Prior to promulgating such rules or regulations or any amendments or revisions thereto, the Town Manager, or the Town Manager’s designee shall first publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once in each of two successive weeks notice that a public hearing will be held concerning adopting, amending or revising such rules and regulations with information concerning the scope of the proposed action to be taken sufficient for public understanding; the first publication of such notice to be not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing. Following the promulgation of such rules and regulations or amendments or revisions thereto, they shall forthwith be filed with the office of the director of public works and the office of the town clerk. The Town Clerk shall have a copy of the same posted in each of the precincts of the Town.

Transitional Provision

The provisions of the By-law regarding sanitary sewer existing on the date this By-law is adopted shall remain in effect until a new set of regulations is promulgated in accordance with this section.


8-401 Water Regulations

Every connection to the town water supply system shall be made in conformity with standards and procedures established by the Town Manager.

The director of public works shall from time to time propose to the Town Manager adoption of, or amendments or revisions to rules and regulations relative to connections to the public water supply and regulating water usage. Water supply rules and regulations may prescribe the size, form, contents, style and number of copies of plans and the procedure for the submission and approval thereof, and shall set forth the design requirements and methods of construction to satisfy the town’s standards. A true copy of the rules and regulations, with their most recent amendments, shall be kept on file available for inspection in the office of the inspector of buildings, in the office of the director of public works and in the office of the town clerk.

Prior to promulgating such rules or regulations or any amendments or revisions thereto, the Town Manager, or the Town Manager’s designee, shall first publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once in each of two successive weeks notice that a public hearing will be held concerning adopting, amending or revising such rules and regulations with information concerning the scope of the proposed action to be taken sufficient for public understanding; the first publication of such notice to be not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing. If the Town Manager promulgates such rules and regulations or amendments or revisions thereto, they shall forthwith be filed with the office of the director of public works and the office of the town clerk. The Town Clerk shall have a copy of the same posted in each of the precincts of the Town.

(Article XIX)(TCM 4/23/90)

Transitional Provision

The provisions of the By-law regarding water supply existing on the date this By-law is adopted shall remain in effect until a new set of regulations is submitted by the director of public works and approved by the town council, consistent with this provision.


CHAPTER 9 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY

Section

9-100    BUILDING

9-101    Building Inspections

9-102    Plumbing and Gas Fitting Inspections

9-103    Wiring and Electrical Standards

9-104    Stretch Energy Code Adoption

9-200    OTHER RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF PROPERTY

9-201    Regulation of Earth Removal

9-202    Regulation of Signs

9-300    BLIGHTED PROPERTIES

9-301    Purpose

9-302    Definitions

9-303    Blighted Conditions

9-304    Administration

9-305    Appeals

9-306    Registration of Vacant Buildings Required

9-307    Penalties and Enforcement

9-308    Severability


9-101 Building Inspections

9-101.1 Effect of this By-law – None of the provisions of this building inspection department By-law shall be construed so as to conflict with the requirements of state law or any regulations issued there under. The Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Safety Board of Standards Building Code, otherwise known as 780 CMR, and General Laws, Chapter 143, Section 3A are considered minimum standards and regulations when not provided for in these By-laws. (Article XI, § 1)

9-101.2 Department Established – There shall be a department known as the building inspection department which shall be furnished and maintained at the expense of the town with office room and such supplies and implements as are necessary for the transaction of its business. (Article XI, § 2)

9-101.3 Inspector of Buildings – The town manager shall in June of each year appoint an inspector of buildings for the term of three years from that date and until another is appointed and qualified. Said inspector shall have charge and control of the enforcement of the regulations relative to buildings or structures and see that such regulations are complied with. The salary or compensation for the inspector of buildings shall be such as the town may from time to time determine. (Article XI, § 3)

9-101.4 Restrictions on Person Appointed Inspector of Buildings – The inspector shall have no financial nor business interest in the doing of work, or the furnishing of materials, for the construction, repair or maintenance of any building or structure in this town, nor in the making of plans or specifications therefor unless the inspector is the owner of the premises. (Article XI, § 4)

9-101.5 Annual Report of Inspector – The inspector shall keep a record of the business of the building inspection department and submit to the town manager a yearly report of such business and such other reports as the town manager may require and the report of the inspector of buildings shall be incorporated into the yearly report of the town; records to be open for the inspection of any citizen. (Article XI, § 5)

9-101.6 Applications for Permits – It shall be unlawful to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove, or demolish a building or structure; or to change the use or occupancy of a building or structure; or to install or alter any equipment for which provision is made or the installation of which is regulated by 780 CMR without first filing a written application with the inspector of buildings and obtaining the required permit therefor.

Before commencing any activity described above, an application for a permit shall be filed with the inspector of buildings on forms furnished by the building inspection department giving a description of the building, pool, structure or additions, alterations or repairs proposed. Plans and specifications shall be submitted for examination and approval.

Also, a plan of the lot on which any proposed building is to be erected is to be filed with the application.

The location of the structure and its elevation in relation to the street is to be shown on the plot plan. All drawings are to be submitted in duplicate and one copy is to remain on file, the other copy to be stamped with this department’s seal of approval. If the inspector is of the opinion that the requirements of this By-law have been complied with, the inspector shall thereupon issue said stamped permits to the applicants. (Article XI, § 6)

9-101.7 Building Permit Fees – Fees for building permits shall be established by the building inspector, with the approval of the town manager.


9-102 Plumbing and Gas Fitting Inspectors

9-102.1 Permits Required – All persons who desire to engage in, carry on or work at the business of plumbing within this jurisdiction shall be registered or licensed by the State Examiners of Plumbers, in accordance with the provisions of MGL Chapter 142.

Before commencing work in a building every plumber shall first, except in the case of the repair of leaks, file at the office of the board of health, upon forms provided for that purpose, a notice of the work to be performed. No such work shall be done in any building except in accordance with plans to be submitted, if required, which shall be approved by the inspector of plumbing and a permit issued therefor. Permits to perform plumbing shall be issued to master plumbers only. Permits may be recalled if the conditions are violated. No septic tank shall be installed without a permit from the inspector of plumbing. (Article XII, § 1)

All work considered plumbing and covered within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Plumbing Code, Chapter 358 Acts of 1965 as amended will be performed within the rules and regulations of said code. (Article XII, § 2)


9-103 Wiring and Electrical Standards

9-103.1 Notice Required Before Installation of Wires, etc. – No person shall install wires, conduits, apparatus, fixtures or other appliances for carrying or using electricity for light, heat or power within, or connected to any building, without first notifying the inspector of wires in writing of the proposed installations. (Article XIII, § 1)

9-103.2 Notice Required Before Enclosing or Covering Wires, etc. – No wire, appliance or apparatus shall be covered or enclosed without first notifying and obtaining permission to do so from the inspector of wires. Said notification to be given to the inspector at least 24 hours before said work is covered or enclosed. (Article XIII, § 2)

9-103.3 Permit Required Before Any Electrical Work Begins – No person or corporation shall do any electrical construction work, whether original work or alterations, without obtaining from the inspector of wires a written permit to do such work. (Article XIII, § 3)

9-103.4 Application of these Provisions – The above sections shall apply to all new construction and changes in existing construction in private dwellings and other buildings the owners of which do not regularly employ the full time services of a licensed electrician. (Article XIII, § 4)

9-103.5 Application of State Electrical Code – The inspector of wires is hereby authorized to enforce the rules and regulations as contained and provided in the current edition of the Massachusetts Electrical Code (527 CMR 12.00) for the installation of electric wiring and apparatus, and in accordance with the provisions and requirements therein contained. (Article XIII, § 5)

9-103.6 Turning Off Electrical Current – Whenever, in the opinion of the inspector of wires, any electrical conductors or appliances used for the distribution or consumption of a current, or electricity for light, heat or power purposes are in a dangerous condition, said inspector is hereby authorized to cause the current to be shut off, if the existing defect is not remedied within a reasonable time after written notice has been given to the owner or user of such defective conductor or appliance. (Article XIII, § 6)

9-103.7 Installation of Electric Meters – No meter shall be installed without a written permit from the inspector of wires. (Article XIII, § 7)


9-104  Stretch Energy Code Adoption

9-104.1 Definitions – International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) – The International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building energy code created by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted by many state and municipal governments in the United States for the establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for energy efficiency, and is updated on a three-year cycle. The baseline energy conservation requirements of the MA State Building Code are the IECC with Massachusetts amendments, as approved by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards.

Stretch Energy Code – Codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA of the 9th edition Massachusetts Building Code, the Stretch Energy Code is an appendix to the Massachusetts Building Code, based on further amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) to improve the energy efficiency of buildings built to this code.

9-104.2 Purpose – The purpose of 780 CMR 115.AA is to provide a more energy efficient alternative to the Base Energy Code applicable to the relevant sections of the building code for new buildings.

9-104.3 Applicability – This code applies to residential and commercial building. Buildings not included in this scope shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 24, 51, as applicable.

9-104.4 Stretch Code – The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions, amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into the Code of By-laws, Town of Southbridge, Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Chapter 9-104.

The Stretch Code is enforceable by the building inspector and/or the director of inspectional services. (TCM 1/6/17)


9-201 Regulation of Earth Removal

9-201.1 Effect – No person, firm or corporation shall excavate, process, or treat in any one year more than 50 cubic yards of soil, rock, sod, loam, peat, humus, clay, sand, earth, gravel or other minerals or materials from any land within the town without first obtaining a permit from the special permit granting authority (SPGA) of the town as provided in the following sections.

9-201.2 Authority and Applicability -

(a) Authority – This By-law is adopted under authority of MGL Chapter 40A, Section 9 and Chapter 40, Section 21(17).

(b) Applicability – The special permit granting authority under this By-law shall be the planning board. A permit shall be granted only by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of the SPGA. Permits shall only be granted in accordance with the procedures for notice, hearings, decisions and appeals set forth in MGL Chapter 40A, Sections 9 and 11. Any permit granted hereunder shall lapse within one year if substantial use has not sooner commenced.

9-201.3 Administration -

(a) Enforcement – This By-law shall be administered by the planning board and enforced by the building inspector. Written notice of any violation shall be provided to the owner of the premises, specifying a time for compliance, which shall not be less than one day or more than two weeks, depending upon the feasibility of quick compliance and the hazard or damage risk involved. Violation shall be subject to the maximum penalty allowed under MGL Chapter 40, Section 21(17), with each day that the violation continues beyond the specified time for compliance considered a separate offense. Violations of this by-law shall be enforceable through non-criminal disposition pursuant to G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, refer to Fee Schedule:

9-201.4 Exceptions to the By-law

(b) A special permit shall not be required under this By-law for the following types of excavation:

(1) Excavation for new structures, for which a valid building permit is in force.

(2) The construction or reconstruction of any driveway if otherwise permitted.

(3) Excavation in the course of normal and customary agricultural use of land.

(4) Excavation in the normal use of a cemetery.

(5) Excavation in the normal and customary maintenance of utilities.

(6) Subdivisions shall not be exempted from the operation of this By-law. However, they may apply for an earth removal permit at the time of application for definitive subdivision approval, and a public hearing may be held jointly for the purpose of obtaining an earth removal permit and subdivision approval. Security for site restoration purposes shall be provided per the requirements of this By-law, which shall be in addition to that required for the completion of public improvements as required in the Southbridge Subdivision Rules and Regulations.

9-201.5 Limited Operations Permit -

(a) Permitted Activities – The following activities may be authorized by a limited operations permit issued by the enforcement agent, which shall be the building inspector unless otherwise provided for, without a public hearing unless such hearing is requested by the applicant. The building inspector may determine at any time that a public hearing by the planning board is required, and may require that any applicant for a limited operation permit shall first present his application to the planning board.

(1) Removal of less than 200 cubic yards of material from any one or more sites on a one time basis by any one applicant within any twelve month period.

(2) Removal necessarily incidental to construction on the premises under a currently valid building permit.

(b) Application – Application for a limited operations permit shall identify the location, the owner, the volume of material to be removed, and the period during which removal will take place. The application fee shall be $20.00. The SPGA shall act on such application within thirty days of application.

The application shall be accompanied by a plan showing –

(1) The property lines.

(2) The area to be excavated.

(3) The distance from the property lines to the area to be excavated.

(4) The approximate contours before and after excavating.

(c) Requirements – All requirements of Sections 9-201.6(g)(1), removal operations, and 9-201.6(h), restoration operations, may be complied with by limited operations.

(d) Permit – A limited operations permit may set conditions regarding such things as time of completion, transport routes, and hours of operation, and if the operation entails having topsoil displaced from more than two acres simultaneously, security may be required assuring restoration within six months of expiration of the permit.

9-201.6 Standard Operations -

(a) Permits Required – All earth removal, process, or treating operations, except those qualifying under Section 9-201.5, limited operations, require a special permit (removal permit) to be acted on by the SPGA following a public hearing with published notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the town at least 14 and 7 days prior to the hearing and with written notice by certified return receipt mail, sent to all abutters and to all owners of property on both sides of a servicing street if having frontage within three hundred feet of the centerline of any proposed egress.

Removal permits shall expire one year from the date of issue, except that such permits may be granted for three years for operations which are located in an industrial district. Removal permits may be renewed upon application without hearing for the same length of time as originally issued following notice that renewal is contemplated published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town.

(b) Application – The application for an original or renewal removal permit shall be in writing and shall contain an accurate description of the portion of land in which the excavation will take place, shall state fully the purpose of the excavation, shall include the required fee, shall include an assessor’s certified list of abutters in cases where a hearing is required, and shall include site plans drawn by a registered surveyor or engineer containing the following information:

(1) Property lines and names of all abutters including those across any way.

(2) Existing contours at two-foot intervals in the area from which materials are to be excavated and in surrounding areas at least 100 feet from any point in the area of excavation.

(3) Natural features such as wetlands, the 100-year floodplain, ground    cover and groundwater. Water table elevation shall be determined by test pits and soil borings. A log of soil borings shall be included taken to the depth of the proposed excavation, congruent with the size and geological make-up of the site.

(4) A topographical map showing drainage facilities, final grades, and proposed vegetation and trees.

(5) Erosion and sediment-control plan.

(6) The amount and cost of proposed restoration materials, and where the applicant intends to get them.

(7) The application shall authorize the SPGA or building inspector access to the premises at any time in administration of this By-law.

(c) Fees – The application or renewal fee shall be $300 per year of permit validity, plus any costs of advertising and notice.

(d) Authorization – A removal permit may authorize having topsoil removed from (and not yet restored to) a total of no more than five acres at any one time and at no more than five separate locations simultaneously. Additional acres may be authorized for operations which are located in an industrial district and which involve substantial on-site investment in fixed processing equipment.

(e) Security – The applicant shall provide security which will be forfeited to the town in the event of failure to comply with the requirements of this By-law or the removal permit issued.

Such security shall equal $5000 per acre authorized for removal at any one time or such larger amount determined by the SPGA to be necessary in view of site conditions and proposals. Irrevocable security shall be provided in the form of a certified check or other form satisfactory to the town counsel and town treasurer. The security shall not be released until the surveyor or engineer has filed with the SPGA an "as-built" plan and has also certified that the restoration has been completed in compliance with the permit and the plans.

(f) Approval – The SPGA shall exercise its powers with due regard to:

(1) The health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town.

(2) Detriment to the neighborhood.

(3) Effect on natural resources including, but not limited to, the recharge of the water table or condition of the surface water.

Permits shall be granted only upon determination that the proposed operation will create no substantial hazard, will not cause environmental degradation outside the premises, and will not permanently impair the utility of abutting properties for uses allowed under the zoning By-law. The SPGA may impose on any permit conditions including, but not limited to, conditions upon methods of removal, type and location of structures, fencing, hours of operation, area, location and depth of excavation, steepness of slopes, drainage, disposition of boulders and stumps, restoration and planting.

Every permit shall contain the condition that inspection of the operation may be made at any reasonable hours by an agent of the SPGA to determine if conditions of the permit are being enforced.

(g) Standards of Operation – The following standards of operation shall apply to every permitted operation in addition to conditions imposed under Section 9-201.6(f) (approval) -

(1) Removal Operations -

a) No removal, processing, or treating shall take place for mining operations within:

1) 100 feet of an existing public way.

2) 300 feet of a residential property line unless specifically authorized in the permit.

3) 100 feet of stream or pond.

4) 5 feet of the annual high water table, as established by test pits and soil borings.

Observation wells shall be monitored for one year to establish this elevation. The information shall show the topographic plan and on a permanent monument erected upon the property.

b) All topsoil displaced shall be stockpiled on the site until termination of the operation or restoration, subject to condition of the SPGA.

c) The active excavation operation area shall not exceed a total of five acres in more than five separate sites at any one time. Natural vegetation shall be left and maintained on undisturbed land for screening and noise reduction purposes.

d) Any work or bank that slopes more than thirty degrees downward adjacent to a public street shall be adequately fenced at the top.

e) A substantial fence shall be provided enclosing the excavation or quarry where any excavation or quarry will extend under original round level or will have a depth of ten feet or more and create a slope of more than one foot vertical to two feet horizontal. Such fence shall be located ten feet or more from the edge of the    excavation or quarry and shall be at least six feet in height or subject to condition of the SPGA.

f) Adequate provision is to be made for drainage during and after the completion of operations.

g) Adequate lateral support shall be maintained for all adjacent properties.

h) The use of explosives shall be done in accordance with the regulations for storage and handling of explosive as published by the Massachusetts Department of Public Safety, the Southbridge Fire Department, and the SPGA

i) Any access to excavated area or areas in the process of excavation shall be adequately posted with KEEP OUT – DANGER signs.

j) Operation hours shall be only between 7 A.M. and 5 P.M. on weekdays excluding holidays, and trucks may enter and leave the premises only within such hours. All loaded vehicles shall be suitably covered to prevent dust and contents from spilling and blowing from the load.

k) Trucking routes and methods shall be subject to approval of the SPGA.

l) All access roads leading to public ways shall be treated with calcium chloride, stone or other suitable non-polluting material to reduce dust and mud for a distance of 200 feet back from the way. The operator shall clean up any spillage on public ways.

m) Access roads shall be constructed at an angle to the public way or with a curve so as to help screen the operation from public view.

(h) Restoration Operations – Immediately following the expiration or withdrawal of a limited operation or removal permit, upon voluntary cessation of operations, or upon completion of removal in a substantial area as in one (1) following, all land not built upon shall be restored as follows:

(1) Restoration shall be carried on simultaneously with excavation, so that when any five acre operation area has been excavated, at least three acres shall be restored before work commences (including building haul roads) on the next contiguous five acres. Final restoration work shall be complete within 60 days after expiration or withdrawal of a permit or upon cessation of operations.

(2) No finished grade shall be steeper than 3:1 (33%); 4:1 is preferred for erosion control and shall be required in sensitive areas.

(3) Retained topsoil shall be spread over the disturbed area to minimum depth of four inches and treated with one and one-half tons of lime per acre and 300 pounds of 10-10-10 fertilizer per acre (unless otherwise determined by the permit conditions) and seeded with a grass or legume mixture prescribed by the Conservation District or Massachusetts Department of Public Works for slope erosion control. Trees or shrubs of prescribed species will be planted to provide screening and reduce erosion during the establishment period.

(4) All debris, stumps, boulders, etc. shall be removed from the site and disposed of in an approved location or, in the case of inorganic material, buried and covered with at least two feet of soil.

(5) Unless the permit conditions expressly require alteration of drainage patterns, the land shall be left so that natural storm drainage shall leave the property at the original natural drainage points; and so that the hydrograph of any post-development stream is the same as that of the pre-development stream.

(6) All equipment, buildings and structures shall be removed from the area.

(7) Security release – Security shall not be released until sufficient time has lapsed to ascertain that the vegetation planted has successfully been established and that drainage is satisfactory.

(i) Revocation of Permits – The SPGA may revoke any permit which it has issued for good cause, and may take other action as shall be necessary either against the permittee or surety in the bond, to cause completion of the work forthwith in accordance with the terms of the application and permit, provided that it shall offer to the operator an opportunity for a hearing within 14 days after the revocation.

(Article VIII, § 38) (TCM 3/12/90)


9-202 Regulation of Signs

9-202.1 General Objectives – Purpose: Signs are here in regulated and restricted in order to place limitations on the size, location, type and illumination of all signs, and to ensure that they will be appropriate to the land, building or use to which they are appurtenant and be protective of property values and the safety, convenience and welfare of the Town of Southbridge residents. It is also the intent of this by-law:

a) To prevent adverse community appearances while protecting the character of the area in which they are located.

b) To protect and enhance the visual environment of the Town and to prevent or minimize damage to the environment.

c) To restrict private signs and lights which violate privacy, or which increase the probability of accidents by distracting attention or obstructing vision.

d) To encourage signing and lighting and other communications which aid orientation, express local history and character.

e) To reduce conflict among private signs and lighting from environmental information signs, such as alternating time and/or temperature signage

f) To permit maximum legibility and effectiveness of signs and to prevent over concentration, improper placement and excessive bulk and area, by providing a limiting control.

The rules and regulations contained herein shall govern the construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, replacement, and erection of all signs within the Town of Southbridge. Additionally, any proposal which requires site plan review as outlined in §701A of the Southbridge Zoning Bylaw, shall comply with the Standards for Nonresidential Development in §706. Additionally, any proposal located within the Proposed Downtown Redevelopment area shall follow guidance in the Downtown Center Design Guidelines prepared for the Southbridge Redevelopment Authority by Vanasse Hangen, Brustlin, Inc., in 2010, available in the “Downtown Southbridge Urban Renewal Plan,” to be consulted in conjunction with existing signage by-laws. Additionally, any sign erected within a historical district shall comply with current regulations promulgated by the Southbridge Historical Commission, and there shall not be any sign erected in any historical district inconsistent with the character of the historical district in which it is erected. Applicants must consult the Department of Inspections Services or the Planning Board if uncertain whether a project is located within a historical district or within the Proposed Downtown Redevelopment area.

9-202-2 Definitions -

“Sign” means any device, structure or object for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others, located on property owned/leased by the sign owner.

“Sign Area” means the area defined by the frame or edge of a sign; however, where there is no geometric frame or edge of the sign, the area shall be defined by a projected, enclosed, rectilinear shape which most closely outlines the said sign. Sign area includes the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding, but not the supporting structure.

“Sign Height” means the vertical distance from the grade below the sign to the uppermost module, cabinet or character.

“Temporary Sign” means any sign, banner, pennant, or advertising display intended to be displayed for a limited time period. Easily removed signs attached to windows are considered temporary signs, and shall be removed within thirty (30) days of placement.

“Banner Sign” means signs made of cloth, fabric, paper, non-rigid plastic or similar types of material; national flags, flags of political subdivisions and symbolic flags of an institution or a business are excluded.

“Construction Sign” means a temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architect, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure of project.

“Freestanding Sign” means a sign attached to the ground and supported by uprights placed on or in the ground.

“Political Sign” means a sign which advertises a candidate or candidates for public elective office, a political party, or which promotes a position on a public or ballot issue.

“Real Estate Sign” means a temporary sign which advertises the real estate on which it is located for rent, lease, or sale.

“Shopping Center Sign” means a pylon type sign announcing the shopping mall itself, and shall be a maximum of fifteen (15) feet in height, and shall be appropriately landscaped.

9-202-3- Plan and Permit Requirements – Applicants must submit plans with their permit applications to the Building Inspector prior to obtaining a building permit.

9-202-4- Nullification – A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six (6) months from the date of the permit. The Building Inspector may at their discretion issue extensions covering a period not to exceed one (1) year from the date of issue of the original permit.

No sign shall be allowed unless it is in conformance with the current Massachusetts State Building Code except as specifically permitted.

No permanent ‘sign shall be erected, altered, replaced, or relocated without a permit issued by the Building Inspector.

Sign regulations vary based on the zoning district in which the sign is located. The Town of Southbridge has eight (8) unique zoning districts:

Single Family Residence Districts (SF) Two Family Residence Districts (2F) Multiple Family Residence Districts (MF) Retail Business Districts (RB) General Business Districts (GB) Light Industry Districts (LI) Heavy Industry Districts (HI) Central Core District (CC)

With the exception of the Central Core District, all zoning districts can be found in multiple locations throughout the Town. A parcel’s zoning district can be found in the Town’s GIS database, accessible on the Town of Southbridge website. The zone is referred to by the abbreviations listed above, and are located under Property Info > Land > Zone. More information can be found in the Town’s Zoning By-Laws.

Each zoning district’s unique signage regulations are outlined below.

9-202-5- Allowed Signs and Sign Regulations –

a) General Regulations – The following requirements shall apply to all signs and other advertising devices in all zoning districts. (Note: Dimensional requirements are included in the next sections – b, c, and d.)

1) No sign or other advertising device with visible moving or movable parts or with flashing animated or intermittent illumination, shall be erected or maintained except alternating Electric Message Centers.

2) No illumination shall be permitted which is visible from any portion of a way so as to create a traffic hazard.

3) Signs may be illuminated by: a steady stationary light of reasonable intensity shielded and directed solely at the sign; an internal light of reasonable intensity; a neon or gas filled tube; or light emitting diodes (LED).

4) All signs lighted externally shall be shielded or directed in such a way as to prevent spillage of the building or onto streets, parking, driveway areas, or surrounding properties.

5) No freestanding sign or other advertising device, or part thereof, shall be more than twenty (20) feet above ground level.

6) No sign or other advertising device attached to a building shall project above the roof or parapet line.

7) No sign or other advertising device attached to a building shall project more than three (3) feet from a building or two-thirds the width of the sidewalk, whichever is less.

8) No sign shall be erected in any manner that will cover windows or doors.

9) No signs shall be erected on public property without express written permission from the Town.

10) No remote signs, (i.e., on a neighboring or other property), shall be erected.

b) All Residential Districts (SF, 2F, MF) – The following requirements shall apply to all signs and other advertising devices in all residential zoning districts:

1) One (1) sign for each family residing on the premises indicating the name of the owner or occupant or pertaining to a permitted accessory use, provided that each sign does not exceed two(2) square feet in area.

2) One (1) sign not over sixteen (16) square feet in area pertaining to permitted buildings, structures, and uses of the premises other than dwellings and their accessory uses.

3) Each temporary sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises must be unlighted and not over eight (8) square feet in area, and all signs must not aggregate more than eighteen (18) square feet in area.

4) Unlighted directional signs not exceeding one (1) square foot in area pertaining to churches, schools, institutions, and other non-profit or public uses.

c) Business Districts (GB, RB) – The following requirements shall apply to all signs and other advertising devices in business zones:

1) Sign area shall not exceed five (5) % of the side of the building upon which the sign is to be attached or located or a maximum of thirty-two (32) square feet.

2) Only one (1) exterior sign with an area not exceeding twelve (12) square feet shall be erected on any non-conforming building or use.

3) Only one (1) sign shall be allowed on each side of a structure facing upon a public way.

d) Industrial Districts (L1, H1) –The following requirements shall apply to all signs and other advertising devices in industrial zone.

1) No freestanding sign shall exceed a height of ten (10) feet.

2) Freestanding signs shall be placed no more than one-half the required setback distance from the roadway.

3) No sign shall exceed forty (40) square feet in area.

4) If more than one (1) sign, designating more than one (1) use of a structure, is erected, the accumulated sign area shall not exceed fifteen (15) % of the side of the building upon which the signs are to be attached or located.

e) Shopping Centers – In business districts with mall style shopping centers, the sign area for the principal entrance of each store shall not exceed the lesser of four hundred fifty (450) square feet or ten (10) % of the area of the side of the store building which contains the principal entrance.

f) Downtown Center – Signage in the Downtown Center (DC) is strongly suggested to follow the Downtown Center Design Guidelines set forth in the “Downtown Southbridge Urban Renewal Plan.” Building and signage in DC requires a special permit, the approval of which comes first from the Southbridge Redevelopment Authority, who uses these design guidelines as a reference for their decision.

The design guidelines seek to preserve, interpret, and enhance the rich and diverse history of Southbridge, seeking to blend in new development while preserving the area’s historic character.

Signage in this area must still abide by the applicable requirements listed above.

Downtown Center is shown on the map below and extends from Main Street north to the Quinebaug River, with its eastern border along Foster Street and its western border roughly following Hamilton Street for a short distance before cutting north to the River.

9-202-6- Temporary Signs – The following signs are allowed on a temporary basis, may be freestanding, and do not need a permit from the Town.

a) Construction Signs – One (1) unlighted sign of up to thirty-two (32) square feet identifying parties involved in construction is allowed on the premises where the sign is located. The sign shall be removed prior to the issuance of any occupancy permit. Construction signage is temporary and limited to the span of the project’s valid building permit.

b) Real Estate Signs – Each sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises must be unlighted and not over eight (8) square feet in area, and all signs must not aggregate more than eighteen (18) square feet in area in all residential districts, and each sign must be not over eighteen (18) square feet in all other districts pertaining to the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which the sign is displayed. Signs shall be removed within fourteen (14) days after sale, rental or lease.

c) Event Signs – Unlighted signs of up to thirty-two (32) square feet in business and industrial districts and eight (8) square feet in residential districts, may be displayed on private property and are limited to one (1) per street frontage announcing a drive or event of a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organization. Signs shall be installed no sooner than thirty (30) days prior to the event and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the event.

d) Political Signs – Due to federal first amendment rights, political signs are exempt from regulations except that they are subject to public safety requirements. Political signs shall be installed no sooner than ninety (90) days before an election and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the close of the polls.

e) Banner Signs – Non-profit, charitable, community organizations shall be allowed to erect sign banners not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area. Banner signs shall be installed no sooner than thirty (30) days prior to the event and shall be removed within seven (7) days after the event.

f) Display Window Signs – Signs on the surface of or inside

Display windows, lighted only by the building illumination and covering no more than ten (25) % of the display window area are allowed.”

g) Non-Commercial Signs – Buildings occupied solely for the civic, philanthropic, educational, religious, or other non-commercial purposes are exempt from regulations except that they are subject to public safety requirements.

h) Seasonal Decorative Signs – Seasonal decorative signs and residential decorative signs are exempt from regulations except that they are subject to the public safety requirements.

i) Electronic Message Center – means any sign on which the characters, letters or illustrations can be changed automatically or through electronic or mechanical means. Electronic Message Centers include time and temperature signs.

j) Yard / Garage Sale Signs – Not to exceed five (5) square feet displayed on private property and limited one to each premise. Not to be erected earlier than three (3) days preceding the sale and shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours following

9-202-7- Removing or reconstructing signs – No sign heretofore approved and erected shall be repaired, altered or removed, nor shall any sign, or substantial part thereof, which is blown down, destroyed or removed, be re-erected, reconstructed, rebuilt or relocated unless it is made to comply with all applicable requirements of this by-law.

9-202-8- Exemptions – Signs for large scale buildings (over 100,000 SF), or buildings with extraordinarily large setbacks, or which are more than 50 feet from the roadway are exempt from this bylaw and shall be permitted through Zoning Bylaw Site Plan Review or Special Permit, whichever is applicable.

9-202-9- Enforcement – Any violation of Section 9-202 shall be enforceable by the Director of Inspection or a designee of the Town through non-criminal disposition pursuant to MGL Chapter 40 §21D and Section 1-111 of the Bylaws, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties A through F shall be applicable.

9-202-10– Signs which were legally erected before adaptation of this by-law shall not be voluntarily rebuilt, altered or relocated without conforming to this by-law.


9-301 Purpose

(a) It is hereby found and declared that there exists within the town of Southbridge numerous real properties which are in a blighted condition. Many of these properties are essentially abandoned. Some are in violation of multiple aspects of state and local building and sanitary codes. These code violations may include, but are not limited to, unoccupied buildings susceptible to vandalism and/or open structures rendering them unsafe and dangerous, yards full of litter and trash, unsecured houses, unshoveled snow and foliage rendering sidewalks impassable. 

(b) The existence of such blight contributes to the decline of town neighborhoods. It is further found that the existence of such blighted properties encourages temporary occupancy, if abandoned, by transients, drug users and persons engaged in criminal activity, adversely affecting the economic wellbeing of the town of Southbridge and the health, safety and wellbeing of Southbridge’s residents and creates significant costs to Southbridge by virtue of the need for constant monitoring and frequent boarding and securing.

(c) It is further found that many of the blighted properties can be rehabilitated, reconstructed, demolished and/or reused so as to provide decent, safe, sanitary housing or commercial facilities, and that such rehabilitation, reconstruction, demolition and/or reuse would eliminate, remedy and/or prevent the adverse conditions described above.

(d) It is the intent of this section to protect and preserve public health, safety, security and wellbeing of occupants, abutters and neighborhoods by:

(1) Requiring all residential, commercial and industrial property owners to properly maintain properties free from blighted conditions, and

(2) Regulating the maintenance of residential, commercial and industrial properties to prevent blighted and unsecured properties. (TCM 9/12/16)


9-302 Definitions

When used in this chapter, unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(a) “Blighted premises” or “blighted property(ies)” or the condition of “blight” involving real property in the town of Southbridge shall mean any building, structure, parcel of land, or any part of a building or structure that is a separate unit, whether commercial or residential, whether occupied or unoccupied, in which at least one (1) of the following conditions exists:

(1) The property is not being adequately maintained and secured as documented by the enforcement officer (as the term is defined herein) based upon, without limitation, the following factors or similar factors: missing or boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing walls, roofs or floors; siding that is seriously damaged or missing; fire damage; a foundation that is structurally faulty; other structural deficiencies that contribute to blight as determined by the enforcement officer or his/her agents; the accumulation outside of interior furniture, garbage, trash, and/or junk; and/or the existence of inoperable/neglected motor vehicles, boats, motorcycles or other inoperable machinery or other refuse (unless otherwise licensed to do so);

(2) The property or its owner(s) has/have been cited for violations as documented by an enforcement officer or his/her designated agents, and said violations have not been corrected;

(3) The property is a fire hazard as documented by the fire department;

(4) Because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or because of physical deterioration, the property is no longer habitable as a dwelling or useful for the purpose for which the completed structure was originally intended;

(5) The property is a vacant building as defined hereunder; or

(6) It is determined by an enforcement officer or his/her designated agents that the building, structure or parcel of land is in a condition which poses a serious nuisance or serious threat to safety, health, and/or wellbeing of the town of Southbridge.

(b) “Board of health” shall mean the board as defined and designated by the town’s governance documents.

(c) “Building” shall mean a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, resting on its own foundations and designed for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.

(d) “Costs” shall mean any and all expenses paid or incurred by the town for work done or efforts expended in furtherance of carrying out the intent and directives of this by-law including but not limited to all technical, administrative, and/or professional fees, and all court costs and attorney fees for all efforts to carry out this by-law.

(e) “Inoperable/neglected motor vehicle” shall mean a motor vehicle, whether registered or not, that remains in condition of disrepair or partially dismantled with no progress toward restoration; or a vehicle showing neglect by invasion of foliage, rodent nesting, or progressive deterioration or other condition attributable to neglect.

(f) “Inspector of buildings” shall mean the director of the inspections department as well as the electrical inspector, the plumbing inspector, and/or the gas inspector, whether they are permanent or temporary in their service.

(g) “Enforcement officer” shall mean the inspector of buildings, director of public health, police chief, fire chief and/or their designated agents.

(h) “Local agent” shall mean an agent located within thirty (30) driving miles distance of the property in question.

(i) “Owner” shall mean any individual, business entity, voluntary association or nonprofit organization, which alone or jointly or severally with others:

(1) Has legal title to any building, structure, and property, or

(2) Has care, charge, or control of any such building, structure or property in any capacity, including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title, or

(3) Is a lessee under a written agreement, or

(4) Is an agent, trustee, or other person appointed by the courts and vested with possession or control of such building, structure or property.

(j) “Property” shall mean any real residential, commercial, or industrial property or portion thereof, located in the town of Southbridge, including buildings or structures situated on the property. For purposes of this section, “property” does not include property owned or subject to the control of the town of Southbridge or any of its governmental bodies.

(k) “Receiver” shall mean a court appointed individual who serves as a general contractor and whose duties and powers shall be specified by the court in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 111 sec 127I. 

(l) “Securing measures” shall mean any actions that are taken to prevent unauthorized persons access to the property including but not limited to erecting fencing around the property, boarding up doors and windows and the like.

(m) “Town” shall mean the town of Southbridge.

(n) “Vacant” shall mean either:

(1) Any unoccupied real property which is empty or remains empty due to abandonment or is not continuously maintained; or which persistently or repeatedly becomes unprotected or unsecured; or which has become occupied by unauthorized persons or which displays conditions of blight.

(2) Any unoccupied building, structure or property displaying conditions of blight. (TCM 9/12/16)


9-303 Blighted Conditions

(a) Creating a Condition of Blight – It shall be a violation of this by-law for any owner of a property, vacant or otherwise, in the town of Southbridge, to allow or cause to be created intentionally, or through neglect to take corrective action, any condition of blight on that property or condition of blight caused by that property on any abutting properties. 

(b) Correction of Blighted Conditions – The owner(s) of such blighted property shall correct any condition of blight on such property or its appurtenance(s). (TCM 9/12/16)


9-304 Administration

(a) Inspection Authority – In order to properly protect the health and wellbeing of the people and the emergency responders of the town of Southbridge, enforcement officer(s) or their authorized agent(s) or representative(s), upon reasonable cause, are authorized to enter, examine, and/or survey at any reasonable time such places as they consider necessary.

(b) Investigation – The enforcement officer(s) may undertake an investigation of any alleged violation of this section upon their own initiative or shall, upon receipt of a complaint from any individual, civic organization or other governmental agency, undertake an investigation of the alleged violation.

(c) Orders to Take Corrective Action – Upon a finding of a violation of the provisions of this section the enforcement officer shall serve notice of the violation and an order to correct such violation upon the owner(s) of the property by certified mail or by in hand service by a person authorized to do such. The order shall require the owner(s) to take one or more of the following actions to bring the property into compliance with the requirements of this by-law:

(1) To take any action that the enforcement officer deems necessary to correct the violations of this by-law in order to assist the town of Southbridge in protecting the public health, safety and the wellbeing;

(2) To correct the violation within seven days or within such time as the enforcement officer deems reasonable and necessary; or 

(3) In instances where permits or other authorizations are required, to file a completed application and any required plans for said permit for repair or rehabilitation along with a schedule indicating a completion date for such work or its various phases. Such schedule shall be approved by the enforcement officer.

(d) Right of the Town to Effect Repairs – Whenever a property owner fails, neglects, or refuses to make repairs or take other corrective actions specified in the order, the town officials may undertake such repairs or actions; or the town may seek a court appointed receiver to manage the property and bring said property into compliance with all applicable statutes, regulations and codes; or take other action the town official or enforcement officer determines is necessary when, in his or her judgment, a failure to make the necessary repairs or corrective actions will endanger the public health, safety and wellbeing.

(e) Recovery of Costs – Notice of the intention of the town to make such repairs or other corrective actions shall be served on the owner(s) by certified mail or by service in hand by a person duly authorized to do such.

When the repairs are made or other corrective actions are taken by the town of Southbridge, the cost of such repairs (which “costs” are understood to include all technical, administrative, and/or professional fees to accomplish these repairs and/or corrective actions) plus any and all court costs and attorney fees for administration, processing, and/or prosecution of the collection of these costs shall constitute a debt in favor of the town against the owner(s) of the repaired property. In the event that the owner(s) fails, neglects or refuses to pay the town the amount of the debt within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the notice of the debt, the town may place a lien on the property for such debt and/or may initiate a civil action against the owner in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover the debt.

(f) Multiple Remedies – The enforcement remedies provided in this chapter are not intended to replace or supersede the following remedies already existing under current law but are to be available in addition to these existing remedies to better address and confront the dire community problem of blighted properties:

(1) Receivership (MGL c. 111, sec 127I).

(2) Municipal Charges Lien (MGL c. 40, sec 58).

(3) Noncriminal Disposition of By-Law Violation (MGL c. 40, sec 21D).

(4) Removal and Abatement of Public Nuisances (MGL c. 111, sec 122 – 125).

(5) Demolition Liens for Common Nuisances (MGL c. 139, sec 3A).

(6) Remedies provided by State Sanitary Code and State Building Code. (TCM 9/12/16)


9-305 Appeals

(a) Right to Hearing – Any person or persons upon whom any order has been served pursuant to any section of this by-law, and who is aggrieved by said order, may appeal to the board of health provided, such petition must be filed in writing within seven days after the day the order was served.

(b) Hearing Notice – Upon receipt of a petition the board of health shall in writing inform the petitioner and other affected parties (affected parties shall include the occupants of all affected premises if the petitioner is an owner, and the owner if the petitioner is an occupant) of the date, time and place of the hearing and of their right to inspect and copy the enforcement officer’s file and other public records concerning the matter to be heard. 

(c) Appeal of Final Decisions – Any person aggrieved by the final decision of the board of health with respect to any order issued under the provisions of this by-law may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this commonwealth. (TCM 9/12/16)


9-306 Registration of Vacant Buildings Required

(a) Registration – 

(1) Within thirty (30) days of a building becoming vacant, and each January 1st thereafter, each owner of such vacant building shall register said property with the town of Southbridge’s director of building inspections. All registrations must state the owner’s name, mailing address, physical address if different, telephone number and email address if the individual has an email address. 

(2) If none of the owner(s) are at an address within the commonwealth of Massachusetts, or within thirty (30) miles of Southbridge, the registration shall also include the name, address, phone number and email address of a responsible local agent for purposes of securing and maintaining the property, for the purposes of notification in the event of an emergency affecting the public health, safety and wellbeing, and for service of any and all notices issued pursuant to this by-law.

(3) The failure to timely register a vacant building shall be a violation of this by-law. Within the context of this chapter, “timely” shall mean registration no later than thirty (30) days after a building becomes vacant. 

(b) Registration Fees – 

(1) An annual registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) must accompany the registration form. The fee and registration are for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registration and fees are due on or prior to January 1st of each year.

(2) Failure to timely register any vacant real property shall be a violation of this by-law and a fee shall be imposed as a municipal charges lien on the property in accordance with MGL c. 40 sec 58.

(c) Maintenance Requirements – 

(1) Properties subject to this section shall comply with the current edition of 780 CMR: The Massachusetts State Building Code and shall be maintained in accordance with all applicable State Sanitary Codes, Building Codes and local regulations;

(2) The property must contain a posting with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local owner or local agent responsible for the maintenance. This sign must be posted at the front of the property and must be legible and clearly visible from the public way and/or street. 

(d) Once the property is no longer vacant or is sold, the owner must provide proof of sale or written notice of occupancy to the director of building inspections. (TCM 9/12/16)


9-307 Penalties and Enforcement

This section shall be enforced by the enforcement officer, the director of building inspections, the director of the board of health/health inspector, the police chief, the fire chief and/or their designated agents.

Upon failure to comply with any order issued under this section, the town may, in addition to other penalties and actions:

(a) Bring civil or legal action against the owner to require compliance with the order including but not limited to seeking a court approved receiver for the property in violation. 

(b) Issue fines whereby each separate offense of this section may be punishable by a fine of:

(1) First offense: $100.00 daily for each day the violation exists,

(2) Second offense: $150.00 daily for each day the violation exists,

(3) Third offense and each subsequent offense: $200.00 daily for each day the violation exists.

Any fines issued in any action to enforce this by-law shall be instituted and enforced in accordance with Massachusetts General Law (MGL) c. 40 sec 21D.

(c) Undertake any other actions legally applicable in enforcing any other laws, codes, regulations or by-laws. The imposition of any enforcement of any section of this by-law shall not be construed to prevent the enforcement of other laws upon the owner(s) and/or the premises nor prevent the initiation of other enforcement measures or penalties. Failure to pay any fine arising from the enforcement of this chapter shall constitute a debt in favor of the town. The town may place a lien on the property for such debt and/or initiate a civil action against the owner(s) in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover the debt. In addition to this debt amount, “costs” as defined in the definition section of the chapter shall be added to the debt to comprise the total lien amount. (TCM 9/12/16)


9-308 Severability

If any provision of this section is held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, then such provision shall be considered separately and apart from the remaining provisions, which shall remain in full force and effect.

The provisions of this section are effective immediately upon passage and all provisions shall be enforced immediately.

All by-laws or parts of by-laws inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. (TCM 9/12/16)


CHAPTER 10 PUBLIC HEALTH

Section

10-100    GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE

10-101    Storage of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse

10-102    Collection of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse

10-103    Maintenance of Areas Free From Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse

10-104    Enforcement

10-200    MANDATORY RECYCLING

10-201    Recyclable Materials

10-300    LANDFILL


10-101 Storage of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse

10-101.1 Garbage or mixed garbage and rubbish shall be stored in receptacles with tight-fitting covers. Said receptacles and covers shall be of metal or other durable, rodent-proof material. Such containers may remain upon any sidewalk or street in the Town from 12 Noon the day prior to 12 Noon the day following trash collection.

10-101.2 Plastic bags shall be used to store garbage or mixed rubbish and garbage only in watertight receptacles with tight-fitting covers.

10-101.3 The owner of any dwelling, the owner of any rooming house, and the occupant of any other dwelling place shall be responsible for providing as many receptacles for the storage of garbage and rubbish as are sufficient to contain the accumulation before final collection or ultimate disposal, and shall conveniently locate the containers and shall provide covers or lids to prevent objectionable odors from enter any dwelling.

10-101.4 The occupants of each dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit shall be responsible for the proper placement of garbage and rubbish in the receptacles. (Article XX, § 2)(TCM 12/30/91)


10-102 Collection of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse

The owner of any dwelling, the owner of any rooming house, and the occupant of any other dwelling place shall be responsible for the final collection or ultimate disposal or incineration of garbage and rubbish by means of:

(a) the regular municipal collection system; or

(b) any other collection system approved by the board of health; or

(c) when otherwise lawful, a garbage grinder which grinds garbage into the kitchen sink drain finely enough to ensure its free passage, and is otherwise maintained in a sanitary condition; or

(d) when otherwise lawful, a garbage or rubbish incinerator located within the dwelling which is properly installed and which is maintained so as not to create a safety or health hazard; or

(e) any other method of disposal which does not endanger any person and which is approved in writing by the board of health.

(Article XX, § 3)


10-103 Maintenance of Areas Free From Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse

10-103.1 Land – The owner of any parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, shall be responsible for maintaining such parcel of land in a clean and sanitary condition and free from garbage, rubbish or other refuse. The owner of such parcel of land shall correct any condition caused by or on such parcel or its appurtenance which affects the health or safety and well-being of the occupants of any dwelling or of the general public. (Article XX, § 4(A))

10-103.2 Dwelling Units – The occupant of any dwelling unit shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition and free of garbage, rubbish, other filth or causes of sickness that part of the dwelling which he exclusively occupies or controls. (Article XX, § 4(B))

10-103.3 Dwellings Containing Less than Three Dwelling Units – In a dwelling that contains less than 3 dwelling units, the occupant shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition, free of garbage, rubbish, other filth or causes of sickness the stairs or stairways leading to his dwelling unit and the landing adjacent to his dwelling unit. (Article XX, § 4(C))

10-103.4 Common Areas – In any dwelling, the owner shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition free of garbage, rubbish, other filth or causes of sickness that part of the dwelling which is used in common by the occupants and which is not occupied or controlled by one occupant exclusively. (Article XX, § 4(D))

10-103.5 Passageways – The owner of any dwelling abutting a private passageway or right-of-way owned or used in common with other dwellings or which the owner or occupants under his control have the right to use or are in fact using shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition free of garbage, rubbish, other filth or causes of sickness that part of the passageway or right-of-way which abuts his property and which he or the occupants under his control have the right to use, or are in fact using, or which he owns. (Article XX, § 4(D)(1))


10-104 Enforcement

If the owner of any parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, or the owner or occupant of any dwelling unit or units, shall fail to provide for the proper storage and collection of rubbish and garbage, and maintenance of the property free from garbage and rubbish under the provisions of this By-law, the town may enforce the By-law by both criminal and non-criminal procedures. This by-law may be enforced through non-criminal disposition in accordance with G.L. c.40, §21D and Section 1-111 of the By-laws, and for such purposes, Schedule of Penalties D through F shall be applicable. Should the owner of any parcel or land, or the owner or occupant of any dwelling unit or units, fail to comply with the requirements of this by-law, the town may remove such garbage and rubbish at the expense of the owner or occupant. Such expense may be recovered in contract by the town or be imposed as a municipal charges lien under the provisions of MGL Chapter 40, Section 58 and Section 5-109 of these By-laws. (Article XX, § 5)


10-201 Recyclable Materials

10-201.1 Declaration of Intent – There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of certain recyclable material from garbage or rubbish by the residents of the Town of Southbridge and the collection of these recyclables at the residents’ curbside. The collection of separated recyclables shall be made periodically under the supervision of the Town Manager or the Town Manager’s designee.

10-201.2 Rules and Regulations – The collection of recyclable materials shall be made in conformity with standards and procedures established by the Board of Health to protect the public health, and in consultation with the Town Manager.

The Board of Health in consultation with the Town Manager shall prepare, and may, from time to time, amend or revise reasonable rules and regulations relative to the collection of recyclable materials to protect the public health. Recycling rules and regulations may prescribe the size, form, style and number of containers and the type of material to be collected, what types of materials may be mixed and what types of materials must be kept separated. A true copy of the rules and regulations, with their most recent amendments, shall be kept on file available for inspection in the office of the board of health, in the office of the director of public works and in the office of the town clerk.

Prior to promulgating such rules or regulations or any amendments or revisions thereto, the Board of Health shall first publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the town once in each of two successive weeks notice that a public hearing will be held concerning adopting, amending or revising such rules and regulations with information concerning the scope of the proposed action to be taken sufficient for public understanding; the first publication of such notice to be not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing. The Board of Health shall provide the Town Manager and Director of Public Works with copies of such proposed amendments or revisions at least 14 days before the day of the hearing.

Following the promulgation of such rules and regulations or amendments or revisions thereto, they shall forthwith be filed with the office of the director of public works, the office of the board of health and the office of the town clerk. The Town Clerk shall have a copy of the same posted in each of the precincts of the Town.

Transitional Provision

The provisions of any By-law applicable to recycling existing on the date this By-law is adopted shall remain applicable to recycling in the Town until regulations regarding recycling are adopted in accordance with this section.


APPENDIX – LIST OF AMENDMENTS, ADDITIONS, DELETIONS

	Section 7-507	Sex Offender Residency	Added TCM 09/24/2007

	Section 7-104.1	Regulation of Leaves, Garden Trimmings, Rubbish, etc. in Public Way	Amend TCM 02/25/2008

	Section 7-104.2	Regulation of Leaves, Garden Trimmings, Rubbish, etc. in Public Way	Added TCM 02/25/2008

	Section 10-101.1 	Storage of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse	Amend TCM 02/25/2008

	Section 3-222	Agricultural Commission	Added TCM 2/23/2009

	Section 3-223	Economic Development Commission	Added TCM 10/3/2011

	Section 3-224	Industrial Development Financing Authority	Added TCM 10/3/2011

	Section 3-223	Economic Development Commission	Amended TCM 2/6/2012

	Section 3-224	Industrial Development Financing Authority	Deleted TCM 2/6/2012

	Section 6-102.3	Licensing of Dealers in Junk, Old Metals And Second Hand Goods	Added TCM 12/3/2012

	Section 6-102.6	Licensing of Dealers in Junk, Old Metals And Second Hand Goods	Added TCM 12/3/2012

	Section 6-102.7	Licensing of Dealers in Junk, Old Metals And Second Hand Goods	Added TCM 12/3/2012

	Section 6-102.8	Licensing of Dealers in Junk, Old Metals And Second Hand Goods	Added TCM 12/3/2012

	Section 6.102.9	Licensing of Dealers in Junk, Old Metals And Second Hand Goods	Added TCM 12/3/2012

	Section 6.102.10	Licensing of Dealers in Junk, Old Metals And Second Hand Goods	Added TCM 12/3/2012

	Section 7-302	Prohibition of Possession of Intoxicating Liquors and Medical Marijuana in Public Places	Amended TCM 5/20/2013

	Section 2-102	Eligibility for Elected Office	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 2-801.1	Powers, In General	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 3-102.1	Term of Office	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 3-104	Multiple Member Body Internal Organization	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 3-204	Facilities Planning and Construction Committee	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 3-209.2	Health, Board of	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 6-101.3	Licensing of Solicitors, Canvassers and Peddlers	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 6-101.4	Licensing of Solicitors, Canvassers and Peddlers	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 6-101.4	Licensing of Solicitors, Canvassers and Peddlers	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 6-101.7	Licensing of Solicitors, Canvassers and Peddlers	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 6-101.11	Licensing of Solicitors, Canvassers and Peddlers	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 7-104.2	Regulation of Leaves, Garden Trimmings, etc., in Public Way	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 7-110	Regulation of Sound Trucks, etc.	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 7-201	No Parking During Street Sweeping Operations	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 7-406	Owners/Agents of Property Abutting Sidewalks Required to Remove Snow	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 7-501.1	Youth Protection Curfew	Amended TCM 1/272014

	Section 7-503.4	Noise Control	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 7-504.2	Alarm Systems	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 7-506	Prohibition of Camping	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 7-507.4	Sex Offender Residency	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 9-201.3	Regulation of Earth Removal	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 10-101.1	Storage of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 10-101.2	Storage of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 10-101.3	Storage of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 10-102	Collection of Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 10-103.3	Maintenance of Areas Free From Garbage, Rubbish, and Refuse	Amended TCM 1/27/2014

	Section 9-202	Regulations of Signs	Replaced TCM 3/24/2014

	Section 7-508	Graffiti	Added TCM 4/7/2014

	Section 7-508	Graffiti	Amended TCM 9/4/2014

	Section 7-406	Snow Removal	Amended TCM 8/24/2015

	Section 3-205.1	Cable TV Advisory Committee	Amended TCM 10/19/2015

	Sections 9-301 – 9-308	Blighted Properties	Added TCM 9/12/2016

	Section 9-104	Stretch Energy Code	Added TCM 1/6/2017

	Sections 10-300.1, 10-300.2	Landfill	Added TCM 11/20/2017

	Section 7-509	Marijuana	Added TCM 1/19/2018

	Sections 3-204.1, 3-204.2	Municipal Building Committee	Amended TCM 3/26/2018

	Section 5-102.2	Tax Delinquency	Amended TCM 4/22/2019


SECTION 1. PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY


1.1. TITLE

A.    This By-law shall be the "Zoning By-law of the Town of Southbridge, Massachusetts" and it shall be referred to herein as "this By-law."

B.    Headings, subheadings, captions, and illustrations are for reference only and are not substantive provisions of this By-law. They are not legally adopted parts of this By-law as voted by the Town Council.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.2. PURPOSES

This By-law is enacted in order to promote the general welfare of the Town of Southbridge; to protect the health and safety of its inhabitants; to conserve the value of land and buildings; to encourage an orderly expansion of the tax base through utilization, development, and redevelopment; to support the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town; to further the goals and policies of the Southbridge Master Plan, and to preserve and increase the amenities of the Town, consistent with but not limited by the provisions of the Zoning Act, G.L. c. 40A, as amended, and Section 2A of Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.3. AUTHORITY

This By-law is enacted in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 40A, any and all amendments thereto, and Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.4. APPLICABILITY

All buildings or structures hereinafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or modified, and the use of all premises in the Town, shall be in conformity with the provisions of this By-law. No building, structure, or land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as expressly permitted within the district in which such building, structure, or land is located. Where the application of this By-law imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by any other regulations, permits, restrictions, easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this By-law shall control.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.5. AMENDMENT

This By-law may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition, or repeal by the Town Council in the manner provided for in G.L. c. 40A, §5.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.6. SEVERABILITY

The invalidity of any section or provision of this By-law shall not invalidate any other section or provision herein.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.1. TITLE

A.    This By-law shall be the "Zoning By-law of the Town of Southbridge, Massachusetts" and it shall be referred to herein as "this By-law."

B.    Headings, subheadings, captions, and illustrations are for reference only and are not substantive provisions of this By-law. They are not legally adopted parts of this By-law as voted by the Town Council.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.2. PURPOSES

This By-law is enacted in order to promote the general welfare of the Town of Southbridge; to protect the health and safety of its inhabitants; to conserve the value of land and buildings; to encourage an orderly expansion of the tax base through utilization, development, and redevelopment; to support the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town; to further the goals and policies of the Southbridge Master Plan, and to preserve and increase the amenities of the Town, consistent with but not limited by the provisions of the Zoning Act, G.L. c. 40A, as amended, and Section 2A of Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.3. AUTHORITY

This By-law is enacted in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 40A, any and all amendments thereto, and Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.4. APPLICABILITY

All buildings or structures hereinafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or modified, and the use of all premises in the Town, shall be in conformity with the provisions of this By-law. No building, structure, or land shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as expressly permitted within the district in which such building, structure, or land is located. Where the application of this By-law imposes greater restrictions than those imposed by any other regulations, permits, restrictions, easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this By-law shall control.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.5. AMENDMENT

This By-law may from time to time be changed by amendment, addition, or repeal by the Town Council in the manner provided for in G.L. c. 40A, §5.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


1.6. SEVERABILITY

The invalidity of any section or provision of this By-law shall not invalidate any other section or provision herein.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


SECTION 2. ADMINISTRATION


2.1. ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PERMITS

A.    The Zoning Enforcement Officer is the official charged with interpreting and enforcing this Zoning By-law.

B.    No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, convert, or alter a structure, or change the use, increase the intensity of use, or extend or displace the use of any structure or lot without receiving the required permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plan of the lot and the exact location and size of the buildings already on the lot, of the other buildings or structures to be constructed or changed, the intended use of the buildings, the streets adjacent to the lot, and other information as the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require in order to determine compliance with this By-law.

C.    No premises, and no building erected, altered, or in any way changed as to construction or use under a permit or otherwise, shall be occupied or used without a certificate of occupancy from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the premises, structure, and its uses and accessory uses comply in all respects with this Zoning By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.2. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES


2.2.1. Enforcement.

A.    If the Zoning Enforcement Officer is informed or has reason to believe that any provision of these By-laws is being violated, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner and the occupant and make or cause to be made an investigation of the facts and inspect the property where such violation may exist.

B.    If upon such investigation and inspection the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds evidence of a violation, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall give notice thereof in writing to the owner and occupant of the premises and demand that the violation be abated within such time as the Zoning Enforcement Officer deems reasonable. The notice and demand may be given by mail, addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as it then appears on the records of the Board of Assessors of the Town and to the occupant at the address of the premises.

C.    If after such notice and demand the violation has not been abated within the time specified therein, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall institute appropriate action or proceedings in the name of the Town of Southbridge to prevent, correct, restrain, or abate such violation of this By-law.

D.    Anyone who violates a provision of this Zoning By-law, or any condition of a variance, site plan review decision, or special permit, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 for each offense. Each day during which any portion of a violation continues under the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense.

E.    As an alternative means of enforcement, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may impose noncriminal penalties pursuant to G.L. c. 40, §21D, in accordance with the following schedule:

1.    First offense: warning (verbal or written)

2.    Second offense: $100

3.    Third offense: $200

4.    Fourth and each subsequent offense per violation: $300

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.2.2. Appeal

As provided in G.L. c. 40A, §8, any person aggrieved by reason of inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from the Zoning Enforcement Officer may appeal to the Board of Appeals.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.3. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS

A.    Establishment. The Town Manager shall appoint the Board of Appeals, established pursuant to G.L. c. 40A, which shall consist of three members and two associate members. To be consistent with the Town Charter, in the Town of Southbridge, associates on the Zoning Board of Appeals are also known as alternates. The Chair may designate one associate to sit in the place of any member who has a conflict of interest or cannot attend the hearing, or to cover a vacancy on the Board. The first appointments shall be made for one-, two- and three-year terms, respectively, and thereafter one appointment for a three-year term shall be made on or before the first day of July in each year. Associate members shall be appointed for two-year terms, the first appointments being for a one-year and a two-year term.

B.    Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:

1.    To hear and decide appeals in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §8, as amended.

2.    To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 40A, §9, applications for special permits when the Board is designated as the special permit granting authority.

3.    To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 40A, §6, applications for special permits to change, alter, or extend lawfully preexisting nonconforming uses and structures.

4.    To hear and decide petitions for variances in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §10.

5.    To hear and decide applications for comprehensive permits for construction of low- or moderate-income housing, as set forth in G.L. c. 40B, §§20 – 23.

C.    The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules and regulations for the administration of its powers and shall file a copy of such regulations with the Town Clerk.

D.    The Board of Appeals may adopt reasonable administrative fees and procedures and fees for employing outside consultants, consistent with G.L. c. 44, §53G, to assist the Board with its review of special permits, variances, administrative appeals, and applications for comprehensive permits in accordance with its regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.4. PLANNING BOARD

A.    There shall be a Planning Board consisting of seven members and two alternate members appointed by the Town Council in accordance with the Town Charter. Each member shall serve for a three-year term.

B.    The Planning Board shall have and exercise all the powers granted to planning boards by the General Laws, including G.L. c. 40, c. 40A, and c. 41, and by the Town By-laws and this Zoning By-law, including but not limited to the following:

1.    To hear and decide applications for special permits when designated as the special permit granting authority herein.

2.    To review site plans pursuant to Section 2.6.

C.    The Planning Board shall adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of the Zoning By-law for conduct of its business and otherwise carrying out the purposes of G.L. c. 40A and this Zoning By-law, and shall file a copy of such rules in the office of the Town Clerk.

D.    The Planning Board may adopt reasonable administrative fees for petitions for special permits and site plan review, and procedures and fees for employing outside consultants, consistent with G.L. c. 44, §53G, to assist the Board with its review of special permits in accordance with its regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.5. SPECIAL PERMITS

A.    The Planning Board shall serve as special permit granting authority unless otherwise designated in this By-law.

B.    The applicant shall file an application for a special permit with the Town Clerk and immediately thereafter shall file a copy of the application, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, with the special permit granting authority. The form and contents of the application shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the special permit granting authority.

C.    The special permit granting authority shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of receipt of a special permit application and shall take final action no later than 90 days from the closing of the public hearing. Notification requirements for a public hearing shall be in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §11.

D.    Unless otherwise specified herein, special permits shall be granted by the special permit granting authority only upon its written determination that the beneficial effects of the proposed use outweigh its adverse impacts to the Town or the neighborhood, in view of the particular characteristics of the site, and of the proposal in relation to that site. The determination shall include findings that all the following criteria for granting a special permit are met:

1.    The use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this By-law;

2.    The use is in an appropriate location and is not detrimental to the neighborhood and does not significantly alter the character of the zoning district;

3.    Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the operation of the proposed use;

4.    The proposed use will not be detrimental or otherwise offensive to the adjoining zoning districts and neighboring properties due to the effects of lighting, odors, smoke, noise, sewage, refuse materials, or visual or other nuisances;

5.    The proposed use will not cause undue traffic congestion in the immediate area;

6.    The proposed use is consistent with the Southbridge master plan; and

7.    Any other finding expressly required in this By-law for specific uses.

The special permit granting authority’s findings shall be made part of the record of the public hearing.

E.    Special permits may be granted with such reasonable conditions, safeguards, or limitations on time or use, including performance guarantees, as the special permit granting authority may deem necessary to serve the purposes of this Zoning By-law. Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to the following:

1.    Deadline to commence construction.

2.    Dimensional standards more restrictive than those set forth in this By-law.

3.    Limitations on signage, number of vehicles or parking spaces, noise, or hours of operation of construction equipment.

4.    Limitation of size, method or hours of operation, extent of facilities, or other operating characteristics of a use.

5.    Requirements pertaining to integrated emergency or alarm systems, maintenance, landscaping, dust control, wastewater disposal or water supply, bond or other performance guarantee.

6.    Requirements for independent monitoring, at the expense of the applicant, and reporting to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, if necessary to ensure continuing compliance with the conditions of a special permit or of this By-law.

7.    Term for years with or without automatic renewals, to the extent allowed by law.

8.    Requirements pertaining to tree protection, maintenance, or replacement.

9.    Other limitations as may be reasonably related to reducing any adverse impact on, or increasing the compatibility of the proposed use, structure or activity with, the surrounding area.

F.    Special permits shall lapse within two years, which shall not include such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal under G.L. c. 40A, §17, from the grant thereof, if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause, or, in the case of a special permit for construction, if construction has not begun by such date except for good cause.

G.    Special permits shall not take effect until filed with the Town Clerk. Proof of recording with the Registry of Deeds or Registry District of the Land Court shall be presented to the Zoning Enforcement Officer.

H.    Any special permit granting authority may hire professional consultants at the applicant’s expense pursuant to G.L. c. 44, §53G, to assist with review of a special permit application; provided, that the procedures for hiring outside consultants are set forth in the applicable board’s rules and regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6. SITE PLAN APPROVAL


2.6.1. Purposes

Site plan review is a means of managing the aesthetics and environmental impact of land use by the regulation of permitted uses, not their prohibition. Its purpose is to assure protection of the public interest consistent with a reasonable use of the site for the purposes permitted in the district. Accordingly, no building permit shall be issued for any use, site, or building alteration, or other improvement, that is subject to this Section 2.6 unless an application for site plan review has been submitted in accordance with the following requirements.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.2. Applicability

Site plan review shall apply to the following:

A.    Major Site Plan Review by the Planning Board.

1.    New construction or any alteration, reconstruction, or renovation of any multifamily, commercial, industrial, institutional, or municipal use involving 2,000 square feet or more of gross floor area; or

2.    Any change in use or reactivation of a structure that has not been in use for two or more years; or

3.    New construction or any alteration, reconstruction, or renovation of an existing building, or any change in use of an existing building requiring ten or more parking spaces; or

4.    Construction, expansion, redesign, or alteration of an existing parking area involving the addition of ten or more new parking spaces.

B.    Minor Site Plan Review by the Development Review Team (DRT).

1.    New construction or any alteration, reconstruction, or renovation of any multifamily, commercial, industrial, institutional, or municipal use involving less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area; or

2.    New construction, expansion of an existing structure, or a change in use in an existing building requiring three or more but less than ten parking spaces; or

3.    Construction or modification of a parking area involving the addition of three or more but less than ten new parking spaces.

C.    The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall not issue a building permit or make a determination of zoning compliance for any project subject to this Section 2.6 unless a site plan has been approved by the applicable review authority or the review authority’s decision period has lapsed, unless the applicant has requested an extension in writing. Any work done in deviation from an approved site plan shall be a violation of this By-law unless such deviation is approved in writing by the Board or DRT or determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to be an insubstantial change.

D.    Exemptions. This Section 2.6 shall not apply to:

1.    A single-family or two-family dwelling; or

2.    Restoration or reconstruction of a structure destroyed by fire or other natural cause; provided, that the restoration or reconstruction is limited to the footprint of the original structure; or

3.    Any project the scope of which is limited to removal, containment, or other clean-up of hazardous waste contamination on a site when carried out under a permit or other approval from a state or federal agency with legal authority for such review and approval.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.3. Site Plan Rules and Regulations

A.    The Planning Board shall adopt site plan rules and regulations to administer this Section 2.6, including submission requirements and procedures for major or minor site plan review, modification of approved site plans, and standards of review consistent with Section 2.6.5.

B.    The Board may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees in accordance with G.L. c. 44, §53G, for site plan approval.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.4. Procedures

A.    The applicant shall file an application for site plan review with the Town Clerk and immediately thereafter shall file a copy of the application, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, with the Planning Board or DRT, as applicable. The form and contents of the application shall be in accordance with the Planning Board’s site plan rules and regulations.

B.    The site plan submission date shall be the date the site plan application is filed with the Town Clerk.

C.    Minor Site Plan Review. Any proposal requiring minor site plan review under Section 2.6.2(B) shall be subject to the following procedures:

1.    An application for minor plan review shall be in accordance with the Planning Board’s rules and regulations.

2.    The DRT shall meet at a regularly scheduled time and place to review the site plan.

3.    The DRT’s decision to approve, approve with conditions, or refer the plan to the Planning Board shall be in writing, and shall be made within 30 days of receipt of a complete application for minor plan review.

4.    Any dispute arising from the minor plan review process or any plan not receiving a majority vote of approval from the DRT shall be referred to the Planning Board for review and decision. The DRT may also refer any application for minor site plan review to the Planning Board for review and decision if it determines that, due to unusual circumstances or a unique situation, the plan warrants review by the Planning Board. In addition, any minor site plan review application involving a use that was previously approved by special permit from the Planning Board shall be referred to the Planning Board for review and approval even if the use became a permitted use after the special permit was issued. In the event that the DRT refers a minor site plan application to the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall issue a written decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan within thirty (30) days of receipt from the DRT.

D.    Major Site Plan Review. Any proposal requiring major site plan review by the Planning Board under Section 2.6.2(A) shall be subject to the following procedures:

1.    The Board shall review the site plan at a duly posted open meeting. Any public notice to abutters and other parties of interest shall be conducted in accordance with the site plan rules and regulations.

2.    The Board shall review and act upon the site plan, requiring such conditions as necessary to satisfy the site plan approval standards under Section 2.6.5, and notify the applicant of its decision. The decision shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Town Clerk within 60 days of the application date. The applicant may request, and the Board may grant by majority vote of the membership, an extension of the time limit set forth herein.

3.    The Board may approve the site plan or approve it with conditions, or deny a site plan only if the plan does not include adequate information as required by the site plan rules and regulations, or if the plan depicts a use or structure so contrary to health, safety and welfare of the public that no set of conditions would render the project tenable. The Board’s decision shall be by majority vote of the membership, and the decision shall be in writing and filed with the Town Clerk.

4.    The applicant shall satisfy or comply with all conditions of the site plan review decision prior to the issuance of a building permit except for those conditions that by their terms are intended to be satisfied during construction or later.

5.    Unless specifically authorized by the terms of the site plan review decision, a final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the applicant has complied with or satisfied all conditions of the site plan review decision.

6.    The Planning Board may, upon written request of the applicant, waive any of the technical requirements of this Section 2.6 where the project involves relatively simple development plans as determined by the Board.

E.    Site plan approval shall lapse after one year from the grant thereof if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause. Such approval may, for good cause, be extended in writing by the Planning Board or DRT, as applicable, upon the written request of the applicant.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.5. Site Plan Approval Criteria

A.    Site plan approval shall be granted if the Planning Board determines, after considering the qualities of the specific location, the proposed land use, the design of building form, grading, egress points, and other aspects of the project, that the proposed development:

1.    Minimizes the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed trees 6-inch caliper or larger, the length of removed stone walls, the area of wetland vegetation displaced, the extent of stormwater flow increase from the site, soil erosion, and threat of air and water pollution;

2.    Maximizes pedestrian and vehicular safety both on the site and egressing from it;

3.    Minimizes obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations;

4.    Minimizes visual intrusion by controlling the visibility of parking, storage, or other outdoor service areas viewed from public ways or premises residentially used or zoned;

5.    Minimizes glare from headlights and lighting intrusion;

6.    Minimizes unreasonable departure from the character, materials, and scale of buildings in the vicinity, as viewed from public ways and places;

7.    Provides access to each structure for fire and service equipment and adequate provision for utilities and stormwater drainage consistent with the functional requirements of the Board’s subdivision rules and regulations;

8.    Minimizes contamination of groundwater from on-site wastewater disposal systems or operations on the premises involving the use, storage, handling, or containment of hazardous substances;

9.    Complies with all applicable provisions of this By-law; and

10.    Meets all applicable development review considerations and guidelines in Section 7.2.

B.    Approval for all commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations of up to 700 kilowatts on property of five acres or less shall be granted upon determination by the Planning Board that the plan also meets the objectives of Section 8.5.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.6. Appeal

Appeal of a major site plan review decision of the Planning Board shall be in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §17, to a court of competent jurisdiction.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.1. ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PERMITS

A.    The Zoning Enforcement Officer is the official charged with interpreting and enforcing this Zoning By-law.

B.    No person shall erect, construct, reconstruct, convert, or alter a structure, or change the use, increase the intensity of use, or extend or displace the use of any structure or lot without receiving the required permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plan of the lot and the exact location and size of the buildings already on the lot, of the other buildings or structures to be constructed or changed, the intended use of the buildings, the streets adjacent to the lot, and other information as the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require in order to determine compliance with this By-law.

C.    No premises, and no building erected, altered, or in any way changed as to construction or use under a permit or otherwise, shall be occupied or used without a certificate of occupancy from the Zoning Enforcement Officer. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the premises, structure, and its uses and accessory uses comply in all respects with this Zoning By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.2. ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES


2.2.1. Enforcement.

A.    If the Zoning Enforcement Officer is informed or has reason to believe that any provision of these By-laws is being violated, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner and the occupant and make or cause to be made an investigation of the facts and inspect the property where such violation may exist.

B.    If upon such investigation and inspection the Zoning Enforcement Officer finds evidence of a violation, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall give notice thereof in writing to the owner and occupant of the premises and demand that the violation be abated within such time as the Zoning Enforcement Officer deems reasonable. The notice and demand may be given by mail, addressed to the owner at the owner’s address as it then appears on the records of the Board of Assessors of the Town and to the occupant at the address of the premises.

C.    If after such notice and demand the violation has not been abated within the time specified therein, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall institute appropriate action or proceedings in the name of the Town of Southbridge to prevent, correct, restrain, or abate such violation of this By-law.

D.    Anyone who violates a provision of this Zoning By-law, or any condition of a variance, site plan review decision, or special permit, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $300 for each offense. Each day during which any portion of a violation continues under the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense.

E.    As an alternative means of enforcement, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may impose noncriminal penalties pursuant to G.L. c. 40, §21D, in accordance with the following schedule:

1.    First offense: warning (verbal or written)

2.    Second offense: $100

3.    Third offense: $200

4.    Fourth and each subsequent offense per violation: $300

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.2.2. Appeal

As provided in G.L. c. 40A, §8, any person aggrieved by reason of inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from the Zoning Enforcement Officer may appeal to the Board of Appeals.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.3. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS

A.    Establishment. The Town Manager shall appoint the Board of Appeals, established pursuant to G.L. c. 40A, which shall consist of three members and two associate members. To be consistent with the Town Charter, in the Town of Southbridge, associates on the Zoning Board of Appeals are also known as alternates. The Chair may designate one associate to sit in the place of any member who has a conflict of interest or cannot attend the hearing, or to cover a vacancy on the Board. The first appointments shall be made for one-, two- and three-year terms, respectively, and thereafter one appointment for a three-year term shall be made on or before the first day of July in each year. Associate members shall be appointed for two-year terms, the first appointments being for a one-year and a two-year term.

B.    Powers. The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:

1.    To hear and decide appeals in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §8, as amended.

2.    To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 40A, §9, applications for special permits when the Board is designated as the special permit granting authority.

3.    To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of G.L. c. 40A, §6, applications for special permits to change, alter, or extend lawfully preexisting nonconforming uses and structures.

4.    To hear and decide petitions for variances in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §10.

5.    To hear and decide applications for comprehensive permits for construction of low- or moderate-income housing, as set forth in G.L. c. 40B, §§20 – 23.

C.    The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules and regulations for the administration of its powers and shall file a copy of such regulations with the Town Clerk.

D.    The Board of Appeals may adopt reasonable administrative fees and procedures and fees for employing outside consultants, consistent with G.L. c. 44, §53G, to assist the Board with its review of special permits, variances, administrative appeals, and applications for comprehensive permits in accordance with its regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.4. PLANNING BOARD

A.    There shall be a Planning Board consisting of seven members and two alternate members appointed by the Town Council in accordance with the Town Charter. Each member shall serve for a three-year term.

B.    The Planning Board shall have and exercise all the powers granted to planning boards by the General Laws, including G.L. c. 40, c. 40A, and c. 41, and by the Town By-laws and this Zoning By-law, including but not limited to the following:

1.    To hear and decide applications for special permits when designated as the special permit granting authority herein.

2.    To review site plans pursuant to Section 2.6.

C.    The Planning Board shall adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of the Zoning By-law for conduct of its business and otherwise carrying out the purposes of G.L. c. 40A and this Zoning By-law, and shall file a copy of such rules in the office of the Town Clerk.

D.    The Planning Board may adopt reasonable administrative fees for petitions for special permits and site plan review, and procedures and fees for employing outside consultants, consistent with G.L. c. 44, §53G, to assist the Board with its review of special permits in accordance with its regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.5. SPECIAL PERMITS

A.    The Planning Board shall serve as special permit granting authority unless otherwise designated in this By-law.

B.    The applicant shall file an application for a special permit with the Town Clerk and immediately thereafter shall file a copy of the application, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, with the special permit granting authority. The form and contents of the application shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the special permit granting authority.

C.    The special permit granting authority shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of receipt of a special permit application and shall take final action no later than 90 days from the closing of the public hearing. Notification requirements for a public hearing shall be in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §11.

D.    Unless otherwise specified herein, special permits shall be granted by the special permit granting authority only upon its written determination that the beneficial effects of the proposed use outweigh its adverse impacts to the Town or the neighborhood, in view of the particular characteristics of the site, and of the proposal in relation to that site. The determination shall include findings that all the following criteria for granting a special permit are met:

1.    The use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this By-law;

2.    The use is in an appropriate location and is not detrimental to the neighborhood and does not significantly alter the character of the zoning district;

3.    Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the operation of the proposed use;

4.    The proposed use will not be detrimental or otherwise offensive to the adjoining zoning districts and neighboring properties due to the effects of lighting, odors, smoke, noise, sewage, refuse materials, or visual or other nuisances;

5.    The proposed use will not cause undue traffic congestion in the immediate area;

6.    The proposed use is consistent with the Southbridge master plan; and

7.    Any other finding expressly required in this By-law for specific uses.

The special permit granting authority’s findings shall be made part of the record of the public hearing.

E.    Special permits may be granted with such reasonable conditions, safeguards, or limitations on time or use, including performance guarantees, as the special permit granting authority may deem necessary to serve the purposes of this Zoning By-law. Such conditions may include but shall not be limited to the following:

1.    Deadline to commence construction.

2.    Dimensional standards more restrictive than those set forth in this By-law.

3.    Limitations on signage, number of vehicles or parking spaces, noise, or hours of operation of construction equipment.

4.    Limitation of size, method or hours of operation, extent of facilities, or other operating characteristics of a use.

5.    Requirements pertaining to integrated emergency or alarm systems, maintenance, landscaping, dust control, wastewater disposal or water supply, bond or other performance guarantee.

6.    Requirements for independent monitoring, at the expense of the applicant, and reporting to the Zoning Enforcement Officer, if necessary to ensure continuing compliance with the conditions of a special permit or of this By-law.

7.    Term for years with or without automatic renewals, to the extent allowed by law.

8.    Requirements pertaining to tree protection, maintenance, or replacement.

9.    Other limitations as may be reasonably related to reducing any adverse impact on, or increasing the compatibility of the proposed use, structure or activity with, the surrounding area.

F.    Special permits shall lapse within two years, which shall not include such time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal under G.L. c. 40A, §17, from the grant thereof, if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause, or, in the case of a special permit for construction, if construction has not begun by such date except for good cause.

G.    Special permits shall not take effect until filed with the Town Clerk. Proof of recording with the Registry of Deeds or Registry District of the Land Court shall be presented to the Zoning Enforcement Officer.

H.    Any special permit granting authority may hire professional consultants at the applicant’s expense pursuant to G.L. c. 44, §53G, to assist with review of a special permit application; provided, that the procedures for hiring outside consultants are set forth in the applicable board’s rules and regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6. SITE PLAN APPROVAL


2.6.1. Purposes

Site plan review is a means of managing the aesthetics and environmental impact of land use by the regulation of permitted uses, not their prohibition. Its purpose is to assure protection of the public interest consistent with a reasonable use of the site for the purposes permitted in the district. Accordingly, no building permit shall be issued for any use, site, or building alteration, or other improvement, that is subject to this Section 2.6 unless an application for site plan review has been submitted in accordance with the following requirements.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.2. Applicability

Site plan review shall apply to the following:

A.    Major Site Plan Review by the Planning Board.

1.    New construction or any alteration, reconstruction, or renovation of any multifamily, commercial, industrial, institutional, or municipal use involving 2,000 square feet or more of gross floor area; or

2.    Any change in use or reactivation of a structure that has not been in use for two or more years; or

3.    New construction or any alteration, reconstruction, or renovation of an existing building, or any change in use of an existing building requiring ten or more parking spaces; or

4.    Construction, expansion, redesign, or alteration of an existing parking area involving the addition of ten or more new parking spaces.

B.    Minor Site Plan Review by the Development Review Team (DRT).

1.    New construction or any alteration, reconstruction, or renovation of any multifamily, commercial, industrial, institutional, or municipal use involving less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area; or

2.    New construction, expansion of an existing structure, or a change in use in an existing building requiring three or more but less than ten parking spaces; or

3.    Construction or modification of a parking area involving the addition of three or more but less than ten new parking spaces.

C.    The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall not issue a building permit or make a determination of zoning compliance for any project subject to this Section 2.6 unless a site plan has been approved by the applicable review authority or the review authority’s decision period has lapsed, unless the applicant has requested an extension in writing. Any work done in deviation from an approved site plan shall be a violation of this By-law unless such deviation is approved in writing by the Board or DRT or determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to be an insubstantial change.

D.    Exemptions. This Section 2.6 shall not apply to:

1.    A single-family or two-family dwelling; or

2.    Restoration or reconstruction of a structure destroyed by fire or other natural cause; provided, that the restoration or reconstruction is limited to the footprint of the original structure; or

3.    Any project the scope of which is limited to removal, containment, or other clean-up of hazardous waste contamination on a site when carried out under a permit or other approval from a state or federal agency with legal authority for such review and approval.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.3. Site Plan Rules and Regulations

A.    The Planning Board shall adopt site plan rules and regulations to administer this Section 2.6, including submission requirements and procedures for major or minor site plan review, modification of approved site plans, and standards of review consistent with Section 2.6.5.

B.    The Board may adopt reasonable administrative fees and technical review fees in accordance with G.L. c. 44, §53G, for site plan approval.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.4. Procedures

A.    The applicant shall file an application for site plan review with the Town Clerk and immediately thereafter shall file a copy of the application, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, with the Planning Board or DRT, as applicable. The form and contents of the application shall be in accordance with the Planning Board’s site plan rules and regulations.

B.    The site plan submission date shall be the date the site plan application is filed with the Town Clerk.

C.    Minor Site Plan Review. Any proposal requiring minor site plan review under Section 2.6.2(B) shall be subject to the following procedures:

1.    An application for minor plan review shall be in accordance with the Planning Board’s rules and regulations.

2.    The DRT shall meet at a regularly scheduled time and place to review the site plan.

3.    The DRT’s decision to approve, approve with conditions, or refer the plan to the Planning Board shall be in writing, and shall be made within 30 days of receipt of a complete application for minor plan review.

4.    Any dispute arising from the minor plan review process or any plan not receiving a majority vote of approval from the DRT shall be referred to the Planning Board for review and decision. The DRT may also refer any application for minor site plan review to the Planning Board for review and decision if it determines that, due to unusual circumstances or a unique situation, the plan warrants review by the Planning Board. In addition, any minor site plan review application involving a use that was previously approved by special permit from the Planning Board shall be referred to the Planning Board for review and approval even if the use became a permitted use after the special permit was issued. In the event that the DRT refers a minor site plan application to the Planning Board, the Planning Board shall issue a written decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the site plan within thirty (30) days of receipt from the DRT.

D.    Major Site Plan Review. Any proposal requiring major site plan review by the Planning Board under Section 2.6.2(A) shall be subject to the following procedures:

1.    The Board shall review the site plan at a duly posted open meeting. Any public notice to abutters and other parties of interest shall be conducted in accordance with the site plan rules and regulations.

2.    The Board shall review and act upon the site plan, requiring such conditions as necessary to satisfy the site plan approval standards under Section 2.6.5, and notify the applicant of its decision. The decision shall be in writing and shall be filed with the Town Clerk within 60 days of the application date. The applicant may request, and the Board may grant by majority vote of the membership, an extension of the time limit set forth herein.

3.    The Board may approve the site plan or approve it with conditions, or deny a site plan only if the plan does not include adequate information as required by the site plan rules and regulations, or if the plan depicts a use or structure so contrary to health, safety and welfare of the public that no set of conditions would render the project tenable. The Board’s decision shall be by majority vote of the membership, and the decision shall be in writing and filed with the Town Clerk.

4.    The applicant shall satisfy or comply with all conditions of the site plan review decision prior to the issuance of a building permit except for those conditions that by their terms are intended to be satisfied during construction or later.

5.    Unless specifically authorized by the terms of the site plan review decision, a final certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until the applicant has complied with or satisfied all conditions of the site plan review decision.

6.    The Planning Board may, upon written request of the applicant, waive any of the technical requirements of this Section 2.6 where the project involves relatively simple development plans as determined by the Board.

E.    Site plan approval shall lapse after one year from the grant thereof if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause. Such approval may, for good cause, be extended in writing by the Planning Board or DRT, as applicable, upon the written request of the applicant.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.5. Site Plan Approval Criteria

A.    Site plan approval shall be granted if the Planning Board determines, after considering the qualities of the specific location, the proposed land use, the design of building form, grading, egress points, and other aspects of the project, that the proposed development:

1.    Minimizes the volume of cut and fill, the number of removed trees 6-inch caliper or larger, the length of removed stone walls, the area of wetland vegetation displaced, the extent of stormwater flow increase from the site, soil erosion, and threat of air and water pollution;

2.    Maximizes pedestrian and vehicular safety both on the site and egressing from it;

3.    Minimizes obstruction of scenic views from publicly accessible locations;

4.    Minimizes visual intrusion by controlling the visibility of parking, storage, or other outdoor service areas viewed from public ways or premises residentially used or zoned;

5.    Minimizes glare from headlights and lighting intrusion;

6.    Minimizes unreasonable departure from the character, materials, and scale of buildings in the vicinity, as viewed from public ways and places;

7.    Provides access to each structure for fire and service equipment and adequate provision for utilities and stormwater drainage consistent with the functional requirements of the Board’s subdivision rules and regulations;

8.    Minimizes contamination of groundwater from on-site wastewater disposal systems or operations on the premises involving the use, storage, handling, or containment of hazardous substances;

9.    Complies with all applicable provisions of this By-law; and

10.    Meets all applicable development review considerations and guidelines in Section 7.2.

B.    Approval for all commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations of up to 700 kilowatts on property of five acres or less shall be granted upon determination by the Planning Board that the plan also meets the objectives of Section 8.5.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


2.6.6. Appeal

Appeal of a major site plan review decision of the Planning Board shall be in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §17, to a court of competent jurisdiction.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


SECTION 3. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS


3.1. DISTRICTS

For purposes of this By-law, the Town of Southbridge is divided into eight use districts, as follows: 

A.    Residence Districts.

1.    Residence 1 District (R1).

2.    Residence 2 District (R2).

3.    Residence 3 District (R3).

B.    Business Districts.

1.    Central Core District (CC).

2.    Retail Business District (RB).

3.    General Business District (GB).

C.    Office and Industrial Districts.

1.    Office Research District (OR).

2.    Manufacturing District (M).

D.    Overlay Districts.

1.    Flood Plain District (FPD).

2.    Watershed Protection (WP).

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


3.2. ZONING MAP

The districts listed in Section 3.1 are as shown, defined, and bounded on the map accompanying this By-law, entitled "Zoning Map of the Town of Southbridge, Assessors Maps (152 sheets), Southbridge, Mass., revised to January 1, 1974, John E. O'Donnell and Associates, Auburn, Maine," as hereafter amended from time to time by the Town Council. The Zoning Map and all explanatory matter are hereby made a part of this By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


3.3. BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS

A.    District boundaries are as shown upon the Zoning Map.

B.    Where the boundary lines are shown approximately on the location of property or lot lines and the exact location of property, lot, or boundary lines is not indicated by means of dimensions shown in figures, then the property or lot lines shall be the boundary lines.

C.    Where a boundary is indicated upon a street, the line shall be the centerline of the street. 

D.    Where a boundary is indicated approximately parallel to a street, it shall be taken as parallel thereto, and if there is any variance between the scaled distance between the boundaries and the side line of the street and the distance as marked in feet upon the map, the latter shall govern.

E.    Where a boundary is indicated otherwise than above, it is determined by its location on the Zoning Map.

F.    Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing as of the effective date of this By-law, the district in which the lot frontage is located shall determine the use regulations that apply to the entire lot, but the portion of the lot located in the less restrictive district shall conform to the dimensional regulations of that district.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


3.1. DISTRICTS

For purposes of this By-law, the Town of Southbridge is divided into eight use districts, as follows: 

A.    Residence Districts.

1.    Residence 1 District (R1).

2.    Residence 2 District (R2).

3.    Residence 3 District (R3).

B.    Business Districts.

1.    Central Core District (CC).

2.    Retail Business District (RB).

3.    General Business District (GB).

C.    Office and Industrial Districts.

1.    Office Research District (OR).

2.    Manufacturing District (M).

D.    Overlay Districts.

1.    Flood Plain District (FPD).

2.    Watershed Protection (WP).

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


3.2. ZONING MAP

The districts listed in Section 3.1 are as shown, defined, and bounded on the map accompanying this By-law, entitled "Zoning Map of the Town of Southbridge, Assessors Maps (152 sheets), Southbridge, Mass., revised to January 1, 1974, John E. O'Donnell and Associates, Auburn, Maine," as hereafter amended from time to time by the Town Council. The Zoning Map and all explanatory matter are hereby made a part of this By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


3.3. BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS

A.    District boundaries are as shown upon the Zoning Map.

B.    Where the boundary lines are shown approximately on the location of property or lot lines and the exact location of property, lot, or boundary lines is not indicated by means of dimensions shown in figures, then the property or lot lines shall be the boundary lines.

C.    Where a boundary is indicated upon a street, the line shall be the centerline of the street. 

D.    Where a boundary is indicated approximately parallel to a street, it shall be taken as parallel thereto, and if there is any variance between the scaled distance between the boundaries and the side line of the street and the distance as marked in feet upon the map, the latter shall govern.

E.    Where a boundary is indicated otherwise than above, it is determined by its location on the Zoning Map.

F.    Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing as of the effective date of this By-law, the district in which the lot frontage is located shall determine the use regulations that apply to the entire lot, but the portion of the lot located in the less restrictive district shall conform to the dimensional regulations of that district.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


SECTION 4. USE REGULATIONS


4.1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.    No building or structure shall be erected and no building or structure, or land or water area, shall be used for any purpose or in any manner except as provided in this Section 4. 

B.    No building permit shall be issued for any use that is subject to Section 2.6 unless a site plan has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.

C.    An accessory use shall not alter the character of the premises on which it is located or have an adverse impact on the surrounding area.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


4.2. PROHIBITED USES

A.    Any use not listed in Section 4.4, Schedule of Uses (Table 1), or otherwise allowable under other provisions of this By-law is prohibited.

B.    All uses that pose a present or potential hazard to human health, safety, welfare, or the environment through emission of smoke, particulate matter, noise or vibration, or through fire or explosive hazard, or glare, or release of toxic chemicals, are expressly prohibited in all districts.

C.    Mobile homes are prohibited, except that pursuant to G.L. c. 40A, §3, a mobile home or temporary manufactured home may be placed on the site of a residence destroyed by fire or natural disaster, for a period not to exceed 18 months, while the residence is being rebuilt.

D.    Except where otherwise provided in this By-law, and except in the case of a licensed dealer in junk or used automobiles, it shall be prohibited to park or keep more than two motor vehicles or trailers unregistered or without a valid inspection sticker. This shall not apply to antique motor vehicles as defined in G.L. c. 90, §1, whether or not they are registered for use on public ways.

E.    Common or shared driveways serving more than one single-family dwelling.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


4.3. PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS

The following uses are permitted in all districts:

A.    Federal government use.

B.    State government uses to the extent that this By-law would prohibit the exercise of an essential government function.

C.    Uses protected or exempt pursuant to G.L. c. 40A, §3, or other state law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


4.4. SCHEDULE OF USES

A.    Table 1 Legend:

1.    Y: Permitted by right (but may be subject to site plan review under Section 2.6).

2.    SP: Allowed by special permit.

3.    N: Prohibited.

B.    Applicability of Site Plan Review. In the event that any permitted use is subject to a threshold under Section 2.6, no building permit or determination of zoning compliance shall be issued without an approved site plan.

 

Table 1. Schedule of Uses  

	Use	R1	R2	R3	CC	RB	GB	OR	M

	AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Agriculture, nonexempt	Y	SP	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Farm stand accessory to an exempt or nonexempt agricultural use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Storage of motor vehicle fuel in above-ground tanks for farm vehicles and machinery, accessory to an exempt farm	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Agriculturally related uses on a farm	SP	SP	N	N	N	N	N	N

	Kennel	SP	N	N	N	N	SP	N	N

	Commercial greenhouse	Y	Y	SP	SP	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Conservation, wildlife preserve	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	RESIDENTIAL USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Single-family dwelling	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N

	Two-family dwelling	N	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	N	N

	Group home	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Multifamily dwelling (limited to lots with public sewer service)	N	N	Y	SP	Y	Y	SP	N

	Mixed-use building	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Senior housing	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	N	N

	Assisted living residence	SP	SP	SP	N	N	N	SP	N

	Continuing care retirement community	SP	SP	SP	N	N	N	N	N

	Open space residential development	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	EDUCATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Public or private nonprofit educational use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Private for-profit educational use	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Religious use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Child care center	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Library or museum	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Hospital or nursing home	N	SP	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	GOVERNMENT, PUBLIC SERVICES, UTILITIES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Municipal use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Public drinking water supply	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Essential services	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Power co-generation facility	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	SP

	Commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation up to 700 kw or on less than 5 acres	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation larger than 700 kw or on 5 or more acres	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	RECREATIONAL AND SOCIAL FACILITIES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Public park, playground, or other outdoor recreational use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Reservation, wildlife preserve or other conservation use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Country club, fraternal lodge, or other social, civic, or recreational use of nonprofit organization or membership club	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Commercial recreational uses such as boat livery, ice skating rink, recreation camp, ski ground, riding academy stable, picnic grounds, campground, tourist or camp, swimming area, other commercial recreational and sporting facilities	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Commercial golf course on at least 30 acres, the operation of which shall be restricted to daylight hours	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Club, membership or fraternal	N	SP	SP	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	BUSINESS USE	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Retail store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	    Not exceeding 5,000 sq. ft. per retail establishment	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	    Between 5,001 sq. ft. and 20,000 sq. ft.	N	N	N	SP	Y	Y	N	N

	    More than 20,000 sq. ft.	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	N	N

	Shopping center	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	N	N

	Retail sale of custom goods manufactured and sold exclusively on the premises, e.g., production and retail space for an artisan, craftsperson, or cabinet maker	N	N	N	Y	Y	SP	N	N

	Sale of automobiles, boats, motorcycles, trailers, trucks or farm implements, monument sales, including showroom and outdoor display of merchandise for sale on the premises	N	N	N	SP	Y	Y	N	N

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	HOSPITALITY, FOOD SERVICES, ENTERTAINMENT USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Hotel or motel	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Restaurant, full-service, which may include service at an adjacent outdoor seating area	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Take-out food service establishment such as a deli, pizza shop, bakery, ice cream shop; no drive-through service	N	SP	SP	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Refreshment stand, drive-in, or other food service establishment where food or beverages are served inside a building to persons standing or seated outside	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	SP	SP

	Drive-through food service	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	N	N

	Indoor commercial entertainment facility such as a cinema, bowling alley, skating rink, or other enclosed place of assembly operated for profit	N	N	N	SP	Y	Y	SP	SP

	Outdoor commercial recreation facility such as golf driving range, "miniature" golf course, amusement park, drive-in theater, stadium and other outdoor facility operated for profit for spectator sports or amusement use	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	OFFICES AND RELATED USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Professional or business office	N	SP	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Medical or dental office or office of allied health care professional	N	SP	SP	SP	Y	Y	SP	N

	Veterinarian	N	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	N

	Bank	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	N

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	TRADE AND SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Personal service establishment such as a barber or beauty shop, tailor or dressmaker, dry cleaning or laundry dropoff/pickup, photography studio	N	SP	SP	Y	Y	Y	SP	SP

	Self-service laundromat	N	SP	SP	SP	N	SP	N	N

	Repair shop for bicycles or small household appliances	N	N	SP	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Funeral home	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	N

	Licensed body arts establishment, including retail sales of directly associated items only	N	N	N	SP	SP	N	N	N

	Place of business of a builder, carpenter, caterer, electrician, mason, painter, plumber, roofer, or other trade	N	N	N	N	N	Y	SP	Y

	Adult-oriented business	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	WHOLESALE TRADE, STORAGE	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Wholesale showroom, storage, or warehouse or distribution facility for contractor’s equipment, heating fuel, lumber and other building supplies, livestock feed, fertilizer, food, furniture, hardware, metal, print, consumer commodities, or similar products	N	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	Y

	Outdoor storage yard of any material or equipment of a type permitted to be stored in a warehouse in the same location	N	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	Y

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	AUTOMOTIVE AND VEHICLE SERVICES AND FACILITIES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Automobile service station, including bays for routine auto maintenance services (e.g., oil change and tune-up), but not a repair garage or an auto body shop	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Car wash	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Automobile and vehicle repair garage	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Sheltered bus stop	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Bus or train station	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Commercial parking garage	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Truck terminal, or motor freight station, servicing or parking of trucks, buses, or semi-trailers	N	N	N	N	N	N	Y	Y

	Airport, heliport, other aircraft landing and servicing facility	SP	SP	SP	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	MANUFACTURING AND RELATED USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Office or industrial campus master plan	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP/Y	SP

	Research, experimental, or testing laboratory	N	N	N	N	N	N	Y	SP

	Processing, packaging, storage, assembly, or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously manufactured or processed materials, where such activities are carried out wholly within an enclosed building; including incidental storage, sales, or distribution of such products	N	N	N	N	SP	Y	SP	Y

	Basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	ACCESSORY USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Home occupation	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Renting of rooms as transient guest quarters in an owner-occupied single-family dwelling	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	N	N

	Bed and breakfast	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	N	N

	Noncommercial greenhouse, tool shed, boat house, satellite dish, shelter for domestic pets or other similar accessory structure	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Living quarters for domestic employees; provided, that such quarters shall have no cooking facilities and are not rented or used as a separate dwelling	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N

	Tennis court, swimming pool, similar accessory recreational use	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N

	Noncommercial ground-mounted or otherwise mounted solar photovoltaic installation, 15 feet or less in height, accessory to an existing residential use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Watchperson’s quarters	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Cafeteria, snack bar, retail or personal services accessory to manufacturing or business use, operated primarily for the convenience of employees of the establishment	N	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Outdoor storage of trucks, supplies, and equipment in good working order incidental to permitted uses. If on a lot abutting a residential district, the outdoor storage shall be screened from view from adjacent properties with evergreen vegetation of sufficient density and height to achieve year-round effective screening. Vegetation shall be maintained in living condition. Privacy fence or solid wall may substitute for vegetation subject to approval by the Town Planner.	N	N	N	N	SP	Y	Y	Y

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


4.1. GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.    No building or structure shall be erected and no building or structure, or land or water area, shall be used for any purpose or in any manner except as provided in this Section 4. 

B.    No building permit shall be issued for any use that is subject to Section 2.6 unless a site plan has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Board.

C.    An accessory use shall not alter the character of the premises on which it is located or have an adverse impact on the surrounding area.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


4.2. PROHIBITED USES

A.    Any use not listed in Section 4.4, Schedule of Uses (Table 1), or otherwise allowable under other provisions of this By-law is prohibited.

B.    All uses that pose a present or potential hazard to human health, safety, welfare, or the environment through emission of smoke, particulate matter, noise or vibration, or through fire or explosive hazard, or glare, or release of toxic chemicals, are expressly prohibited in all districts.

C.    Mobile homes are prohibited, except that pursuant to G.L. c. 40A, §3, a mobile home or temporary manufactured home may be placed on the site of a residence destroyed by fire or natural disaster, for a period not to exceed 18 months, while the residence is being rebuilt.

D.    Except where otherwise provided in this By-law, and except in the case of a licensed dealer in junk or used automobiles, it shall be prohibited to park or keep more than two motor vehicles or trailers unregistered or without a valid inspection sticker. This shall not apply to antique motor vehicles as defined in G.L. c. 90, §1, whether or not they are registered for use on public ways.

E.    Common or shared driveways serving more than one single-family dwelling.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


4.3. PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS

The following uses are permitted in all districts:

A.    Federal government use.

B.    State government uses to the extent that this By-law would prohibit the exercise of an essential government function.

C.    Uses protected or exempt pursuant to G.L. c. 40A, §3, or other state law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


4.4. SCHEDULE OF USES

A.    Table 1 Legend:

1.    Y: Permitted by right (but may be subject to site plan review under Section 2.6).

2.    SP: Allowed by special permit.

3.    N: Prohibited.

B.    Applicability of Site Plan Review. In the event that any permitted use is subject to a threshold under Section 2.6, no building permit or determination of zoning compliance shall be issued without an approved site plan.

 

Table 1. Schedule of Uses  

	Use	R1	R2	R3	CC	RB	GB	OR	M

	AGRICULTURE, CONSERVATION USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Agriculture, nonexempt	Y	SP	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Farm stand accessory to an exempt or nonexempt agricultural use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Storage of motor vehicle fuel in above-ground tanks for farm vehicles and machinery, accessory to an exempt farm	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Agriculturally related uses on a farm	SP	SP	N	N	N	N	N	N

	Kennel	SP	N	N	N	N	SP	N	N

	Commercial greenhouse	Y	Y	SP	SP	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Conservation, wildlife preserve	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	RESIDENTIAL USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Single-family dwelling	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N

	Two-family dwelling	N	Y	Y	N	Y	Y	N	N

	Group home	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Multifamily dwelling (limited to lots with public sewer service)	N	N	Y	SP	Y	Y	SP	N

	Mixed-use building	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Senior housing	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	N	N

	Assisted living residence	SP	SP	SP	N	N	N	SP	N

	Continuing care retirement community	SP	SP	SP	N	N	N	N	N

	Open space residential development	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	EDUCATIONAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Public or private nonprofit educational use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Private for-profit educational use	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Religious use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Child care center	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Library or museum	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Hospital or nursing home	N	SP	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	GOVERNMENT, PUBLIC SERVICES, UTILITIES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Municipal use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Public drinking water supply	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Essential services	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Power co-generation facility	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	SP

	Commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation up to 700 kw or on less than 5 acres	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation larger than 700 kw or on 5 or more acres	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	RECREATIONAL AND SOCIAL FACILITIES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Public park, playground, or other outdoor recreational use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Reservation, wildlife preserve or other conservation use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Country club, fraternal lodge, or other social, civic, or recreational use of nonprofit organization or membership club	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Commercial recreational uses such as boat livery, ice skating rink, recreation camp, ski ground, riding academy stable, picnic grounds, campground, tourist or camp, swimming area, other commercial recreational and sporting facilities	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Commercial golf course on at least 30 acres, the operation of which shall be restricted to daylight hours	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Club, membership or fraternal	N	SP	SP	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	BUSINESS USE	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Retail store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	    Not exceeding 5,000 sq. ft. per retail establishment	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	    Between 5,001 sq. ft. and 20,000 sq. ft.	N	N	N	SP	Y	Y	N	N

	    More than 20,000 sq. ft.	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	N	N

	Shopping center	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	N	N

	Retail sale of custom goods manufactured and sold exclusively on the premises, e.g., production and retail space for an artisan, craftsperson, or cabinet maker	N	N	N	Y	Y	SP	N	N

	Sale of automobiles, boats, motorcycles, trailers, trucks or farm implements, monument sales, including showroom and outdoor display of merchandise for sale on the premises	N	N	N	SP	Y	Y	N	N

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	HOSPITALITY, FOOD SERVICES, ENTERTAINMENT USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Hotel or motel	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Restaurant, full-service, which may include service at an adjacent outdoor seating area	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Take-out food service establishment such as a deli, pizza shop, bakery, ice cream shop; no drive-through service	N	SP	SP	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Refreshment stand, drive-in, or other food service establishment where food or beverages are served inside a building to persons standing or seated outside	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	SP	SP

	Drive-through food service	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	N	N

	Indoor commercial entertainment facility such as a cinema, bowling alley, skating rink, or other enclosed place of assembly operated for profit	N	N	N	SP	Y	Y	SP	SP

	Outdoor commercial recreation facility such as golf driving range, "miniature" golf course, amusement park, drive-in theater, stadium and other outdoor facility operated for profit for spectator sports or amusement use	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	OFFICES AND RELATED USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Professional or business office	N	SP	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Medical or dental office or office of allied health care professional	N	SP	SP	SP	Y	Y	SP	N

	Veterinarian	N	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	N

	Bank	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	N

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	TRADE AND SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Personal service establishment such as a barber or beauty shop, tailor or dressmaker, dry cleaning or laundry dropoff/pickup, photography studio	N	SP	SP	Y	Y	Y	SP	SP

	Self-service laundromat	N	SP	SP	SP	N	SP	N	N

	Repair shop for bicycles or small household appliances	N	N	SP	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Funeral home	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	N

	Licensed body arts establishment, including retail sales of directly associated items only	N	N	N	SP	SP	N	N	N

	Place of business of a builder, carpenter, caterer, electrician, mason, painter, plumber, roofer, or other trade	N	N	N	N	N	Y	SP	Y

	Adult-oriented business	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	WHOLESALE TRADE, STORAGE	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Wholesale showroom, storage, or warehouse or distribution facility for contractor’s equipment, heating fuel, lumber and other building supplies, livestock feed, fertilizer, food, furniture, hardware, metal, print, consumer commodities, or similar products	N	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	Y

	Outdoor storage yard of any material or equipment of a type permitted to be stored in a warehouse in the same location	N	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	Y

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	AUTOMOTIVE AND VEHICLE SERVICES AND FACILITIES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Automobile service station, including bays for routine auto maintenance services (e.g., oil change and tune-up), but not a repair garage or an auto body shop	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Car wash	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Automobile and vehicle repair garage	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Sheltered bus stop	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Bus or train station	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Commercial parking garage	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Truck terminal, or motor freight station, servicing or parking of trucks, buses, or semi-trailers	N	N	N	N	N	N	Y	Y

	Airport, heliport, other aircraft landing and servicing facility	SP	SP	SP	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	MANUFACTURING AND RELATED USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Office or industrial campus master plan	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP/Y	SP

	Research, experimental, or testing laboratory	N	N	N	N	N	N	Y	SP

	Processing, packaging, storage, assembly, or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously manufactured or processed materials, where such activities are carried out wholly within an enclosed building; including incidental storage, sales, or distribution of such products	N	N	N	N	SP	Y	SP	Y

	Basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials	N	N	N	N	N	N	N	SP

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	ACCESSORY USES	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Home occupation	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Renting of rooms as transient guest quarters in an owner-occupied single-family dwelling	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	N	N

	Bed and breakfast	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	SP	N	N

	Noncommercial greenhouse, tool shed, boat house, satellite dish, shelter for domestic pets or other similar accessory structure	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	N	N

	Living quarters for domestic employees; provided, that such quarters shall have no cooking facilities and are not rented or used as a separate dwelling	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N

	Tennis court, swimming pool, similar accessory recreational use	Y	Y	Y	N	N	N	N	N

	Noncommercial ground-mounted or otherwise mounted solar photovoltaic installation, 15 feet or less in height, accessory to an existing residential use	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Watchperson’s quarters	N	N	N	N	SP	SP	SP	SP

	Cafeteria, snack bar, retail or personal services accessory to manufacturing or business use, operated primarily for the convenience of employees of the establishment	N	N	N	N	Y	Y	Y	Y

	Outdoor storage of trucks, supplies, and equipment in good working order incidental to permitted uses. If on a lot abutting a residential district, the outdoor storage shall be screened from view from adjacent properties with evergreen vegetation of sufficient density and height to achieve year-round effective screening. Vegetation shall be maintained in living condition. Privacy fence or solid wall may substitute for vegetation subject to approval by the Town Planner.	N	N	N	N	SP	Y	Y	Y

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


SECTION 5. DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS


5.1. SCHEDULE OF DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS

No building or structure in any district shall be located, constructed, changed, enlarged or permitted and no use of premises or land in any district shall be permitted which does not conform to the density and dimensional regulations set forth in Table 2: Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


5.2. GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.    More than one principal use on a lot is prohibited unless the lot contains at least the basic minimum area and, in the case of residential uses, the required additional area for each unit in excess of one.

B.    Computation of Lot Area. In computing the area of any lot, no part of a public or private way and no part of a pond, certified vernal pool, or perennial stream or river shall be included. For every lot laid out for residential use, at least 50 percent of the required lot area shall be land exclusive of area subject to protection under the Wetlands Protection Act, G.L. c. 131, §40.

C.    No lot shall be so reduced as to fail to satisfy any minimum dimension, area, or yard required for a permitted principal use except as provided in Section 8.1, Open Space Residential Development.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


5.2.1. Supplemental Lot Regulations

A.    Lot Frontage.

1.    Minimum Lot Frontage Required. Every lot must have at least the minimum frontage set forth in Table 2 for the district in which the lot is located on a street as defined in Section 10 of this By-law.

2.    Measurement of Lot Frontage. Frontage is measured in a continuous line along the sideline of the street right-of-way between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street right-of-way line. The measurement of lot frontage excludes jogs in the street width, backup strips, and other irregularities in the street line.

3.    Access. An owner shall provide a means of access for vehicles from the frontage to a principal building for emergency services, for deliveries, and for off-street parking. All access to lots shall be through the lot frontage except the DPW Director or designee may approve access over another property line if the applicant demonstrates to the DPW Director’s or designee’s satisfaction that such other access is a safer alternative.

B.    Lot Width. No lot shall at any point between the front building line of the principal building and the lot frontage have less width than 75 percent of the required lot frontage for the district in which the frontage is located.

C.    Yard Requirements.

1.    No part of a yard or other open space required in connection with any building shall be used to meet the requirements for any other building unless specifically permitted in this By-law.

2.    No required yard abutting a public street shall be used for the storage or display or abandonment of merchandise, lumber, building material, equipment, salvable secondhand items, or any type of junk, scrap, trash, rubble, or discarded or abandoned equipment or materials.

D.    Corner Visibility.

1.    Buildings. On a corner lot, there shall be erected no building or structure, fence, foliage, or other obstruction so as to impede traffic visibility within the space bounded as follows:

a)    In a residence district, the two intersecting street lines and a circular curve about the point of intersection of the two street lines and having a radius equal to one and two-thirds times the setback required in that district; and

b)    In a business or industrial district, the two intersecting street lines, and a straight line connecting the points on both street lines 10 feet from their point of intersection. 

2.    Provided, that where the interior angle between the intersecting street lines is greater than 105 degrees, or where the street lines intersect in a curve having a radius greater than twice the setback required in that district, these regulations shall be waived, and the setback line established parallel to or concentric with the street lines.

3.    Vegetation. Between the street lines of intersecting streets, and a circular curve about the point of intersection of the two street lines and having a radius equal to twice the setback required in that district, no vegetation other than shade trees may be maintained in any residence district above a height three feet above the plane through the established grades at the street lines; nor in any other district, within the corner space as described in the foregoing paragraph.

E.    Maximum Building Height. Building height shall be determined as defined in Section 10. Limitations of height shall not apply to cupolas, belfries, chimneys, flag or radio poles, gas holders, grain elevators, water towers, nor to bulkheads, hose towers, elevator enclosures, water tanks, scenery lofts, or scenery towers, nor to churches or municipal or institutional buildings.

F.    Appurtenant Open Space. No building setback area or other open space required for a building under this Section 5 shall, during the life of such building, be occupied by or counted as open space for another building.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


5.2.2. Transition between Districts

A.    Side Yards and Rear Yards. For that portion of a lot which adjoins the boundary line of a more restricted district than that in which the lot is located, side yard and rear yard requirements shall be the same as those which apply to lots in the more restricted district.

B.    Setback. For that portion of a lot which fronts on the same street within 100 feet of the boundary line of a more restricted district than that in which the lot is located, setback requirements shall be the average between the requirement for the less restricted district and that which applies to lots in the more restricted district.

C.    Building Height. A building on a lot adjoining or within 50 feet of the boundary line of a more restricted district than that in which the lot is located shall conform to the height regulations of the more restricted district.

 

Table 2. 
Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations  
DISTRICT 

	 	Minimum Lot Area Per Unit Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Frontage	Minimum Front Setback Minimum Side Setback Minimum Rear Setback Maximum Setback	Feet Stories	Maximum Lot Coverage

	
R1 SINGLE-FAMILY 22,500 22,500	125	30	20	35	 	35	2.5	30%

	    	 
R2 TWO-FAMILY - 12,500	125	30	10	30	 	35	2.5	30%

	   		 	 	 	 	 	 

	
R3 MULTIFAMILY 2,500	15,000	125	30	10	30	 	50	4	30%

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	
CENTRAL CORE Multifamily - 10,000	100	10	10	20	30	50	4.0	50%

	    
Mixed-use building -	 5,000	80	10	10	20	30	60	5.0	70%

	    
RETAIL BUSINESS, GENERAL BUSINESS - 10,000	125	30	20	20	40	35	2.5	20%

	    
Mixed-use building -	 	10,000	125	30	20	20	40	50	4.0	25%

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	
OFFICE-INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACURING -	 40,000	125	30	10	20	 	60	5.0	50%

	
Multifamily or other permitted residential use	2,500	25,000	125	30	10	20	 	50	4.0	40%

	    
All other uses	- 	20,000	125	30	10	20	 	60	5.0	50%



Notes to Table 2:

(a) If a garage is constructed on the front or under the building, it must be set back the greater of (1) 20 feet or (2) the front building line.

(b) On a corner lot, only the front of the building must meet requirements. The side street line shall be considered the side property line. However, if a garage is constructed on the side street, it must be set back the greater of (1) 20 feet or (2) the side building line of the principal building on the lot.

(c) Front, side, and rear setbacks for commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations of up to 700 kilowatts on property of five acres or less are 7.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


5.1. SCHEDULE OF DIMENSIONAL AND DENSITY REGULATIONS

No building or structure in any district shall be located, constructed, changed, enlarged or permitted and no use of premises or land in any district shall be permitted which does not conform to the density and dimensional regulations set forth in Table 2: Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


5.2. GENERAL PROVISIONS

A.    More than one principal use on a lot is prohibited unless the lot contains at least the basic minimum area and, in the case of residential uses, the required additional area for each unit in excess of one.

B.    Computation of Lot Area. In computing the area of any lot, no part of a public or private way and no part of a pond, certified vernal pool, or perennial stream or river shall be included. For every lot laid out for residential use, at least 50 percent of the required lot area shall be land exclusive of area subject to protection under the Wetlands Protection Act, G.L. c. 131, §40.

C.    No lot shall be so reduced as to fail to satisfy any minimum dimension, area, or yard required for a permitted principal use except as provided in Section 8.1, Open Space Residential Development.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


5.2.1. Supplemental Lot Regulations

A.    Lot Frontage.

1.    Minimum Lot Frontage Required. Every lot must have at least the minimum frontage set forth in Table 2 for the district in which the lot is located on a street as defined in Section 10 of this By-law.

2.    Measurement of Lot Frontage. Frontage is measured in a continuous line along the sideline of the street right-of-way between the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the street right-of-way line. The measurement of lot frontage excludes jogs in the street width, backup strips, and other irregularities in the street line.

3.    Access. An owner shall provide a means of access for vehicles from the frontage to a principal building for emergency services, for deliveries, and for off-street parking. All access to lots shall be through the lot frontage except the DPW Director or designee may approve access over another property line if the applicant demonstrates to the DPW Director’s or designee’s satisfaction that such other access is a safer alternative.

B.    Lot Width. No lot shall at any point between the front building line of the principal building and the lot frontage have less width than 75 percent of the required lot frontage for the district in which the frontage is located.

C.    Yard Requirements.

1.    No part of a yard or other open space required in connection with any building shall be used to meet the requirements for any other building unless specifically permitted in this By-law.

2.    No required yard abutting a public street shall be used for the storage or display or abandonment of merchandise, lumber, building material, equipment, salvable secondhand items, or any type of junk, scrap, trash, rubble, or discarded or abandoned equipment or materials.

D.    Corner Visibility.

1.    Buildings. On a corner lot, there shall be erected no building or structure, fence, foliage, or other obstruction so as to impede traffic visibility within the space bounded as follows:

a)    In a residence district, the two intersecting street lines and a circular curve about the point of intersection of the two street lines and having a radius equal to one and two-thirds times the setback required in that district; and

b)    In a business or industrial district, the two intersecting street lines, and a straight line connecting the points on both street lines 10 feet from their point of intersection. 

2.    Provided, that where the interior angle between the intersecting street lines is greater than 105 degrees, or where the street lines intersect in a curve having a radius greater than twice the setback required in that district, these regulations shall be waived, and the setback line established parallel to or concentric with the street lines.

3.    Vegetation. Between the street lines of intersecting streets, and a circular curve about the point of intersection of the two street lines and having a radius equal to twice the setback required in that district, no vegetation other than shade trees may be maintained in any residence district above a height three feet above the plane through the established grades at the street lines; nor in any other district, within the corner space as described in the foregoing paragraph.

E.    Maximum Building Height. Building height shall be determined as defined in Section 10. Limitations of height shall not apply to cupolas, belfries, chimneys, flag or radio poles, gas holders, grain elevators, water towers, nor to bulkheads, hose towers, elevator enclosures, water tanks, scenery lofts, or scenery towers, nor to churches or municipal or institutional buildings.

F.    Appurtenant Open Space. No building setback area or other open space required for a building under this Section 5 shall, during the life of such building, be occupied by or counted as open space for another building.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


5.2.2. Transition between Districts

A.    Side Yards and Rear Yards. For that portion of a lot which adjoins the boundary line of a more restricted district than that in which the lot is located, side yard and rear yard requirements shall be the same as those which apply to lots in the more restricted district.

B.    Setback. For that portion of a lot which fronts on the same street within 100 feet of the boundary line of a more restricted district than that in which the lot is located, setback requirements shall be the average between the requirement for the less restricted district and that which applies to lots in the more restricted district.

C.    Building Height. A building on a lot adjoining or within 50 feet of the boundary line of a more restricted district than that in which the lot is located shall conform to the height regulations of the more restricted district.

 

Table 2. Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations  

	 	Per Unit	Minimum Lot Area	Minimum Frontage	Minimum Setback (Ln. Ft.)	Maximum Setback	Maximum Building Height	Maximum Lot Coverage

	DISTRICT	 	Sq. Ft.	Lin. Ft.	Fronta,c	Sideb,c	Rearc	Front	Feet	Stories	Percent

	SINGLE-FAMILY	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	    Lot	 	22,500	125	30	20	35	 	35	2.5	30%

	    Accessory structure	 	 	 	30	10	10	 	35	1.5

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	TWO-FAMILY	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	    Lot	 	12,500	125	30	10	30	 	35	2.5	30%

	    Accessory structure	 	 	 	20	10	10	 	35	1.5

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	MULTIFAMILY	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	    Allowed residential use 	2,500	15,000	125	30	10	30	 	50	4	30%

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	CENTRAL CORE	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	    Multifamily 	 	10,000	100	10	10	20	30	50	4.0	50%

	    Mixed-use building	 	5,000	80	10	10	20	30	60	5.0	70%

	    All other uses	 	5,000	80	10	10	10	30	60	5.0	70%

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	RETAIL BUSINESS, GENERAL BUSINESS	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	    All uses	 	10,000	125	30	20	20	40	35	2.5	20%

	    Mixed-use building	 	10,000	125	30	20	20	40	50	4.0	25%

	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	OFFICE-INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACURING	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	Any allowed use	 	40,000	125	30	10	20	 	60	5.0	50%

	Existing sewer	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 

	    Multifamily or other permitted residential use	2,500	25,000	125	30	10	20	 	50	4.0	40%

	    All other uses	 	20,000	125	30	10	20	 	60	5.0	50%

Notes to Table 2:

(a) If a garage is constructed on the front or under the building, it must be set back the greater of (1) 20 feet or (2) the front building line.

(b) On a corner lot, only the front of the building must meet requirements. The side street line shall be considered the side property line. However, if a garage is constructed on the side street, it must be set back the greater of (1) 20 feet or (2) the side building line of the principal building on the lot.

(c) Front, side, and rear setbacks for commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations of up to 700 kilowatts on property of five acres or less are 7.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


SECTION 6. NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES


6.1. APPLICABILITY

A.    Except as otherwise provided herein, this By-law shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in existence or lawfully begun, or to a building permit or special permit issued, before the first publication of notice of the public hearing on this By-law required by G.L. c. 40A, §5. However, this By-law shall apply to the following:

1.    Any change or substantial extension of the use;

2.    To a building permit or special permit issued after the first notice of the public hearing;

3.    To any reconstruction, extension, or structural change of such structure; and

4.    To any alteration of a structure begun after the first notice of a public hearing to provide for its use in a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent, except where alteration, reconstruction, extension, or a structural change to a one-family or two-family residential structure does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure.

B.    Preexisting nonconforming structures or uses may be extended or altered; provided, that no extension or alteration shall be permitted unless there is a finding by the Board of Appeals that the change, extension, or alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming structure or use. It is the purpose of this By-law to discourage the perpetuity of nonconforming structures and uses whenever possible.

C.    Construction or operations under a building permit or special permit shall conform to any subsequent amendments of this By-law unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of 12 months after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.

D.    Anything to the contrary in this By-law notwithstanding, the residential use of two or more dwellings on a single lot shall be deemed a preexisting nonconforming use if commenced prior to March 25, 1958. This use may only be altered, extended, or modified by special permit pursuant to this section provided the Board of Appeals finds through a preponderance of credible evidence that the use commenced prior to March 25, 1958, and has not been abandoned or not used for a period of two years or more. In approving any alteration, extension, or modification, the Board of Appeals shall require that the number of dwelling units be limited to the same as in existence on March 25, 1958.

E.    Any residential structure in existence as of January 1, 1970, not protected by this By-law will be deemed to be conforming to the dimensional requirements of this By-law, but any alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change shall conform to the current By-law dimensional requirements.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.2. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES


6.2.1. Single-Family or Two-Family Dwellings

A.    Alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change to a single- or two-family residential structure that does not increase the nonconforming nature of that structure shall be permitted.

B.    No alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change to a single- or two-family residential structure that increases the nonconforming nature of that structure shall be permitted unless there is a finding by the Board of Appeals that the proposed alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change will not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.2.2. Nonconforming Structures Other Than Single-Family or Two-Family Dwellings

Except as provided elsewhere in this By-law, the following provisions shall apply to nonconforming structures other than single-family or two-family dwellings:

A.    A nonconforming structure may be altered, and the conforming use extended throughout the altered portion; provided, that the resulting alteration shall not cause the structure to further violate the dimensional regulations of the district in which it is located.

B.    No building area or floor area, where already nonconforming, shall be increased so as to create a greater nonconformity.

C.    A lawful nonconforming structure or portion thereof that has come into conformity shall not again become nonconforming.

D.    A nonconforming structure shall not be moved to any other location on the lot or any other lot unless every portion of the structure, the use thereof, and the lot shall be conforming.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.2.3. Nonconforming Structures in Existence; Enforcement

A.    If real property has been improved and used in accordance with the terms of the original building permit, no criminal or civil action intended to compel the abandonment, limitation or modification of the use allowed by the permit or the removal, alteration, or relocation of a structure erected in reliance upon the permit by reason of an alleged violation of G.L. c. 40A or of this By-law shall be maintained unless the action, suit, or proceeding is commenced and notice of the action, suit, or proceeding is recorded in the registry of deeds or, in the case of registered land, the notice is filed in the registry district of the Land Court within six years of the commencement of the alleged violation.

B.    No criminal or civil action intended to compel the removal, alteration, or relocation of a structure by reason of an alleged violation of this chapter or this By-law or the conditions of a variance or special permit shall be maintained unless the action, suit, or proceeding is commenced and notice of the action, suit, or proceeding is recorded in the registry of deeds or, in the case of registered land, the notice is filed in the registry district of the Land Court within 10 years of the commencement of the alleged violation.

C.    If real property has been improved by the erection or alteration of one or more structures and the structures or alterations have been in existence for a period of at least 10 years and no notice of an action, suit, or proceeding as to an alleged violation of G.L. c. 40A or of this By-law has been recorded in the Registry of Deeds or, in the case of registered land, has been filed in the registry district of the Land Court within a period of 10 years from the date the structures were erected, then the structures shall be deemed, for zoning purposes, to be legally nonconforming structures subject to G. L. c. 40A, §6, and to this By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.2.4. Unsafe Structures 

Any nonconforming structure that has not been abandoned and is determined to be unsafe may be restored to a safe condition, provided such work on the structure shall be completed within two years of the determination that the structure is unsafe and it shall not place the structure in greater nonconformity. The Board of Appeals may by special permit waive this condition or extend the completion period.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.3. NONCONFORMING USES

Unless the Board of Appeals has made the findings prescribed in G.L. c. 40A, §6:

A.    A nonconforming use, except for agriculture, horticulture, or floriculture, as defined in G.L. c. 128, §1A, of any open space on a lot outside a structure, or of a lot not occupied by a structure, shall not be extended.

B.    A nonconforming principal use of a structure shall not be extended. However, any nonconforming use of structure may be changed to another nonconforming use by special permit provided the Board of Appeals finds that the new use is not a substantially different use and not more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing use.

C.    A nonconforming accessory use of a portion of a structure or any conforming accessory use of a portion of a nonconforming structure may be extended up to a maximum of 40 percent of the floor area of the existing structure.

D.    A nonconforming use which has been changed to a permitted use shall not again be changed to another nonconforming use.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.4. NONCONFORMING LOTS; REDUCTION OR INCREASE

A.    Any lot, or open space on a lot, including yards and setbacks, shall not be reduced or changed in area or shape such that the lot, open space, yard, or setback is made nonconforming or more nonconforming unless a special permit has been granted under the provisions of this By-law. However, this Section 6.4 shall not apply in the case of a lot a portion of which is taken for a public purpose.

B.    A nonconforming lot which has come into conformity shall not again be changed to a nonconforming lot. 

C.    Any off-street parking or loading spaces, if already equal to or less than the number required to serve their intended use, shall not be further reduced in number except as provided in Section 7.1.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.5. RESTORATION, ABANDONMENT, NON-USE

A.    Reconstruction of a legally nonconforming structure damaged or destroyed by fire or other accidental or natural cause shall be allowed if the reconstruction is substantially in the form it had at the time of damage or destruction, or in any form if within applicable setback requirements and not larger than previously, and if reconstruction is started within 24 months and completed within 36 months of the damage or destruction.

B.    A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when the premises have been devoted to another use, or when the characteristic equipment and the furnishing of the nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar equipment within two years unless other facts show intention to resume the nonconforming use.

C.    A nonconforming use or structure that has been abandoned, demolished without reconstruction, or not used for a period of two years or more shall lose its protected status and shall be subject to all provisions of this By-law; however, the Planning Board may grant a special permit to authorize the reestablishment of a nonconforming use or structure where such reestablishment shall not result in substantial detriment to the neighborhood. The Planning Board shall consider the lot size, the existing building coverage, and available on-site parking based upon review of the specific characteristics of the site, including, but not limited to, available area, traffic patterns, access to public ways, intended use of the site, and protection of public safety and convenience, except that any use so allowed shall not be more substantially detrimental to the neighborhood than the previous use.

D.    Any nonconforming use that has either been abandoned or that has not been used for two years or more shall lose the protections accorded under this By-law and shall be required to conform to the current By-law.

E.    A nonconforming structure determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to be unsafe may be restored to a safe condition, provided such work on any nonconforming structure shall be completed within one year of the determination that the structure is unsafe and it shall not place the structure in greater nonconformity. The Board of Appeals may by special permit extend the completion period.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.6. EXEMPTIONS

Exempted from the requirement for a special permit under this Section 6.6 are the following:

A.    Alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change (collectively "alteration") of a nonconforming single- or two-family residential structure shall not be considered an increase in the nonconforming nature of the structure and shall be permitted as of right under the following circumstances:

1.    Normal repairs or replacement of parts of any nonconforming structure; provided, that such repair or replacement does not constitute an extension of a nonconforming use of such structure.

2.    Alteration to a conforming structure where the alteration will also comply with all applicable sections of the Zoning By-laws in effect at the time of application, if the existing structure is located on a lot which is nonconforming as the result of a zoning change.

3.    Alteration within the existing footprint of a nonconforming structure to comply with requirements of the Massachusetts Building Code.

4.    Alteration to a nonconforming structure where the alteration will comply with all applicable sections of the Zoning By-laws in effect at the time of application and will not increase the habitable space.

5.    Alteration to a nonconforming structure on a lot of at least 20,000 square feet, where the alteration will comply with all applicable sections of the Zoning By-laws in effect at the time of application, including, but not limited to, setback, yard, building coverage, and height requirements.

6.    In cases where the applicant seeks to increase the height of any structure that encroaches on a required setback, where any increase in height will occur within such encroachment, there shall be no alteration as of right under this section.

B.    Interior alteration of any otherwise conforming structure that does not change the nature of, nor increase the intensity of, a nonconforming use, and interior alterations of preexisting nonconforming structures for a use or uses which are otherwise allowed by zoning.

C.    Reconstruction of a legally nonconforming structure damaged or destroyed by fire or other accidental or natural cause, other than flood damage sustained to structure within any floodplain shown on the flood insurance rate maps of Southbridge, if the reconstruction is substantially the form it had at the time of damage or destruction, or in any form if within applicable setback requirements and not larger than previously, and if reconstruction is started within 24 months and completed within 36 months of the damage or destruction.

D.    Nonconforming uses and structures in the Watershed Protection District may be extended or altered through the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board upon a finding that such extension or alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the water supply than the existing use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.

E.    Reconstruction of any permitted commercial accommodation structure or unit(s), if for the purpose of rehabilitation or upgrade, and if the commercial accommodation was licensed and operational for the three years prior to the rehabilitation or upgrade. The reconstruction shall not allow rebuilding at a greater density, greater height, or at a different location than previously existed.

F.    Not exempted under this section are accessory uses and structures.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.1. APPLICABILITY

A.    Except as otherwise provided herein, this By-law shall not apply to structures or uses lawfully in existence or lawfully begun, or to a building permit or special permit issued, before the first publication of notice of the public hearing on this By-law required by G.L. c. 40A, §5. However, this By-law shall apply to the following:

1.    Any change or substantial extension of the use;

2.    To a building permit or special permit issued after the first notice of the public hearing;

3.    To any reconstruction, extension, or structural change of such structure; and

4.    To any alteration of a structure begun after the first notice of a public hearing to provide for its use in a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent, except where alteration, reconstruction, extension, or a structural change to a one-family or two-family residential structure does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure.

B.    Preexisting nonconforming structures or uses may be extended or altered; provided, that no extension or alteration shall be permitted unless there is a finding by the Board of Appeals that the change, extension, or alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming structure or use. It is the purpose of this By-law to discourage the perpetuity of nonconforming structures and uses whenever possible.

C.    Construction or operations under a building permit or special permit shall conform to any subsequent amendments of this By-law unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of 12 months after the issuance of the permit and in cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.

D.    Anything to the contrary in this By-law notwithstanding, the residential use of two or more dwellings on a single lot shall be deemed a preexisting nonconforming use if commenced prior to March 25, 1958. This use may only be altered, extended, or modified by special permit pursuant to this section provided the Board of Appeals finds through a preponderance of credible evidence that the use commenced prior to March 25, 1958, and has not been abandoned or not used for a period of two years or more. In approving any alteration, extension, or modification, the Board of Appeals shall require that the number of dwelling units be limited to the same as in existence on March 25, 1958.

E.    Any residential structure in existence as of January 1, 1970, not protected by this By-law will be deemed to be conforming to the dimensional requirements of this By-law, but any alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change shall conform to the current By-law dimensional requirements.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.2. NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES


6.2.1. Single-Family or Two-Family Dwellings

A.    Alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change to a single- or two-family residential structure that does not increase the nonconforming nature of that structure shall be permitted.

B.    No alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change to a single- or two-family residential structure that increases the nonconforming nature of that structure shall be permitted unless there is a finding by the Board of Appeals that the proposed alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change will not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.2.2. Nonconforming Structures Other Than Single-Family or Two-Family Dwellings

Except as provided elsewhere in this By-law, the following provisions shall apply to nonconforming structures other than single-family or two-family dwellings:

A.    A nonconforming structure may be altered, and the conforming use extended throughout the altered portion; provided, that the resulting alteration shall not cause the structure to further violate the dimensional regulations of the district in which it is located.

B.    No building area or floor area, where already nonconforming, shall be increased so as to create a greater nonconformity.

C.    A lawful nonconforming structure or portion thereof that has come into conformity shall not again become nonconforming.

D.    A nonconforming structure shall not be moved to any other location on the lot or any other lot unless every portion of the structure, the use thereof, and the lot shall be conforming.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.2.3. Nonconforming Structures in Existence; Enforcement

A.    If real property has been improved and used in accordance with the terms of the original building permit, no criminal or civil action intended to compel the abandonment, limitation or modification of the use allowed by the permit or the removal, alteration, or relocation of a structure erected in reliance upon the permit by reason of an alleged violation of G.L. c. 40A or of this By-law shall be maintained unless the action, suit, or proceeding is commenced and notice of the action, suit, or proceeding is recorded in the registry of deeds or, in the case of registered land, the notice is filed in the registry district of the Land Court within six years of the commencement of the alleged violation.

B.    No criminal or civil action intended to compel the removal, alteration, or relocation of a structure by reason of an alleged violation of this chapter or this By-law or the conditions of a variance or special permit shall be maintained unless the action, suit, or proceeding is commenced and notice of the action, suit, or proceeding is recorded in the registry of deeds or, in the case of registered land, the notice is filed in the registry district of the Land Court within 10 years of the commencement of the alleged violation.

C.    If real property has been improved by the erection or alteration of one or more structures and the structures or alterations have been in existence for a period of at least 10 years and no notice of an action, suit, or proceeding as to an alleged violation of G.L. c. 40A or of this By-law has been recorded in the Registry of Deeds or, in the case of registered land, has been filed in the registry district of the Land Court within a period of 10 years from the date the structures were erected, then the structures shall be deemed, for zoning purposes, to be legally nonconforming structures subject to G. L. c. 40A, §6, and to this By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.2.4. Unsafe Structures 

Any nonconforming structure that has not been abandoned and is determined to be unsafe may be restored to a safe condition, provided such work on the structure shall be completed within two years of the determination that the structure is unsafe and it shall not place the structure in greater nonconformity. The Board of Appeals may by special permit waive this condition or extend the completion period.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.3. NONCONFORMING USES

Unless the Board of Appeals has made the findings prescribed in G.L. c. 40A, §6:

A.    A nonconforming use, except for agriculture, horticulture, or floriculture, as defined in G.L. c. 128, §1A, of any open space on a lot outside a structure, or of a lot not occupied by a structure, shall not be extended.

B.    A nonconforming principal use of a structure shall not be extended. However, any nonconforming use of structure may be changed to another nonconforming use by special permit provided the Board of Appeals finds that the new use is not a substantially different use and not more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing use.

C.    A nonconforming accessory use of a portion of a structure or any conforming accessory use of a portion of a nonconforming structure may be extended up to a maximum of 40 percent of the floor area of the existing structure.

D.    A nonconforming use which has been changed to a permitted use shall not again be changed to another nonconforming use.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.4. NONCONFORMING LOTS; REDUCTION OR INCREASE

A.    Any lot, or open space on a lot, including yards and setbacks, shall not be reduced or changed in area or shape such that the lot, open space, yard, or setback is made nonconforming or more nonconforming unless a special permit has been granted under the provisions of this By-law. However, this Section 6.4 shall not apply in the case of a lot a portion of which is taken for a public purpose.

B.    A nonconforming lot which has come into conformity shall not again be changed to a nonconforming lot. 

C.    Any off-street parking or loading spaces, if already equal to or less than the number required to serve their intended use, shall not be further reduced in number except as provided in Section 7.1.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.5. RESTORATION, ABANDONMENT, NON-USE

A.    Reconstruction of a legally nonconforming structure damaged or destroyed by fire or other accidental or natural cause shall be allowed if the reconstruction is substantially in the form it had at the time of damage or destruction, or in any form if within applicable setback requirements and not larger than previously, and if reconstruction is started within 24 months and completed within 36 months of the damage or destruction.

B.    A nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned when the premises have been devoted to another use, or when the characteristic equipment and the furnishing of the nonconforming use have been removed from the premises and have not been replaced by similar equipment within two years unless other facts show intention to resume the nonconforming use.

C.    A nonconforming use or structure that has been abandoned, demolished without reconstruction, or not used for a period of two years or more shall lose its protected status and shall be subject to all provisions of this By-law; however, the Planning Board may grant a special permit to authorize the reestablishment of a nonconforming use or structure where such reestablishment shall not result in substantial detriment to the neighborhood. The Planning Board shall consider the lot size, the existing building coverage, and available on-site parking based upon review of the specific characteristics of the site, including, but not limited to, available area, traffic patterns, access to public ways, intended use of the site, and protection of public safety and convenience, except that any use so allowed shall not be more substantially detrimental to the neighborhood than the previous use.

D.    Any nonconforming use that has either been abandoned or that has not been used for two years or more shall lose the protections accorded under this By-law and shall be required to conform to the current By-law.

E.    A nonconforming structure determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer to be unsafe may be restored to a safe condition, provided such work on any nonconforming structure shall be completed within one year of the determination that the structure is unsafe and it shall not place the structure in greater nonconformity. The Board of Appeals may by special permit extend the completion period.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


6.6. EXEMPTIONS

Exempted from the requirement for a special permit under this Section 6.6 are the following:

A.    Alteration, reconstruction, extension, or structural change (collectively "alteration") of a nonconforming single- or two-family residential structure shall not be considered an increase in the nonconforming nature of the structure and shall be permitted as of right under the following circumstances:

1.    Normal repairs or replacement of parts of any nonconforming structure; provided, that such repair or replacement does not constitute an extension of a nonconforming use of such structure.

2.    Alteration to a conforming structure where the alteration will also comply with all applicable sections of the Zoning By-laws in effect at the time of application, if the existing structure is located on a lot which is nonconforming as the result of a zoning change.

3.    Alteration within the existing footprint of a nonconforming structure to comply with requirements of the Massachusetts Building Code.

4.    Alteration to a nonconforming structure where the alteration will comply with all applicable sections of the Zoning By-laws in effect at the time of application and will not increase the habitable space.

5.    Alteration to a nonconforming structure on a lot of at least 20,000 square feet, where the alteration will comply with all applicable sections of the Zoning By-laws in effect at the time of application, including, but not limited to, setback, yard, building coverage, and height requirements.

6.    In cases where the applicant seeks to increase the height of any structure that encroaches on a required setback, where any increase in height will occur within such encroachment, there shall be no alteration as of right under this section.

B.    Interior alteration of any otherwise conforming structure that does not change the nature of, nor increase the intensity of, a nonconforming use, and interior alterations of preexisting nonconforming structures for a use or uses which are otherwise allowed by zoning.

C.    Reconstruction of a legally nonconforming structure damaged or destroyed by fire or other accidental or natural cause, other than flood damage sustained to structure within any floodplain shown on the flood insurance rate maps of Southbridge, if the reconstruction is substantially the form it had at the time of damage or destruction, or in any form if within applicable setback requirements and not larger than previously, and if reconstruction is started within 24 months and completed within 36 months of the damage or destruction.

D.    Nonconforming uses and structures in the Watershed Protection District may be extended or altered through the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board upon a finding that such extension or alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the water supply than the existing use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.

E.    Reconstruction of any permitted commercial accommodation structure or unit(s), if for the purpose of rehabilitation or upgrade, and if the commercial accommodation was licensed and operational for the three years prior to the rehabilitation or upgrade. The reconstruction shall not allow rebuilding at a greater density, greater height, or at a different location than previously existed.

F.    Not exempted under this section are accessory uses and structures.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


SECTION 7. GENERAL REGULATIONS


7.1. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING


7.1.1. Purposes

The purposes of this Section 7.1 are to ensure the availability of safe and convenient vehicular parking areas; to encourage economic development; to promote safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle occupants, and property and business owners; to reduce impervious surfaces; and to protect adjoining lots and the general public from nuisances created by the noise, fumes and glare of headlights and hazards associated with off-street parking areas.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.2. Applicability

A.    No building or structure shall be used or changed to a category of greater parking demand, determined in accordance with Table 3 below, except in accordance with this Section 7.1.2.

1.    This section shall not apply to any change in use of an existing structure as long as the change does not require an increase of more than 25 percent of the number of parking spaces required herein.

2.    Single-family and two-family dwellings shall be exempt from this Section 7.1.

B.    Administration. This Section 7.1 shall be administered by the Planning Board as part of site plan approval pursuant to Section 2.6 or the special permit process pursuant to Section 2.5, or for a use or activity not subject to site plan review or special permit, by the Building Commissioner.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.3. Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements

The minimum number of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be as set forth in Table 3. Off-street parking requirements for a use not specifically listed in Table 3 shall be determined by the Building Commissioner based on a listed use of similar characteristics of parking demand generation.

Table 3. Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements  

	Use	Minimum or Maximum Number of Parking Spaces

	Single-family or two-family dwelling	Minimum two spaces per unit

	Dwelling units, excluding senior housing or other age-restricted residential uses	Minimum 1.5 spaces for units with up to 2 bedrooms; 2 spaces per unit for more than 2 bedrooms

	Senior housing, independent living units	Minimum 1 space per dwelling unit plus 1 space per 4 units for visitor parking

	Assisted living residence or nursing home	Minimum 0.5 space per room plus 1 space per 4 units for visitor parking

	Dwelling units above the ground floor of a commercial building	Minimum 1.5 spaces per unit

	Bed and breakfast, renting of rooms as transient guest quarters, or boarding house	Minimum 1 space per guest room

	Place of assembly with fixed seating, such as a church, stadium, assembly hall	Minimum 1 space for every 3 seats or, when benches are used, 1 space per 8 lineal feet of bench

	Business, professional, or governmental office, bank	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft. on the first floor; 1 space per 400 sq. ft. on the second floor

	Retail store	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft.

	Shopping center	Maximum 1 space per 200 sq. ft.

	Medical office or clinic	Minimum 1 space per 150 sq. ft.

	Veterinary hospital	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft.

	Business or personal service establishment	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft.

	Hotel or motel	Minimum 1 space per guest room and 1 space per 2 employees on the largest shift (where restaurant is included, see below for restaurant parking)

	Warehouse/distribution facility, wholesale showroom	Minimum 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. for a showroom

	Manufacturing	Minimum 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft.

	Restaurant	Minimum 1 space for every 3 seats

	Automobile service station	Minimum 1 space per fueling position plus 2 spaces per service bay plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. including retail/convenience store areas. Temporary parking at fueling positions shall not count toward the sq. ft. parking requirement.

	Vehicle repair shops	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft. plus 2 spaces per service bay

	Other uses not specified herein 	Where a use is not specifically referenced in this table, the minimum parking requirement for the most nearly comparable use or industry standards shall apply as determined by the Building Commissioner

	*In all instances in Table 3, sq. ft. shall mean net floor area.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.4. General Parking Requirements

Except as may be provided elsewhere in this Section 7.1, the following parking requirements shall be met: 

A.    Computation of Required Parking Spaces.

1.    The minimum number of parking spaces shall be the largest whole number obtained after calculating the parking requirements in accordance with Table 3. Any fractional parking space shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

2.    For a parcel with two or more uses, the minimum number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the minimum number of spaces required for each use, determined in accordance with Table 3, except as may be authorized pursuant to Section 7.1.5.

B.    On-Premises Parking Required. All required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same premises as the uses they serve except as provided in Section 7.1.6.

C.    Dimensional Standards. An off-street parking space shall be an all-weather, surfaced area having a width of not less than nine feet and a length of not less than 18 feet for angle parking or 22 feet for parallel parking. The minimum dimensions for handicapped parking shall be in accordance with the State Building Code.

D.    Each required loading space shall be at least 10 feet wide, 40 feet long, and 14 feet high.

E.    Parking Area Design.

1.    Surface. Parking areas shall have durable, all-weather paved surfaces and shall provide for the satisfactory management of surface water. Pavement materials shall be approved by the Department of Public Works. Parking areas composed of pervious or semi-pervious surfaces are encouraged in low traffic areas such as reserve parking and may be used to meet all or any part of the required parking, subject to environmental limitations.

2.    Parking areas shall be designed that no vehicle will be required to back onto a public way in order to enter or exit from a parking space.

F.    Location of Parking Spaces.

1.    For retail, office, and other commercial uses, no off-street parking shall be located between the front building line and the street without a special permit from the Planning Board and only if no other practical alternative exists.

2.    For residential uses, off-street parking between the front building line and the street is prohibited except for parking in a designated, paved driveway located on one side of the building or in a garage accessory to the residential use. When the off-street parking is located in a driveway and the closest abutter on the driveway side of the lot is a single-family or two-family dwelling, there shall be a minimum landscaped buffer at least five feet in width the full length of the driveway within ten feet of the lot line.

3.    In no event shall vehicular parking spaces be located within the minimum required setback in any district.

G.    Off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed so as to maximize safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle occupants, and property and business owners and their customers. Impacts on scenic roads, historic districts, natural resources, and community character shall be minimized. Parking and loading spaces shall be so arranged so as not to permit or require the backing of motor vehicles into a public way or street.

H.    Illumination of Off-Street Parking Areas. Any fixture used to illuminate any parking area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from the street and away from adjoining residential uses.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.5. Reduced Parking

The number of parking spaces required pursuant to Table 3 may be reduced by special permit from the Planning Board, subject to the following or as otherwise provided for in Section 7.2.7(H). 

1.    The applicant shall demonstrate to the Board’s satisfaction that a reduction is warranted due to circumstances such as but not limited to:

a)    Peak parking needs generated by the proposed uses occur at different times. It shall be the applicant’s burden to demonstrate to the Board’s satisfaction that the proposed uses are noncompeting. In mixed-use developments, applicants may propose a reduction in parking requirements based on an analysis of peak demand for noncompeting uses. In these cases, the Planning Board may determine that the parking requirement for the largest of the uses (in terms of required parking spaces) is sufficient.

b)    Demographic or other characteristics of site users.

c)    Safe, convenient forms of pedestrian access between the proposed development and nearby residential uses.

d)    The presence of a public or private parking facility within 400 feet of the proposed use.

e)    The Board may grant a special permit for reduced parking only upon finding that:

i.    The reduced number of parking spaces is consistent with the general purposes of this Section 7.1.

ii.    The proposed number of parking spaces will be sufficient for the proposed uses.

iii.    The decrease in required off-street parking is supported by a parking analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer. Such analysis shall consider existing and proposed uses on the site; rate of parking turnover for various uses; expected peak traffic and parking loads for various uses based on customary hours of operation; availability of public transportation; industry parking standards for various uses; and other factors.

2.    In granting a special permit for reduced parking, the Board may impose reasonable conditions including but not limited to requiring additional parking should uses change over time, or requirements to designate an area on the site plan for reserve parking. Further, the Board may require the applicant to construct the reserve parking if, within one year of full occupancy of the development, the Building Commissioner determines that the parking constructed on the site is not adequate to meet the project’s actual parking demand.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.6. Shared Parking

By special permit from the Planning Board, the off-street parking required for two or more buildings or uses may be provided in combined facilities on adjacent lots, provided there is a legally enforceable shared parking agreement executed by all parties concerned and approved by the Planning Board as part of the special permit process and recorded with the Registry of Deeds.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2. REVIEW CONSIDERATIONS FOR MAJOR DEVELOPMENT


7.2.1. Purposes

The purpose of these project review considerations is to control the impact of development in the nonresidential districts on nearby single-family and two-family neighborhoods and the overall quality of life in Southbridge.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.2. Applicability

A.    This Section 7.2 applies in any nonresidential use requiring a special permit or site plan review and to any multifamily use, as applicable. As applicable, the Planning Board or other approval authority shall consider and apply the following factors during its review of special permits and site plan applications for projects covered by this Section 7.2.

B.    Exemptions.

1.    Emergency responses performed by a private entity or a public agency and fire or burglar alarms.

2.    Parades, fairs, or outdoor entertainment between the hours of 7:00 am. and 11:00 p.m. only; provided, that a permit for such activity has been granted by the Town Council and the permit is for not more than 10 days.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.3. Outdoor Lighting

A.    The proposed development shall not produce lighting so as to unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property within the Town. Lighting practices and systems shall:

1.    Reduce light pollution, light trespass and glare in order to preserve and enhance the natural, scenic, and aesthetic qualities of the Town;

2.    Conserve energy and decrease lighting cost without decreasing nighttime safety, security, and productivity; and

3.    Preserve the night sky as a natural resource to enhance nighttime enjoyment of property within the Town.

B.    All outdoor light fixtures shall be shielded so as to be consistent with the purposes of this Section 7.2.

C.    Direct light from the light source shall be confined within the property boundaries when the abutting property is used for residential purposes.

D.    Outdoor lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum intensity needed at any particular time.

E.    Preferred surfacing for lighted areas shall be of materials such as blacktop which reflect a relatively small fraction of incident light. Parking area lighting shall be reduced or eliminated outside business hours. The Planning Board may require an electrical configuration for parking lots which supports shut-off for specific unused areas to reduce the glare from lighting.

F.    The operation of laser shows or searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited; provided, however, that same may be authorized for a period of not more than 14 days by special permit issued by the Planning Board.

G.    Indoor light sources will not be projected outside in a manner to defeat the intent of this section.

H.    Outdoor light fixtures using sodium vapor or metal halide lamp or lamps shall be prohibited unless specifically authorized by special permit from the Planning Board.

I.    Outdoor light fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor sign shall be mounted on top of the sign structure or otherwise restricted to prevent up-light and light trespass.

J.    No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted. Processes, such as arc welding, which create light flashes shall be confined within buildings or shielded to prevent either direct glare or flashing.

K.    Height of Fixtures.

1.    Luminaires attached to a building for area lighting shall be mounted on the wall no higher than 10 feet above grade unless waived by the Planning Board.

2.    Pole-mounted exterior lighting fixture types shall be mounted no higher than 15 feet above grade unless waived by the Planning Board.

L.    Except when necessary for site safety or security, all external lighting shall be extinguished one half hour after the facility is closed for the business day. Such lighting may be timed to resume one-half hour prior to the arrival of the first employee on the premises.

M.    Signs may be illuminated subject to conditions of the special permit or site plan approval.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.4. Landscaping and Screening

A.    The proposed development shall:

1.    Maximize and retain open space;

2.    Be integrated into the natural landscape;

3.    Minimize adverse environmental impacts to such features as wetlands, floodplains, and water resource protection recharge areas; and

4.    Minimize tree, vegetation, and soil removal, and grade change.

B.    The proposed landscaping shall require native and drought-tolerant species and prohibit invasive or nonnative plants.

C.    Except for a required sidewalk, there shall be a landscaped buffer strip that is the lesser of 20 feet or the full front setback in the district, continuous except for approved driveways, adjacent to any public road to visually separate parking and other uses from the road. The buffer strip shall be planted with grass, medium height shrubs, evergreens and shade trees having a minimum 2½ – 3 inches in caliper measured four feet from ground level planted at least every 30 feet along the road frontage. Evergreens and shade trees shall be at least six feet in height at time of planting. Trees or shrubs shall be set back a sufficient distance from all street or driveway intersections so that they do not present an obstruction to sight lines.

D.    There shall be a continuous landscaped buffer strip at least 10 feet wide, maintained in perpetuity, between a Business District or an Industrial District and any Residential District or property line. Along the zoning district or property line, the landscaped buffer strip shall be of a density to substantially screen the proposed development from view. Plantings of various approved evergreen species are encouraged and shall be planted at a minimum height of six feet.

E.    Parking areas containing over 20 spaces shall have at least one shade tree per 10 parking spaces. Each shade tree shall be a minimum of 2½ inches in diameter and located either in the parking area or within 10 feet of it. At least 5 percent of the interior of the parking area shall be maintained with landscaping, including trees, in landscape islands or plots with no more than 20 parking spaces between each island or plot. Trees shall be located to provide visual relief from sun and wind interruption within the parking area and assure safe patterns of internal pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Other traffic calming measures such as crosswalks, bike lanes, rumble-strips and landscape islands may be required as necessary.

F.    Fencing may be allowed in lieu of or in conjunction with plantings. The design and height of fencing, with accompanying landscaping, shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board.

G.    Retaining walls shall be constructed to a maximum height of six feet unless waived by the Planning Board. If site conditions require elevation changes of greater than six feet, retaining walls shall be terraced and landscaped. Retaining walls facing residential districts shall be solid fieldstone or fieldstone veneer or other similar material. Unless used within the Manufacturing Districts, vertical cast-in-place concrete or concrete blocks shall not be permitted.

H.    Exposed storage areas, refuse disposal facilities, machinery, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings, and structures and other unsightly uses shall be screened from view from neighboring properties and streets using dense, hardy evergreen plantings or earthen berms, or wall or tight fence complemented by evergreen plantings.

I.    All landscaping features, structures, and areas shall be properly maintained. Dead shrubs or trees shall be replaced within two growing seasons as a condition of approval.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.5. Stormwater Management

A.    The proposed development shall include adequate provisions or measures to prevent pollution of surface or groundwater, minimize erosion and sedimentation, prevent changes in groundwater levels, increased run-off, and potential for flooding, and minimize adverse impacts to neighboring properties by flooding from excessive runoff.

B.    All development shall comply with the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection’s (DEP) Stormwater Management Policy (including Phase III Stormwater requirements) to ensure that the rate of surface water runoff from the site shall not be increased after construction.

C.    Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are unfeasible and shall require oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contaminants.

D.    The Planning Board shall refer any special permit application to the Department of Public Works for its determination that the storm drainage system is consistent with DEP Stormwater Management Policy and that there is sufficient storm drainage capacity to meet the flow demands of the proposed development on site, and, where applicable, without causing surge in those storm drainage lines which serve the project and are consistent with the standards of the Town.

E.    During the construction phase, temporary diversions, berms, grassed waterways, special culverts, shoulder dikes or such other mechanical measures as may be necessary may be required by the Board to intercept and divert surface water runoff. Runoff flow shall not be routed through areas of protected vegetation or revegetated slopes and other areas. Temporary runoff from erosion and sedimentation controls shall be directed according to BMPs, such as vegetated swales. Retaining walls may be required where side slopes are steeper than a ratio of 3:1.

F.    Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be constructed in accordance with the DEP Storm Water Guidance manual and the EPA’s Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan guidelines and requirements. Topsoil and loam storage areas shall be subject to these standards.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.6. Site Development Standards

A.    To the extent practical, the proposed development shall be located to preserve and enhance the natural features of the site, to avoid disturbances of environmentally sensitive areas, to minimize adverse impacts of development on adjoining properties, to minimize the alteration of the natural features of the site and to preserve and enhance scenic points, historic buildings and places and similar community assets which add value and attractiveness to the project and the Town.

B.    Site/building design shall preserve natural topography outside of the development footprint to reduce unnecessary land disturbance and to preserve natural drainage on the site.

C.    Clearing for utility trenching shall be limited to the minimum area necessary to maneuver a backhoe or other construction equipment. Tunneling for utilities installation other than water should be utilized wherever feasible to protect root systems of trees.

D.    Site Design.

1.    Placement of buildings, structures, or parking facilities shall not detract from the site's scenic qualities and shall blend with the natural landscape.

2.    Building sites shall be directed away from the crest of hills so as not to break the ridgeline, and foundations shall be constructed to reflect the natural terrain.

3.    Sites shall be designed in such a way as to avoid impacts to rare and endangered species and wildlife habitat on a site, and to maintain contiguous forested areas.

E.    The Planning Board may require applicants to submit the proposed development plan to the Historical Commission and/or the Massachusetts Historical Commission for review and comment regarding possible archaeological or historical resources on the site.

F.    Priority shall be given to the preservation of existing stands of trees, trees at site perimeter, contiguous vegetation with adjacent sites (particularly existing sites protected through conservation restrictions), and specimen trees.

1.    Understory vegetation beneath the drip line of preserved trees shall be retained in an undisturbed state.

2.    During clearing and/or construction activities, all vegetation to be retained shall be surrounded by temporary protective fencing or other measures before any clearing or grading occurs and maintained until all construction work is completed and the site is cleaned up. Barriers shall be large enough to encompass the essential root zone of all vegetation to be protected. All vegetation within the protective fencing shall be retained in an undisturbed state.

G.    Limit of Clearing. Development envelopes for structures, driveways, wastewater disposal, lawn areas and utility work shall be designated to limit clearing and grading.

1.    In order to minimize the clearing and grading on a site associated with construction activities such as parking of construction vehicles, offices/trailers, stockpiling of equipment/materials, such activities may be limited to areas already planned for permanent structures.

2.    Topsoil shall not be stockpiled in areas of protected trees or wetlands or their vegetated buffers.

H.    Finished grades no greater than a 3:1 slope are preferred, while preserving, matching, or blending with the natural contours and undulations of the land to the greatest extent possible. Finished grades of 1:1 slope or 2:1 slope are allowed with stabilization if approved by the Planning Board. Finished grade shall be no higher than the trunk flare(s) of trees to be retained. The design of grade changes at the base of existing large trees shall be subject to the approval of the Tree Warden or its agent.

I.    The Planning Board may limit the extent of a site exposed at any one time through phasing of construction operations. Effective sequencing shall occur within the boundaries of natural drainage areas.

J.    Proper revegetation techniques shall be employed during construction using native plant species, proper seed bed preparation, fertilizer and mulching to protect germinating plants. Revegetation shall occur on cleared sites within 7 (seven) calendar days of final grading and shall occur during the planting season appropriate to the selected plant species.

K.    A minimum of 6" of topsoil shall be placed on all disturbed surfaces which are proposed to be planted.

L.    The Planning Board may require that water for the purpose of irrigation shall be provided by an on-site well, after consultation with the Water Department.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.7. Pedestrian and Vehicular Access – Traffic Management

A.    The proposed development shall be designed with a forecast for the next five years from the time of application to:

1.    Minimize hazards to public health and safety as a result of traffic;

2.    Provide safe access and circulation on the site for expected vehicles, pedestrians, and emergency vehicles; 

3.    Provide off-site traffic mitigation, where required, to offset the impact of the development;

4.    Reduce the traffic impacts of the proposed development on the area and the Town by incorporating traffic management devices; and

5.    Minimize the impact on scenic roads, historic districts, natural resources, and community character. The development shall not degrade safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle occupants, or property.

B.    To the extent feasible, access to nonresidential uses and structures shall be provided via one of the following:

1.    Access via a common driveway serving adjacent lots or premises, which are hereby authorized for nonresidential uses, provided there is a legally enforceable shared parking agreement executed by all parties concerned and approved by the Planning Board as part of the special permit process and recorded with the Registry of Deeds;

2.    Access via an existing side street;

3.    Access via a cul-de-sac or loop road shared by adjacent lots or premises.

C.    Access via roadways abutting residential districts shall be avoided where possible.

D.    Access and egress to a development with frontage on more than one street shall be in a manner that causes the least impact to the surrounding neighborhoods as determined by the Planning Board.

E.    Driveways. Each development shall be served by an adequate driveway.

1.    The Planning Board may, in certain circumstances, allow additional driveways as a condition of approval where the access is shared or the project has frontage on two separate streets.

2.    All driveways shall be designed to afford adequate sight distance to pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists exiting to public ways. Improvements may be required on the public way for vehicular turning movements in or out of the site and safe pedestrian access to adjoining sidewalks, paths, walking trails or bikeways.

3.    Curb Cuts. Curb cuts shall be limited to the minimum width for safe entering and exiting, and shall in no case exceed 30 feet in width unless waived by the Planning Board for industrial truck traffic. The location of driveway openings in relation to traffic and to adjacent streets shall provide for the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site. The number of curb cuts on state and local roads shall be minimized.

F.    Interior Circulation. The proposed development shall assure safe interior circulation on the site by separating pedestrian, bikeways, and vehicular traffic.

G.    Transportation Plan Approval. The proposed development shall be subject to transportation plan approval by the Planning Board. The transportation plan shall consist of the following information:

1.    A plan showing the proposed parking, loading, and traffic circulation within the site; access and egress points; and other features related to traffic generated by the proposed use.

2.    A traffic study, prepared by a qualified traffic engineer, detailing the expected traffic impacts. For proposed development of 25,000 gross square feet or more, the traffic study shall substantially conform to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development: A Recommended Practice. The Planning Board shall approve the geographic scope and content of the study.

3.    Proposed mitigation measures, if any, such as left-turn lanes, roadway widening, sign-age, signalization of intersections.

4.    For proposed development of 25,000 gross square feet or more, the applicant shall submit a transportation demand management (TDM) plan. The TDM plan shall provide information on the number of expected person trips to and from the site, broken down by various travel modes (e.g., single occupancy vehicle, carpool, walk, bicycle, commuter rail, shuttle bus, etc.). The TDM plan shall also incorporate one or more of the following techniques to reduce the number of single occupancy vehicle trips by employees coming to and departing from the proposed use:

a)    Establishment of or contribution to a traffic management association (TMA) within the region, which shall provide shuttle services for employees and other services as may be appropriate;

b)    Employee carpools or vanpools sponsored by the employer or the TDM;

c)    Monetary incentives to employees who do not use a parking space;

d)    On-site shower facilities and/or bicycle racks for employees who do not drive to work;

e)    Other techniques as may be deemed appropriate by the Planning Board or its traffic consultant.

H.    Reduction in Parking. In consideration of the applicant providing one or more of the above measures to reduce vehicular traffic to and from the site, the Planning Board may reduce the number of required parking spaces below what would ordinarily be required under Section 7.1. To be considered for a reduction, the applicant’s traffic engineer shall determine and justify the parking demand for the project, as well as reduction in needed parking spaces attributable to each traffic management measure.

I.    Level of Service Maintenance or Improvement.

1.    If the proposed project will result in an intersection level of service below a rating of LOS D, or result in a roadway volume to capacity rating greater than 1.0, the applicant may be required to provide detailed plans (including reconstruction concepts), that when implemented would result in an intersection level of service rating of D or better. 

2.    If the proposed project will result in a reduction in level-of-service of one letter grade or an increase of 10 seconds of delay to a signalized or unsignalized intersection, the applicant may be required to provide detailed plans that when implemented would result in a return to existing conditions.

J.    Dangerous Intersections. The Planning Board may require mitigation for any net increase in traffic volumes of 10 percent or more at an intersection that has an accident history of more than five accidents in the last three years for which data is available.

K.    Sight Distance. Acceptable sight distance shall be provided and maintained at all access locations, egress locations, and all intersections affected by the development. At a minimum, these sight distances shall meet the stricter of the Massachusetts Highway Department and American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials standards for safe-stopping sight distances.

L.    Maximum Parking. The maximum parking allowed for a development shall be no more than the minimum number of spaces required under zoning, unless waived.

M.    Mitigation. The Planning Board may require as a condition of any special permit off-site improvements to mitigate the impact of the proposed development. Such improvements include intersection widening and traffic signals or the components of the TDM plan. All road and intersection improvements proposed as part of development and redevelopment shall be consistent with local plans.

N.    Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and the amenities required thereof, on and off site, shall be in accordance with the following requirements:

1.    All development and redevelopment shall provide for pedestrian and bicyclist connections on the property, and allow for possible future connections for pedestrians and bicycles with adjoining properties, where deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.

2.    Pedestrian access shall connect to all building entrances with further connections to local pedestrian arteries.

3.    All road and intersection widening and new traffic signals or modification of existing traffic signals required as part of a development or redevelopment shall include appropriate bicycle and pedestrian accommodation.

O.    Sidewalks, crosswalks, walkways, bike racks or other pedestrian access shall be provided to allow access to adjacent properties and between individual businesses within a development.

P.    Traffic calming measures such as crosswalks, bike lanes, rumble strips and landscaped islands may be required.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.8. Aesthetics

A.    The location, size and design, building materials, and operating characteristics of the proposed development shall be compatible with abutting properties, the natural and built environments in the area, and the character of the surrounding area. Consideration will be given to the following:

1.    Harmony in scale, bulk, massing, and density;

2.    Historical, cultural, and architectural features of nearby buildings or a master plan or other planning document, or any plan that has been adopted by the Town.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.9. Utilities – Security – Emergency Systems

A.    The proposed development shall be adequately served by public or private utilities, security systems, and emergency systems.

B.    The Planning Board may require a report from the Board of Health confirming that the proposed site development provides for wastewater treatment and or disposal in a manner that is consistent with regulations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Board of Health.

C.    There shall be sufficient water capacity to meet the domestic and fire flow demands of the proposed use without causing municipal water flow characteristics off site to fall below the standards adopted by the Town.

D.    All electrical, cable and telecommunications services shall be installed underground.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.3. BUFFER AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS

A.    Where a lot in the Retail Business, General Business, or any Industrial District abuts the side or rear boundary line of any Residence District (including any Residence District in an adjacent municipality), there shall be provided a landscaped buffer planted with evergreen trees or shrubs within 20 feet of the district boundary.

B.    In all Industrial Districts, the outdoor storage and display of goods, products, materials, or equipment shall, if visible at normal eye level from any point beyond the boundaries of the premises, be screened from such view.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING


7.1.1. Purposes

The purposes of this Section 7.1 are to ensure the availability of safe and convenient vehicular parking areas; to encourage economic development; to promote safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle occupants, and property and business owners; to reduce impervious surfaces; and to protect adjoining lots and the general public from nuisances created by the noise, fumes and glare of headlights and hazards associated with off-street parking areas.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.2. Applicability

A.    No building or structure shall be used or changed to a category of greater parking demand, determined in accordance with Table 3 below, except in accordance with this Section 7.1.2.

1.    This section shall not apply to any change in use of an existing structure as long as the change does not require an increase of more than 25 percent of the number of parking spaces required herein.

2.    Single-family and two-family dwellings shall be exempt from this Section 7.1.

B.    Administration. This Section 7.1 shall be administered by the Planning Board as part of site plan approval pursuant to Section 2.6 or the special permit process pursuant to Section 2.5, or for a use or activity not subject to site plan review or special permit, by the Building Commissioner.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.3. Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements

The minimum number of off-street parking and loading spaces shall be as set forth in Table 3. Off-street parking requirements for a use not specifically listed in Table 3 shall be determined by the Building Commissioner based on a listed use of similar characteristics of parking demand generation.

Table 3. Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements  

	Use	Minimum or Maximum Number of Parking Spaces

	Single-family or two-family dwelling	Minimum two spaces per unit

	Dwelling units, excluding senior housing or other age-restricted residential uses	Minimum 1.5 spaces for units with up to 2 bedrooms; 2 spaces per unit for more than 2 bedrooms

	Senior housing, independent living units	Minimum 1 space per dwelling unit plus 1 space per 4 units for visitor parking

	Assisted living residence or nursing home	Minimum 0.5 space per room plus 1 space per 4 units for visitor parking

	Dwelling units above the ground floor of a commercial building	Minimum 1.5 spaces per unit

	Bed and breakfast, renting of rooms as transient guest quarters, or boarding house	Minimum 1 space per guest room

	Place of assembly with fixed seating, such as a church, stadium, assembly hall	Minimum 1 space for every 3 seats or, when benches are used, 1 space per 8 lineal feet of bench

	Business, professional, or governmental office, bank	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft. on the first floor; 1 space per 400 sq. ft. on the second floor

	Retail store	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft.

	Shopping center	Maximum 1 space per 200 sq. ft.

	Medical office or clinic	Minimum 1 space per 150 sq. ft.

	Veterinary hospital	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft.

	Business or personal service establishment	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft.

	Hotel or motel	Minimum 1 space per guest room and 1 space per 2 employees on the largest shift (where restaurant is included, see below for restaurant parking)

	Warehouse/distribution facility, wholesale showroom	Minimum 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. for a showroom

	Manufacturing	Minimum 1 space per 1,000 sq. ft.

	Restaurant	Minimum 1 space for every 3 seats

	Automobile service station	Minimum 1 space per fueling position plus 2 spaces per service bay plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft. including retail/convenience store areas. Temporary parking at fueling positions shall not count toward the sq. ft. parking requirement.

	Vehicle repair shops	Minimum 1 space per 300 sq. ft. plus 2 spaces per service bay

	Other uses not specified herein 	Where a use is not specifically referenced in this table, the minimum parking requirement for the most nearly comparable use or industry standards shall apply as determined by the Building Commissioner

	*In all instances in Table 3, sq. ft. shall mean net floor area.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.4. General Parking Requirements

Except as may be provided elsewhere in this Section 7.1, the following parking requirements shall be met: 

A.    Computation of Required Parking Spaces.

1.    The minimum number of parking spaces shall be the largest whole number obtained after calculating the parking requirements in accordance with Table 3. Any fractional parking space shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

2.    For a parcel with two or more uses, the minimum number of parking spaces shall be the sum of the minimum number of spaces required for each use, determined in accordance with Table 3, except as may be authorized pursuant to Section 7.1.5.

B.    On-Premises Parking Required. All required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same premises as the uses they serve except as provided in Section 7.1.6.

C.    Dimensional Standards. An off-street parking space shall be an all-weather, surfaced area having a width of not less than nine feet and a length of not less than 18 feet for angle parking or 22 feet for parallel parking. The minimum dimensions for handicapped parking shall be in accordance with the State Building Code.

D.    Each required loading space shall be at least 10 feet wide, 40 feet long, and 14 feet high.

E.    Parking Area Design.

1.    Surface. Parking areas shall have durable, all-weather paved surfaces and shall provide for the satisfactory management of surface water. Pavement materials shall be approved by the Department of Public Works. Parking areas composed of pervious or semi-pervious surfaces are encouraged in low traffic areas such as reserve parking and may be used to meet all or any part of the required parking, subject to environmental limitations.

2.    Parking areas shall be designed that no vehicle will be required to back onto a public way in order to enter or exit from a parking space.

F.    Location of Parking Spaces.

1.    For retail, office, and other commercial uses, no off-street parking shall be located between the front building line and the street without a special permit from the Planning Board and only if no other practical alternative exists.

2.    For residential uses, off-street parking between the front building line and the street is prohibited except for parking in a designated, paved driveway located on one side of the building or in a garage accessory to the residential use. When the off-street parking is located in a driveway and the closest abutter on the driveway side of the lot is a single-family or two-family dwelling, there shall be a minimum landscaped buffer at least five feet in width the full length of the driveway within ten feet of the lot line.

3.    In no event shall vehicular parking spaces be located within the minimum required setback in any district.

G.    Off-street parking areas shall be designed and constructed so as to maximize safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle occupants, and property and business owners and their customers. Impacts on scenic roads, historic districts, natural resources, and community character shall be minimized. Parking and loading spaces shall be so arranged so as not to permit or require the backing of motor vehicles into a public way or street.

H.    Illumination of Off-Street Parking Areas. Any fixture used to illuminate any parking area shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from the street and away from adjoining residential uses.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.5. Reduced Parking

The number of parking spaces required pursuant to Table 3 may be reduced by special permit from the Planning Board, subject to the following or as otherwise provided for in Section 7.2.7(H). 

1.    The applicant shall demonstrate to the Board’s satisfaction that a reduction is warranted due to circumstances such as but not limited to:

a)    Peak parking needs generated by the proposed uses occur at different times. It shall be the applicant’s burden to demonstrate to the Board’s satisfaction that the proposed uses are noncompeting. In mixed-use developments, applicants may propose a reduction in parking requirements based on an analysis of peak demand for noncompeting uses. In these cases, the Planning Board may determine that the parking requirement for the largest of the uses (in terms of required parking spaces) is sufficient.

b)    Demographic or other characteristics of site users.

c)    Safe, convenient forms of pedestrian access between the proposed development and nearby residential uses.

d)    The presence of a public or private parking facility within 400 feet of the proposed use.

e)    The Board may grant a special permit for reduced parking only upon finding that:

i.    The reduced number of parking spaces is consistent with the general purposes of this Section 7.1.

ii.    The proposed number of parking spaces will be sufficient for the proposed uses.

iii.    The decrease in required off-street parking is supported by a parking analysis prepared by a registered professional engineer. Such analysis shall consider existing and proposed uses on the site; rate of parking turnover for various uses; expected peak traffic and parking loads for various uses based on customary hours of operation; availability of public transportation; industry parking standards for various uses; and other factors.

2.    In granting a special permit for reduced parking, the Board may impose reasonable conditions including but not limited to requiring additional parking should uses change over time, or requirements to designate an area on the site plan for reserve parking. Further, the Board may require the applicant to construct the reserve parking if, within one year of full occupancy of the development, the Building Commissioner determines that the parking constructed on the site is not adequate to meet the project’s actual parking demand.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.1.6. Shared Parking

By special permit from the Planning Board, the off-street parking required for two or more buildings or uses may be provided in combined facilities on adjacent lots, provided there is a legally enforceable shared parking agreement executed by all parties concerned and approved by the Planning Board as part of the special permit process and recorded with the Registry of Deeds.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2. REVIEW CONSIDERATIONS FOR MAJOR DEVELOPMENT


7.2.1. Purposes

The purpose of these project review considerations is to control the impact of development in the nonresidential districts on nearby single-family and two-family neighborhoods and the overall quality of life in Southbridge.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.2. Applicability

A.    This Section 7.2 applies in any nonresidential use requiring a special permit or site plan review and to any multifamily use, as applicable. As applicable, the Planning Board or other approval authority shall consider and apply the following factors during its review of special permits and site plan applications for projects covered by this Section 7.2.

B.    Exemptions.

1.    Emergency responses performed by a private entity or a public agency and fire or burglar alarms.

2.    Parades, fairs, or outdoor entertainment between the hours of 7:00 am. and 11:00 p.m. only; provided, that a permit for such activity has been granted by the Town Council and the permit is for not more than 10 days.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.3. Outdoor Lighting

A.    The proposed development shall not produce lighting so as to unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of property within the Town. Lighting practices and systems shall:

1.    Reduce light pollution, light trespass and glare in order to preserve and enhance the natural, scenic, and aesthetic qualities of the Town;

2.    Conserve energy and decrease lighting cost without decreasing nighttime safety, security, and productivity; and

3.    Preserve the night sky as a natural resource to enhance nighttime enjoyment of property within the Town.

B.    All outdoor light fixtures shall be shielded so as to be consistent with the purposes of this Section 7.2.

C.    Direct light from the light source shall be confined within the property boundaries when the abutting property is used for residential purposes.

D.    Outdoor lighting shall be designed to provide the minimum intensity needed at any particular time.

E.    Preferred surfacing for lighted areas shall be of materials such as blacktop which reflect a relatively small fraction of incident light. Parking area lighting shall be reduced or eliminated outside business hours. The Planning Board may require an electrical configuration for parking lots which supports shut-off for specific unused areas to reduce the glare from lighting.

F.    The operation of laser shows or searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited; provided, however, that same may be authorized for a period of not more than 14 days by special permit issued by the Planning Board.

G.    Indoor light sources will not be projected outside in a manner to defeat the intent of this section.

H.    Outdoor light fixtures using sodium vapor or metal halide lamp or lamps shall be prohibited unless specifically authorized by special permit from the Planning Board.

I.    Outdoor light fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor sign shall be mounted on top of the sign structure or otherwise restricted to prevent up-light and light trespass.

J.    No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted. Processes, such as arc welding, which create light flashes shall be confined within buildings or shielded to prevent either direct glare or flashing.

K.    Height of Fixtures.

1.    Luminaires attached to a building for area lighting shall be mounted on the wall no higher than 10 feet above grade unless waived by the Planning Board.

2.    Pole-mounted exterior lighting fixture types shall be mounted no higher than 15 feet above grade unless waived by the Planning Board.

L.    Except when necessary for site safety or security, all external lighting shall be extinguished one half hour after the facility is closed for the business day. Such lighting may be timed to resume one-half hour prior to the arrival of the first employee on the premises.

M.    Signs may be illuminated subject to conditions of the special permit or site plan approval.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.4. Landscaping and Screening

A.    The proposed development shall:

1.    Maximize and retain open space;

2.    Be integrated into the natural landscape;

3.    Minimize adverse environmental impacts to such features as wetlands, floodplains, and water resource protection recharge areas; and

4.    Minimize tree, vegetation, and soil removal, and grade change.

B.    The proposed landscaping shall require native and drought-tolerant species and prohibit invasive or nonnative plants.

C.    Except for a required sidewalk, there shall be a landscaped buffer strip that is the lesser of 20 feet or the full front setback in the district, continuous except for approved driveways, adjacent to any public road to visually separate parking and other uses from the road. The buffer strip shall be planted with grass, medium height shrubs, evergreens and shade trees having a minimum 2½ – 3 inches in caliper measured four feet from ground level planted at least every 30 feet along the road frontage. Evergreens and shade trees shall be at least six feet in height at time of planting. Trees or shrubs shall be set back a sufficient distance from all street or driveway intersections so that they do not present an obstruction to sight lines.

D.    There shall be a continuous landscaped buffer strip at least 10 feet wide, maintained in perpetuity, between a Business District or an Industrial District and any Residential District or property line. Along the zoning district or property line, the landscaped buffer strip shall be of a density to substantially screen the proposed development from view. Plantings of various approved evergreen species are encouraged and shall be planted at a minimum height of six feet.

E.    Parking areas containing over 20 spaces shall have at least one shade tree per 10 parking spaces. Each shade tree shall be a minimum of 2½ inches in diameter and located either in the parking area or within 10 feet of it. At least 5 percent of the interior of the parking area shall be maintained with landscaping, including trees, in landscape islands or plots with no more than 20 parking spaces between each island or plot. Trees shall be located to provide visual relief from sun and wind interruption within the parking area and assure safe patterns of internal pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Other traffic calming measures such as crosswalks, bike lanes, rumble-strips and landscape islands may be required as necessary.

F.    Fencing may be allowed in lieu of or in conjunction with plantings. The design and height of fencing, with accompanying landscaping, shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board.

G.    Retaining walls shall be constructed to a maximum height of six feet unless waived by the Planning Board. If site conditions require elevation changes of greater than six feet, retaining walls shall be terraced and landscaped. Retaining walls facing residential districts shall be solid fieldstone or fieldstone veneer or other similar material. Unless used within the Manufacturing Districts, vertical cast-in-place concrete or concrete blocks shall not be permitted.

H.    Exposed storage areas, refuse disposal facilities, machinery, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings, and structures and other unsightly uses shall be screened from view from neighboring properties and streets using dense, hardy evergreen plantings or earthen berms, or wall or tight fence complemented by evergreen plantings.

I.    All landscaping features, structures, and areas shall be properly maintained. Dead shrubs or trees shall be replaced within two growing seasons as a condition of approval.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.5. Stormwater Management

A.    The proposed development shall include adequate provisions or measures to prevent pollution of surface or groundwater, minimize erosion and sedimentation, prevent changes in groundwater levels, increased run-off, and potential for flooding, and minimize adverse impacts to neighboring properties by flooding from excessive runoff.

B.    All development shall comply with the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection’s (DEP) Stormwater Management Policy (including Phase III Stormwater requirements) to ensure that the rate of surface water runoff from the site shall not be increased after construction.

C.    Dry wells shall be used only where other methods are unfeasible and shall require oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contaminants.

D.    The Planning Board shall refer any special permit application to the Department of Public Works for its determination that the storm drainage system is consistent with DEP Stormwater Management Policy and that there is sufficient storm drainage capacity to meet the flow demands of the proposed development on site, and, where applicable, without causing surge in those storm drainage lines which serve the project and are consistent with the standards of the Town.

E.    During the construction phase, temporary diversions, berms, grassed waterways, special culverts, shoulder dikes or such other mechanical measures as may be necessary may be required by the Board to intercept and divert surface water runoff. Runoff flow shall not be routed through areas of protected vegetation or revegetated slopes and other areas. Temporary runoff from erosion and sedimentation controls shall be directed according to BMPs, such as vegetated swales. Retaining walls may be required where side slopes are steeper than a ratio of 3:1.

F.    Erosion and sedimentation controls shall be constructed in accordance with the DEP Storm Water Guidance manual and the EPA’s Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan guidelines and requirements. Topsoil and loam storage areas shall be subject to these standards.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.6. Site Development Standards

A.    To the extent practical, the proposed development shall be located to preserve and enhance the natural features of the site, to avoid disturbances of environmentally sensitive areas, to minimize adverse impacts of development on adjoining properties, to minimize the alteration of the natural features of the site and to preserve and enhance scenic points, historic buildings and places and similar community assets which add value and attractiveness to the project and the Town.

B.    Site/building design shall preserve natural topography outside of the development footprint to reduce unnecessary land disturbance and to preserve natural drainage on the site.

C.    Clearing for utility trenching shall be limited to the minimum area necessary to maneuver a backhoe or other construction equipment. Tunneling for utilities installation other than water should be utilized wherever feasible to protect root systems of trees.

D.    Site Design.

1.    Placement of buildings, structures, or parking facilities shall not detract from the site's scenic qualities and shall blend with the natural landscape.

2.    Building sites shall be directed away from the crest of hills so as not to break the ridgeline, and foundations shall be constructed to reflect the natural terrain.

3.    Sites shall be designed in such a way as to avoid impacts to rare and endangered species and wildlife habitat on a site, and to maintain contiguous forested areas.

E.    The Planning Board may require applicants to submit the proposed development plan to the Historical Commission and/or the Massachusetts Historical Commission for review and comment regarding possible archaeological or historical resources on the site.

F.    Priority shall be given to the preservation of existing stands of trees, trees at site perimeter, contiguous vegetation with adjacent sites (particularly existing sites protected through conservation restrictions), and specimen trees.

1.    Understory vegetation beneath the drip line of preserved trees shall be retained in an undisturbed state.

2.    During clearing and/or construction activities, all vegetation to be retained shall be surrounded by temporary protective fencing or other measures before any clearing or grading occurs and maintained until all construction work is completed and the site is cleaned up. Barriers shall be large enough to encompass the essential root zone of all vegetation to be protected. All vegetation within the protective fencing shall be retained in an undisturbed state.

G.    Limit of Clearing. Development envelopes for structures, driveways, wastewater disposal, lawn areas and utility work shall be designated to limit clearing and grading.

1.    In order to minimize the clearing and grading on a site associated with construction activities such as parking of construction vehicles, offices/trailers, stockpiling of equipment/materials, such activities may be limited to areas already planned for permanent structures.

2.    Topsoil shall not be stockpiled in areas of protected trees or wetlands or their vegetated buffers.

H.    Finished grades no greater than a 3:1 slope are preferred, while preserving, matching, or blending with the natural contours and undulations of the land to the greatest extent possible. Finished grades of 1:1 slope or 2:1 slope are allowed with stabilization if approved by the Planning Board. Finished grade shall be no higher than the trunk flare(s) of trees to be retained. The design of grade changes at the base of existing large trees shall be subject to the approval of the Tree Warden or its agent.

I.    The Planning Board may limit the extent of a site exposed at any one time through phasing of construction operations. Effective sequencing shall occur within the boundaries of natural drainage areas.

J.    Proper revegetation techniques shall be employed during construction using native plant species, proper seed bed preparation, fertilizer and mulching to protect germinating plants. Revegetation shall occur on cleared sites within 7 (seven) calendar days of final grading and shall occur during the planting season appropriate to the selected plant species.

K.    A minimum of 6" of topsoil shall be placed on all disturbed surfaces which are proposed to be planted.

L.    The Planning Board may require that water for the purpose of irrigation shall be provided by an on-site well, after consultation with the Water Department.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.7. Pedestrian and Vehicular Access – Traffic Management

A.    The proposed development shall be designed with a forecast for the next five years from the time of application to:

1.    Minimize hazards to public health and safety as a result of traffic;

2.    Provide safe access and circulation on the site for expected vehicles, pedestrians, and emergency vehicles; 

3.    Provide off-site traffic mitigation, where required, to offset the impact of the development;

4.    Reduce the traffic impacts of the proposed development on the area and the Town by incorporating traffic management devices; and

5.    Minimize the impact on scenic roads, historic districts, natural resources, and community character. The development shall not degrade safety for pedestrians, bicyclists, motor vehicle occupants, or property.

B.    To the extent feasible, access to nonresidential uses and structures shall be provided via one of the following:

1.    Access via a common driveway serving adjacent lots or premises, which are hereby authorized for nonresidential uses, provided there is a legally enforceable shared parking agreement executed by all parties concerned and approved by the Planning Board as part of the special permit process and recorded with the Registry of Deeds;

2.    Access via an existing side street;

3.    Access via a cul-de-sac or loop road shared by adjacent lots or premises.

C.    Access via roadways abutting residential districts shall be avoided where possible.

D.    Access and egress to a development with frontage on more than one street shall be in a manner that causes the least impact to the surrounding neighborhoods as determined by the Planning Board.

E.    Driveways. Each development shall be served by an adequate driveway.

1.    The Planning Board may, in certain circumstances, allow additional driveways as a condition of approval where the access is shared or the project has frontage on two separate streets.

2.    All driveways shall be designed to afford adequate sight distance to pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists exiting to public ways. Improvements may be required on the public way for vehicular turning movements in or out of the site and safe pedestrian access to adjoining sidewalks, paths, walking trails or bikeways.

3.    Curb Cuts. Curb cuts shall be limited to the minimum width for safe entering and exiting, and shall in no case exceed 30 feet in width unless waived by the Planning Board for industrial truck traffic. The location of driveway openings in relation to traffic and to adjacent streets shall provide for the convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement within the site. The number of curb cuts on state and local roads shall be minimized.

F.    Interior Circulation. The proposed development shall assure safe interior circulation on the site by separating pedestrian, bikeways, and vehicular traffic.

G.    Transportation Plan Approval. The proposed development shall be subject to transportation plan approval by the Planning Board. The transportation plan shall consist of the following information:

1.    A plan showing the proposed parking, loading, and traffic circulation within the site; access and egress points; and other features related to traffic generated by the proposed use.

2.    A traffic study, prepared by a qualified traffic engineer, detailing the expected traffic impacts. For proposed development of 25,000 gross square feet or more, the traffic study shall substantially conform to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development: A Recommended Practice. The Planning Board shall approve the geographic scope and content of the study.

3.    Proposed mitigation measures, if any, such as left-turn lanes, roadway widening, sign-age, signalization of intersections.

4.    For proposed development of 25,000 gross square feet or more, the applicant shall submit a transportation demand management (TDM) plan. The TDM plan shall provide information on the number of expected person trips to and from the site, broken down by various travel modes (e.g., single occupancy vehicle, carpool, walk, bicycle, commuter rail, shuttle bus, etc.). The TDM plan shall also incorporate one or more of the following techniques to reduce the number of single occupancy vehicle trips by employees coming to and departing from the proposed use:

a)    Establishment of or contribution to a traffic management association (TMA) within the region, which shall provide shuttle services for employees and other services as may be appropriate;

b)    Employee carpools or vanpools sponsored by the employer or the TDM;

c)    Monetary incentives to employees who do not use a parking space;

d)    On-site shower facilities and/or bicycle racks for employees who do not drive to work;

e)    Other techniques as may be deemed appropriate by the Planning Board or its traffic consultant.

H.    Reduction in Parking. In consideration of the applicant providing one or more of the above measures to reduce vehicular traffic to and from the site, the Planning Board may reduce the number of required parking spaces below what would ordinarily be required under Section 7.1. To be considered for a reduction, the applicant’s traffic engineer shall determine and justify the parking demand for the project, as well as reduction in needed parking spaces attributable to each traffic management measure.

I.    Level of Service Maintenance or Improvement.

1.    If the proposed project will result in an intersection level of service below a rating of LOS D, or result in a roadway volume to capacity rating greater than 1.0, the applicant may be required to provide detailed plans (including reconstruction concepts), that when implemented would result in an intersection level of service rating of D or better. 

2.    If the proposed project will result in a reduction in level-of-service of one letter grade or an increase of 10 seconds of delay to a signalized or unsignalized intersection, the applicant may be required to provide detailed plans that when implemented would result in a return to existing conditions.

J.    Dangerous Intersections. The Planning Board may require mitigation for any net increase in traffic volumes of 10 percent or more at an intersection that has an accident history of more than five accidents in the last three years for which data is available.

K.    Sight Distance. Acceptable sight distance shall be provided and maintained at all access locations, egress locations, and all intersections affected by the development. At a minimum, these sight distances shall meet the stricter of the Massachusetts Highway Department and American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials standards for safe-stopping sight distances.

L.    Maximum Parking. The maximum parking allowed for a development shall be no more than the minimum number of spaces required under zoning, unless waived.

M.    Mitigation. The Planning Board may require as a condition of any special permit off-site improvements to mitigate the impact of the proposed development. Such improvements include intersection widening and traffic signals or the components of the TDM plan. All road and intersection improvements proposed as part of development and redevelopment shall be consistent with local plans.

N.    Pedestrian and Bicycle Safety. Pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and the amenities required thereof, on and off site, shall be in accordance with the following requirements:

1.    All development and redevelopment shall provide for pedestrian and bicyclist connections on the property, and allow for possible future connections for pedestrians and bicycles with adjoining properties, where deemed appropriate by the Planning Board.

2.    Pedestrian access shall connect to all building entrances with further connections to local pedestrian arteries.

3.    All road and intersection widening and new traffic signals or modification of existing traffic signals required as part of a development or redevelopment shall include appropriate bicycle and pedestrian accommodation.

O.    Sidewalks, crosswalks, walkways, bike racks or other pedestrian access shall be provided to allow access to adjacent properties and between individual businesses within a development.

P.    Traffic calming measures such as crosswalks, bike lanes, rumble strips and landscaped islands may be required.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.8. Aesthetics

A.    The location, size and design, building materials, and operating characteristics of the proposed development shall be compatible with abutting properties, the natural and built environments in the area, and the character of the surrounding area. Consideration will be given to the following:

1.    Harmony in scale, bulk, massing, and density;

2.    Historical, cultural, and architectural features of nearby buildings or a master plan or other planning document, or any plan that has been adopted by the Town.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.2.9. Utilities – Security – Emergency Systems

A.    The proposed development shall be adequately served by public or private utilities, security systems, and emergency systems.

B.    The Planning Board may require a report from the Board of Health confirming that the proposed site development provides for wastewater treatment and or disposal in a manner that is consistent with regulations of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Board of Health.

C.    There shall be sufficient water capacity to meet the domestic and fire flow demands of the proposed use without causing municipal water flow characteristics off site to fall below the standards adopted by the Town.

D.    All electrical, cable and telecommunications services shall be installed underground.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


7.3. BUFFER AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS

A.    Where a lot in the Retail Business, General Business, or any Industrial District abuts the side or rear boundary line of any Residence District (including any Residence District in an adjacent municipality), there shall be provided a landscaped buffer planted with evergreen trees or shrubs within 20 feet of the district boundary.

B.    In all Industrial Districts, the outdoor storage and display of goods, products, materials, or equipment shall, if visible at normal eye level from any point beyond the boundaries of the premises, be screened from such view.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


SECTION 8. SPECIAL REGULATIONS


8.1. OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT


8.1.1. Purposes

The purposes of this Section 8.1 are to:

A.    Promote efficient use of land in harmony with the Town’s natural and heritage landscapes;

B.    Preserve valuable open space;

C.    Foster compact development patterns using flexible density and lot dimensional and to promote and encourage creativity in neighborhood design;

D.    Provide diverse and energy-efficient housing at all market levels;

E.    Protect surface water and groundwater, wetlands, floodplains, agricultural lands, wildlife, and other natural resources; and

F.    Promote aesthetics and the amenities of the Town.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.2. Applicability

To encourage open space design, OSRD is allowed by right, subject only to the requirements of the Planning Board’s subdivision rules and regulations (“subdivision regulations”) and this Section 8.1. An OSRD that does not require approval under subdivision control is allowed by right subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board in accordance with this section and Section 2.6. There is no minimum tract size for an OSRD.

An open space residential design (OSRD) may be proposed in any residential district. All subdivisions shall comply with the open space design provisions of this Section 8.1 unless the Planning Board grants a special permit to allow a development that deviates from the requirements herein. Such deviations may be approved if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed alternative development configuration provides adequate protection of the site’s environmental resources and fulfills the purposes of this Section 8.1 as well as or better than an OSRD.

This Section 8.1 applies only to subdivisions of land as defined in G.L. c. 41, §81L, and not to construction of homes or businesses on individual lots that existed prior to September 14, 2018, or to lots created through the approval not required (ANR) process with frontage on public ways existing as such as of September 14, 2018, described in the subdivision regulations.

If the proposed open space design also involves one or more common driveways, density bonuses, or any other use or purpose that requires a special permit, the proceedings for all special permits and the site plan review for the lot configuration shall occur in one consolidated special permit process with the Planning Board.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.3. Development Impact Statement and Conservation Analysis

The applicant shall present enough information about the site’s environmental and open space resources to enable the Planning Board to determine whether a proposed OSRD (or development by special permit that deviates from the requirements for an OSRD) satisfies the purposes and standards of this Section 8.1. Accordingly, the applicant shall prepare and submit a development impact statement (DIS) including a conservation analysis as described in the Planning Board’s subdivision regulations. For an OSRD that is not a subdivision, and that is presented as a site plan review application under Section 2.6, the applicant shall not be required to submit a full DIS. However, the Planning Board may require the submission of all or part of a conservation analysis as described in the subdivision regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.4. Conservation Analysis and Findings

A.    Prior to filing an application, an applicant is encouraged to meet with the Planning Board to discuss the conservation resources on the site. At this meeting, the Planning Board shall indicate to the applicant which land is likely to have the most conservation value and be most important to preserve and where development may be most appropriately located.

B.    In the case of a proposed plan that deviates from the requirements of this Section 8.1, if the Planning Board determines that the land with the greatest conservation value cannot be protected except by use of an OSRD, the Planning Board shall deny the special permit and require that the applicant submit a plan that complies with this Section 8.1.

C.    The Planning Board, in consultation with the Conservation Commission, shall study the conservation analysis, may conduct field visits, and shall formally determine which land should be preserved and where development may be located. The Planning Board shall make written findings supporting this determination (the “conservation findings”). The Planning Board shall deny any application that does not include sufficient information to make conservation findings or that does not preserve land that the Planning Board determines should be preserved from development as a result of the conservation analysis and findings.

D.    The Planning Board’s conservation findings shall be incorporated into its decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. The conservation findings shall show land to be permanently preserved by a conservation restriction, as well as recommended conservation uses, ownership, and management guidelines for such land. The conservation findings shall also indicate preferred locations for development if the plan is denied based upon such findings.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.5. Basic Requirements

A.    The proposed OSRD plan shall show that at least 50 percent total acreage on the site will be preserved by conservation restriction, based upon the conservation findings.

B.    The maximum number of dwelling units in an OSRD shall be calculated by a formula based on the net acreage of the property. The formula is intended to take into account certain development limitations that make some land less developable than other land. This calculation involves two steps, calculating the net acreage and dividing by the base allowed density.

1.    To determine net acreage, subtract the following from the total (gross) acreage of the site:

a)    Half of the acreage of land with slopes of 20 percent or greater (2,000 square feet or more of contiguous sloped area at least 10 feet in width); and

b)    The total acreage of lakes, ponds, land subject to easements or restrictions prohibiting development, 100-year floodplains, and all freshwater wetlands as defined in G.L. c. 131, §40, as delineated by an accredited wetlands specialist and approved by the Southbridge Conservation Commission.

Documentation of wetlands and site constraints shall be submitted in accordance with the Planning Board’s OSRD regulations.

2.    To determine the base maximum number of allowable dwelling units on the site, divide the net acreage by 2 in the R1 or TF district for a project that will be connected to sewer, and by 1.5 for a project that will not be connected to the sewer system; and in the R3 district, divide the net acreage by 3. Fractional units of less than 0.5 shall be rounded down and 0.5 or more shall be rounded up.

C.    The unit count determined above may be increased through density bonuses designed to advance important goals of the Southbridge master plan. Density bonuses are given by special permit at the discretion of the Planning Board based upon the expected public benefit. They are calculated by first determining the base allowable unit count without rounding fractional units up or down, and then multiplying that number by 100 percent plus the percentages listed below. Resulting fractional units, if any, shall be rounded up or down as in Section 8.1.5(B)(2).

1.    If the applicant allows deeded public access to the open space portion of the property and the Planning Board finds that such public access provides a significant recreational benefit to the Town: a maximum of 10 percent.

2.    If the applicant restricts ownership or rental and occupancy of units allowed by Section 8.1.5(B) as affordable housing and makes a binding commitment to construct such affordable dwellings: a maximum of 50 percent. For every unit dedicated as an affordable unit, the Planning Board may approve up to two bonus market rate units, up to the maximum 50 percent.

3.    If the applicant preserves as permanent open space more than the minimum required percentage: a maximum 10 percent density bonus per additional 5 percent of the parcel preserved as open space.

D.    The housing types allowed in an OSRD include single-family, two-family, or multifamily dwellings. The subdivision approval and special permit/site plan requirements shall be fulfilled concurrently in one proceeding to the extent practical. Any OSRD application involving two-family or multifamily dwellings shall include a site plan that shows the location, layout, height, and setbacks of such dwellings. Accessory apartments shall be permitted in OSRD developments and shall not be counted toward the total maximum number of units in the development.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.6. Dimensional and Design Requirements

A.    Minimum Lot Sizes in Open Space Designs. The limiting factor on lot size in an OSRD is the need for adequate water supply and sewage disposal. Accordingly, there is no required minimum lot size for zoning purposes. This does not affect the power of the Board of Health to require areas on a lot for the disposal of sewage and the protection of water supply.

B.    Setbacks, Road Frontage, and Road Requirements. The minimum setback shall be 10 feet from any property line. There shall be no numerical requirements for lot frontage in an OSRD; provided, that each lot has legally and practically adequate vehicular access to a public way or a way approved under the subdivision regulations across its own frontage or via a shared driveway approved by the Planning Board. All dwellings must comply with applicable Board of Health requirements. The Planning Board may modify the applicable road construction requirements for new roads within an OSRD as provided in the subdivision regulations if it finds that such modifications will be consistent with the purposes of this Section 8.1 and the master plan.

C.    Arrangement of Lots.

1.    Lots shall be located and arranged in a manner that protects views from roads and other publicly accessible points; farmland; wildlife habitat; large intact forest areas; hilltops; ponds; steep slopes; and other sensitive environmental resources, while facilitating pedestrian circulation. Generally, residential lots shall be located the minimum feasible distance from existing public roadways. The Planning Board shall take into consideration the conservation analysis and findings in approving the arrangement of lots.

2.    Lot, roadway, and driveway layouts, land alterations, and placement of structures shall follow any design guidelines for OSRD which may be adopted by the Planning Board.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.7. Open Space

A.    Open space set aside in an OSRD or as a condition of any special permit or site plan approval shall be permanently preserved from development as required by this Section 8.1. The Planning Board may not require such open space to be accessible to the public unless a density bonus is allowed under Section 8.1.5(C). Any development permitted in connection with the setting aside of open space land shall not compromise the conservation value of such open space land, based on the conservation findings of the Planning Board.

B.    All land required to be set aside as open space in connection with any OSRD shall be so noted on any approved plans and shall be protected by a permanent conservation restriction to be held by the Town of Southbridge, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or a nonprofit conservation organization qualified to hold conservation restrictions under G.L. c. 184, §31, and also qualified to hold tax-deductible conservation easements under Section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code. The restriction shall specify the permitted uses of the restricted land which may otherwise constitute development. The restriction may permit, but the Planning Board may not require, public access or access by residents of the development to the protected open space land.

C.    Protected open space may be held in private ownership, owned in common by a homeowner’s association (HOA), dedicated to the Town of Southbridge or state government with their consent, transferred to a nonprofit organization acceptable to the Planning Board, or held in such other form of ownership as the Planning Board finds appropriate to manage the open space land and protect its conservation value.

If the land is owned in common by an HOA, such HOA shall be established in accordance with the following:

1.    The HOA must be created before final approval of the development and must comply with all applicable provisions of state law.

2.    Membership must be mandatory for each lot owner, who must be required by recorded covenants and restrictions to pay fees to the HOA for taxes, insurance, and maintenance of common open space, private roads, and other common facilities.

3.    The HOA must be responsible for liability insurance, property taxes, the maintenance of recreational and other facilities, private roads, and any shared driveways.

4.    Property owners must pay their pro rata share of the costs in this subsection, and the assessment levied by the HOA must be able to become a lien on the property.

5.    The HOA must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs.

6.    Ownership shall be structured in such a manner that real property taxing authorities may satisfy property tax claims against the open space lands by proceeding against individual owners in the HOA and the dwelling units they each own.

7.    The Town Attorney shall find that the HOA documents satisfy the conditions listed above and such other conditions as the Planning Board shall deem necessary.

D.    Maintenance Standards.

1.    Ongoing maintenance standards shall be established as a condition of development approval to ensure that the open space land is not used for storage or dumping of refuse, junk, or other offensive or hazardous materials. Such standards shall be enforceable by the Town against any owner of open space land, including an HOA.

2.    If the Board of Selectmen finds that the provisions of subsection (D)(1) are being violated to the extent that the condition of the land constitutes a public nuisance, it may, upon 30 days’ written notice to the owner, enter the premises for necessary maintenance, and the cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed ratably against the landowner or, in the case of an HOA, the owners of properties within the development, and shall, if unpaid, become a property tax lien on such property or properties.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.8. OSRD Rules and Regulations

The Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations, including administrative procedures and design guidelines, to implement this Section 8.1.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.2. AGRICULTURALLY RELATED USES


8.2.1. Purposes

The purpose of this Section 8.2 is to promote and maintain local farming. Toward that end, this Section 8.2 provides for a variety of agriculturally related uses and farm-affiliated businesses that are not explicitly exempt under G.L. c. 40A, §3, but which the Town of Southbridge deems important for the preservation of a rural economy in order to:

1.    Maintain and promote agriculture and its related activities, such as agricultural tourism;

2.    Preserve open space and farmland;

3.    Maintain both an agricultural heritage and a rural character;

4.    Increase community benefits by having fresh, local produce for sale; and

5.    Increase positive growing businesses that contribute to the economy of the region and the Commonwealth.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.2.2. Applicability.

The provisions of this Section 8.2 shall apply to any farm as defined in this By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.2.3. Use Regulations

A.    The following agriculturally related uses are permitted in any district:

1.    Seasonal outdoors mazes of agricultural origin such as straw bales or corn.

2.    Petting farm, animal display, and pony rides.

3.    Wagon, sleigh and hayrides.

4.    Nature trails.

5.    Open air or covered picnic area with restrooms.

6.    Educational classes, lectures, seminars.

B.    The following farm-affiliated businesses and uses are permitted in any district, subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 2.6 and this Section 8.2:

1.    Storage, retail or wholesale marketing, or processing of agricultural products into a value-added agricultural product is permitted if more than 50 percent of the stored, processed, or merchandised products are produced by the farm operator for at least 3 of the immediately preceding 5 years.

2.    Cider mill or winery selling product, in a tasting room, derived from crops grown primarily on site for at least 3 of the immediately preceding 5 years.

3.    Historical agricultural exhibits.

4.    Gift shop for the sale of agricultural products and agriculturally related products.

5.    Designated parking for 20 or more vehicles.

6.    Commercial or cooperative kitchen, cannery, or co-packing facility.

C.    The following uses are allowed only by special permit from the Planning Board:

1.    Restaurant related to the agricultural use on the site.

2.    Nonagriculturally related uses, such as small-scale entertainment venue or organized meeting space, made available for rent for weddings, corporate picnics, birthday parties, and the like.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3. SENIOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT


8.3.1. Purposes

The purpose of this Section 8.3 is to provide for a variety of housing types, settings, and residential services to meet the needs of people as they age.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.2. Applicability

A.    The Planning Board may grant a special permit for a senior residential development in accordance with this Section 8.3 on any tract of land meeting the following requirements:

1.    Two or more acres of land;

2.    Minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public way; and

3.    Public water available at the street frontage.

B.    A senior residential development is intended for people age 55 or over. As such, buildings and site improvements in a senior residential development shall provide for visitability and universal design in accordance with the provisions of this Section 8.3.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.3. Uses

A.    A senior residential development shall include one or more of the following uses:

1.    Cottage dwellings.

2.    Two-family dwellings.

3.    Townhouse dwellings.

4.    Independent living units.

5.    Assisted living residence, with or without memory care units.

B.    Continuing care retirement community, which shall include an assisted living residence and one or more of the other uses listed above, and may include a skilled nursing facility or physical rehabilitation facility with not more than 100 beds.

C.    An assisted living residence or continuing care retirement community may include the following nonresidential uses for the benefit of its residents and their guests; provided, that aggregate floor area for the nonresidential uses shall not exceed 10 percent of the total gross floor area of the buildings in the development:

1.    Retail, up to a maximum of 2,500 sq. ft.

2.    Personal services.

3.    Medical office or clinic.

4.    Community center or senior center.

D.    A senior residential development may also include the following uses:

1.    Adult day care center.

2.    Accessory uses for residents, employees, and guests, such as central or common dining facilities or laundry facilities, or indoor or outdoor recreation facilities.

3.    Conservation or agricultural uses.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.4. Basic Requirements

A.    A senior residential development shall comply with the following density regulations:

	Use	Maximum Density	Maximum Building Height (Feet)

	Cottage dwellings or two-family dwellings	4 units/acre	32

	Townhouse dwellings	8 units/acre	32

	Independent living units	20 units/acre	55

	Assisted living residence	16 units/acre	40

B.    Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 35 percent of the lot area for new construction or expansion of existing structures.

C.    For detached single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and townhouses, the minimum setback shall be 30 feet from all property lines unless the Planning Board determines that a reduced setback is necessary to achieve the purposes of this section and will not have a detrimental impact on the neighborhood. The minimum setback for an assisted living residence, independent living units, or any buildings in a continuing care retirement community shall be 50 feet in all districts.

D.    No dwelling unit in a senior residential development shall have more than two bedrooms without approval from the Planning Board.

E.    The minimum common open space in the development shall be 30 percent of the lot area, and not more than 25 percent of the required minimum common open space shall consist of wetlands. A permanent conservation restriction running to or enforceable by the Town shall be recorded for the common open space area and shall include restrictions that the land be retained in perpetuity for conservation or passive recreation.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.5. Age-Appropriate Design

A senior residential development shall be designed to provide senior housing services in a setting that encourages and supports aging in community. Units must be “visitable” and age-appropriate by design. At minimum, these terms mean that a senior residential development shall have the following features:

A.    Single-family, two-family, and townhouse units shall provide for:

1.    At least one zero-step entrance;

2.    Doorways with a 36-inch clear passage space;

3.    Master bedroom and an accessible en suite bathroom located on the same floor as the kitchen, living room, and dining room, all being on the same floor as the zero-step entrance;

4.    Master bedroom and en suite bathroom designed and equipped for seniors and people with mobility impairments; and

5.    Indoor or structured parking.

B.    Independent living units and assisted living facilities shall comply with the accessibility requirements of the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board.

C.    Outdoor facilities, such as walkways, gardens, and recreation areas, shall be designed for universal access.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.6. Development Standards

As part of the Planning Board’s special permit review process, the Board shall evaluate the proposed senior residential development for conformance to the following minimum design standards.

A.    Architectural planning and design shall incorporate energy efficient design techniques, such as natural heating and cooling systems, use of sun and wind energy generation systems, and so forth.

B.    Structures located near the project property lines shall be designed and located in a manner that reflects consistency and compatibility with neighboring areas, and shall include appropriate use of building density, heights and design to minimize any intrusion on neighbors.

C.    Outdoor recreation or gathering areas, particularly those that may generate significant noise and/or light and glare, shall be located to minimize intrusion on neighboring properties.

D.    Structures shall be clustered to reduce site disturbance and protect open spaces, natural and environmentally sensitive areas.

E.    Building design shall avoid use of long, unbroken facades, and shall include use of balconies, offset walls, trellises and other design features.

F.    Building design, colors, and materials shall generally correspond to the natural setting of the project site, and to any prevalent design styles that may occur in neighborhoods within the general project area.

G.    The development shall be served by public water.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.7. Procedures

A.    The special permit application, public hearing, and decision procedures shall be in accordance with this Section 8.3, the Planning Board’s rules and regulations, and Section 2.5.

B.    The applicant shall submit a senior residential development special permit application together with the size, form, number, and contents of the required plans and any supplemental information as required in the Planning Board’s rules and regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.8. Decision

A.    The Planning Board may grant a senior residential development special permit with any conditions, safeguards, and limitations it deems necessary to mitigate the project’s impact on the surrounding area and to ensure compliance with this section only upon finding that:

1.    That the senior residential development meets the purposes, requirements, and development standards of this Section 8.3; and

2.    That the senior residential development is consistent with the goals of the Southbridge master plan.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.4. HOME OCCUPATION


8.4.1. Purposes

The purpose of this Section 8.4 is to provide for the conduct of home occupations while preserving the residential character of the premises and preventing adverse effects on the neighborhood.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.4.2. Basic Requirements

A home occupation shall be allowed by right as shown in Table 1, Schedule of Uses, if it meets the requirements of this Section 8.4:

A.    It is incidental to a permitted principal use on the same premises;

B.    It is not detrimental to a residential or rural neighborhood, and the existing character of the neighborhood is preserved;

C.    It is clearly secondary and subordinate to the residential use of the premises;

D.    It has no more than 2 nonresident employees working primarily on the premises;

E.    Adequate off-street parking is available;

F.    There are no exterior alterations that change the residential appearance of the dwelling;

G.    Except as provided in subsections (H) and (I) of this section, there is no exterior indication of the accessory use and no exterior display of merchandise of greater than 100 square feet in total area;

H.    All storage of materials, supplies, or equipment is within the principal building, suitable accessory buildings, and/or within no greater than 500 square feet of total outdoor yard area; and

I.    There shall be no sign to identify the home occupation.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.4.3. Special Permits

A home occupation that does not comply with all of the above standards shall only be allowed by special permit from the Planning Board. Special permits granted hereunder shall be based upon the criteria in Section 2.5.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5. SOLAR AS OF RIGHT


8.5.1. Purposes

The purpose of this By-law is to promote the creation of new commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and to provide adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations. The Town encourages solar installations in the Industrial Districts.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.2. Applicability

This section applies to commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations proposed to be constructed after the effective date of the By-law codified in this section. This section also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these installations or related equipment. This By-law shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or repair of commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations greater than 50 kilowatts and up to 700 kilowatts that occupy no more than five acres of land. Any facility larger than 700 kilowatts, or occupying more than five acres of land on one or more adjacent parcels in common ownership – including those separated by a roadway, shall require a special permit in accordance with Section 2.5. Smaller scale or noncommercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations that are an accessory structure to an existing residential or nonresidential use do not need to comply with this section, but shall require a building permit and must comply with all other applicable provisions of the Southbridge Zoning By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.3. General Requirements for all Commercial Ground-Mounted Solar Power Generation Installations

A.    Compliance with Laws, Ordinances, and Regulations. The construction and operation of all commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed in accordance with the current State Building Code.

B.    Building Permit and Building Inspection. No commercial solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit. The application for a building permit must be accompanied by the fee required. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine the number and dates of the inspections.

C.    Site Plan Review. Commercial solar photovoltaic installations (250 KW or larger of rated nameplate capacity) shall undergo site plan review by the Planning Board prior to construction, installation or modification as provided in this section. The contents of the site plan approval submission shall be in accordance with the Planning Board’s rules and regulations.

D.    Utility Notification. No commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of the proposed installation’s owner’s or operator’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.4. Dimensional and Density Requirements

A.    Setbacks. For large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, front, side and rear setbacks shall be as follows:

1.    The front setback shall be at least 75 feet;

2.    Each side setback shall be at least 75 feet;

3.    The rear setback shall be at least 75 feet;

B.    Appurtenant Structures. All appurtenant structures to commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be considered accessory uses and shall be subject to Sections 4 and 5 regarding bulk, height, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including, but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other. Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.5. Design Standards

All commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be in compliance with Section 2.6.

A.    Lighting. Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where feasible, lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.

B.    Signage. Signs on commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall conform to the Town of Southbridge sign By-law. A sign consistent with the sign By-law shall identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number. Solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the solar photovoltaic installation.

C.    Utility Connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to place all utility connections from the solar photovoltaic installation underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.6. Safety and Environmental Standards

A.    Emergency Services. The commercial solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Southbridge Fire Department. Upon request, the owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout the site of the installation.

B.    Land Clearing, Soil Erosion, and Habitat Impacts. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and By-laws.

C.    Monitoring and Maintenance.

1.    Solar Photovoltaic Installation Conditions. The commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, snow plowing, access road maintenance, mowing, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the Southbridge Fire and Police Departments. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the commercial solar photovoltaic installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.7. Modifications

All material modifications to a solar photovoltaic installation made after issuance of the required building permit shall require approval by the Planning Board.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.8. Abandonment or Decommissioning

A.    Removal Requirements. Any commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with subsection (B) of this section shall be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Planning Board by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:

1.    Physical removal of all ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security barriers, and transmission lines from the site.

2.    Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.

3.    Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion and revert to the state and condition of the site prior to the ground-mounted photovoltaic installation, including planting of trees. The Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.

B.    Abandonment. The Planning Board shall require surety for decommissioning to ensure that removal requirements are met in the event the Town must remove the installation and remediate the landscape. Applicants shall provide a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal. The amount and form of surety shall be determined to be reasonable by the Planning Board, but in no event shall exceed 125% of the cost of removal and compliance as determined by the applicant and the Town. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, as prepared by a qualified, professional engineer. The estimate shall include the cost of removal of underground construction. The amount shall be no less than 10% of the expected construction costs, exclusive of panel purchase costs, and shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation. This surety may also be used to recover license fees or any other debt to the Town that the owner or operator might owe at the time of decommissioning.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6. MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES


8.6.1. Purposes

The purpose and intent of Section 8.6 is to provide for the limited establishment of registered marijuana dispensaries, known hereafter as “RMD,” as registered medical marijuana cultivation centers (RMMCC) and registered medical marijuana dispensary centers (RMMDC), in locations suitable for lawful RMDs; to minimize any adverse impacts on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools, playgrounds and other areas where children commonly congregate, local historic districts and other areas that are incompatible with such uses; and for the location of RMDs where they may be readily monitored by law enforcement for health and public safety purposes.

Subject to the provisions of this Zoning By-law, Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws, and 105 CMR 725.000, registered medical marijuana cultivation centers and registered medical marijuana dispensary centers will be permitted to provide medical support, security, and physician oversight that meet or exceed state regulations as established by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (DPH).

It is neither the purpose nor intent of this section of the By-law to supersede any federal or state laws governing the sale or distribution of narcotic drugs.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6.2. Applicability

This section applies to registered marijuana dispensaries (RMD) to be constructed after the effective date of the By-law codified in this section. The commercial cultivation, production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade, distribution or dispensing of marijuana for medical use is prohibited unless permitted or established as an RMD under this Section 8.6. An RMD may be permitted upon application to and the granting of a special permit and site plan approval by the Planning Board, acting as the special permit granting authority, as specified in the Planning Board’s rules and regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6.3. Requirements for Registered Marijuana Dispensaries

In addition to the standard requirements for uses permitted by right or requiring a special permit or site plan approval, the following shall also apply to all registered medical marijuana cultivation centers and registered medical marijuana dispensary centers:

A.    Application Requirements.

1.    The special permit application, public hearing, and decision procedures shall be in accordance with this Section 8.6, the Planning Board’s rules and regulations, and Section 2.5.

2.    In addition to those materials required for special permit and site plan approval as listed in the Planning Board’s rules and regulations, no special permit will be granted by the Planning Board for an RMD unless an application containing the following is submitted:

a)    A copy of its certificate of registration to operate an RMD issued by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

b)    A proposed timeline for achieving operation of the RMD and evidence that the applicant will be ready to operate within that proposed timeline.

c)    A statement indicating the need for an RMD in the Town of Southbridge and the projected service area including the current patient population amounts in that service area.

d)    Evidence that the applicant has adequate liability insurance.

e)    A copy of the detailed written operating procedures as required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health in 105 CMR 725.105 (or its successor regulation) and as otherwise required by other applicable law or regulation.

f)    Locations of all other RMDs in Worcester County.

g)    A copy of the policies and procedures for patient or personal caregiver home delivery required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for the RMD.

h)    A copy of the policies and procedures for the transfer, acquisition, or sale of marijuana between the RMD and another or independent testing laboratory as required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

i)    A copy of proposed waste disposal procedures.

j)    A description and list of any waivers granted by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for the RMD.

k)    Details of proposed fertilizer, pesticide, water usage, and wastewater plans for any site that will include cultivation.

l)    Evidence of the applicant’s right to use the proposed site of the RMD facility such as a deed, lease or other real estate instrument. Additionally, if a cultivation facility, evidence of contract or agreement to grow marijuana for a certified dispensary.

m)    If the applicant is a business organization, a statement under oath disclosing all of its owners, shareholders, partners, members, managers, directors, officers, or other similarly-situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of these above entities are business organizations rather than individuals, the applicant must disclose the identity of the owners of such entities or business organizations for each level of ownership until the disclosure contains the names of all individuals and their addresses.

n)    A detailed floor plan of the premises of the proposed RMD that identifies the square footage available and describes the functional areas of the RMD, including areas for any preparation of marijuana-infused products or open-air cultivation.

o)    A description of the security measures, including employee security policies, required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for the RMD.

p)    Proposed security measures for the RMD, including lighting, fencing, storage, gates, and alarms to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.

q)    Detailed site plans that include all of the information required under rules and regulations of the Planning Board, including distances to any of the uses identified in subsection (D) of this section.

B.    Use.

1.    RMMCC and RMMDC facilities may only be involved in the uses permitted by its definition and may not include other businesses or services.

2.    No smoking, burning, application, or consumption of any product containing marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the premises.

3.    Hours of operation for any RMD shall be established by the Planning Board, but in no event shall said facilities be open and/or operating between the hours of 9:00 PM and 8:00 AM, including delivery services.

4.    RMD facilities that can demonstrate that they comply with the agricultural exemption under M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §3, must still apply for site plan approval.

C.    Physical Requirements.

1.    No RMD shall have drive-through services.

2.    Ventilation. All RMMCC and RMMDC facilities shall be ventilated in such a manner that no:

a)    Pesticides, insecticides or other chemicals or products used in the cultivation or processing are dispersed into the outside atmosphere; and

b)    No odor from marijuana or its processing can be detected by a person with an unimpaired and otherwise normal sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana business or at any adjoining use or property.

3.    Exterior signs shall identify only the name of the RMD, but shall not display advertisements for marijuana or any brand name, nor shall marijuana, marijuana-infused products, or associated products be displayed or clearly visible to a person from the exterior of the RMD.

4.    All exterior building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a manner as to prevent the public’s view of the interior from any public or private way or from any abutting property.

5.    If cultivation facility, a 6-foot fence or screening with security top should be erected.

D.    Location Requirements.

1.    No RMD facility shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of the following, or two hundred fifty feet (250') if located in the Central Core, as measured in a straight line from the building and/or area actively used;

a)    Public or private preschool, primary or secondary school, dance or gymnastics school, martial arts school, licensed day care center, or any other facility where children commonly congregate in an organized ongoing formal basis under 105 CMR 725.110(A)(14); or

b)    A public library; or

c)    A playground, athletic field, or any other recreational areas where children commonly congregate under CMR 725.110(A)(14) that are not contained within a building.

2.    No RMMCC is to be located within:

a)    One hundred feet (100') of any abutting, occupied residence in a residential zoning district, as measured in a straight line from existing structure to proposed development.

b)    Two hundred fifty feet (250') of any nonconforming residential structures in nonresidential districts, as measured in a straight line from existing structure to proposed development.

3.    No RMMDC is to be located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any Residential Zoning District, residential structure, or any nonconforming residential structures in nonresidential districts. Distance shall be measured in a straight line from residential zone boundary line or from existing structure to proposed development.

4.    No marijuana or marijuana-based products shall be sold or grown or cultivated in motels and dormitories, or inside a mobile structure such as a cargo container, motor vehicle or other similar nonpermanent enclosure.

5.    The distance requirements may be reduced at the discretion of the Planning Board through the special permit application, if the applicant demonstrates that the marijuana establishment will employ adequate security measures to prevent diversion of marijuana to minors.

E.    Reporting Requirements.

1.    All special permit and site plan approval holders for an RMMCC or RMMDC facility shall provide the Police Department, Fire Department, Department of Inspections Services and the Planning Board with the names, phone numbers and email addresses of all management staff and key-holders, including a minimum of two (2) operators or managers of the facility identified as contact persons to whom one can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the establishment. All such contact information shall be updated as needed to keep it current and accurate.

2.    The permit holder shall file a copy of any incident report required under 105 CMR 725.110(F) with the Department of Inspections Services, Board of Health, Police Department, Fire Department, and the Planning Board within 24 hours of creation by the RMD. Such reports may be redacted as necessary to comply with any applicable state or federal laws and regulations.

3.    The permit holder shall file a copy of any deficiency statement, plan of correction, summary cease and desist order, quarantine order, summary suspension order, order limiting sales, notice of a hearing, or final action issued by DPH or the Division of Administrative Law Appeals, as applicable, regarding the RMD with the Department of Inspection Services, Police Department, and Planning Board within 48 hours of receipt by the RMD.

4.    Each RMD permitted under this Zoning By-law shall as a condition of its special permit file an annual report to the Planning Board and the Town Clerk and provide a copy of all current applicable state licenses and registrations for the RMD and/or its owners, any updated operating policies required under 105 CMR 725.105 or by the Department of Public Health, the current insurance policies for the RMD, and demonstrated compliance with the conditions of the special permit.

5.    The owner or manager is required to respond by phone or email within twenty-four hours of contact by a city official concerning their RMMCC or RMMDC at the phone number or email address provided to the City as the contact for the business.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6.4. Approval/Transfer/Discontinuance of Use

A.    The special permit shall remain exclusively with the applicant (who shall also be known as “permit holder” after the granting of the special permit), who shall be the owner or lessee of the premises described in the application as the site for the proposed RMD, and shall terminate automatically on the date there is a voluntary or involuntary separation of the applicant’s title or leasehold interest in the premises or the applicant’s right to occupy the premises terminates for any reason.

B.    A special permit granted under this section is nontransferable and shall have a term limited to the duration of the applicant’s ownership or leasing of the premises as an RMD, dependent on the applicant’s continued existence as the same legal entity. Any violation of subsection (E) of this section shall be considered a “transfer” for purposes of this By-law.

C.    The special permit shall lapse upon the expiration or termination of the applicant’s registration by DPH.

D.    The permit holder shall notify the Department of Inspection Services and Police Department, and Planning Board in writing within 48 hours of the cessation of operation of the RMD or the expiration or termination of the permit holder’s registration with DPH.

E.    The legal entity and structure of the applicant/permit holder shall not change, as represented in compliance with Section 8.6.3(A)(2)(m).

F.    An RMD shall be required to remove all material, plants, equipment, and other paraphernalia, in compliance with 105 CMR 725.105(J) and (O), prior to surrendering state-issued licenses or permits; or within six months of ceasing operations, whichever comes first.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6.5. Findings

In addition to the standard findings for a special permit or site plan approval the special permit granting authority must also find all the following:

A.    That the RMMCC or RMMDC facility demonstrates that it will meet all the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations;

B.    That the applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements of this section and other applicable sections of this By-law/Ordinance;

C.    That the RMMCC or RMMDC facility is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic impacts on abutters and other parties in interest;

D.    That the RMMCC or RMMDC facility provides adequate security measures to ensure that no individual participant will pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals, and that the storage and/or location of cultivation is adequately secured;

E.    That the RMMCC or RMMDC facility adequately addresses issues of traffic demand, circulation flow, parking and queuing, particularly at peak periods at the facility, and their impact on neighboring uses.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.7. ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES

A.    No special permit for an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult paraphernalia store or adult video store may be issued to any person convicted of violating the provisions of G.L. c. 119, §63, or G.L. c. 272, §28.

B.    Adult-oriented businesses shall be permitted only when located outside the area circumscribed by a circle which has a radius consisting of the following distances from the specified uses or zoning districts:

1.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any residence zone;

2.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any public or private school;

3.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any church or other religious facility or institution;

4.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any public park;

5.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any day care center, nursery school, or kindergarten.

The radius distance shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings or structures, from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed adult-oriented business is to be separated.

C.    Any existing adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult paraphernalia store or adult video store shall apply for a special permit within 90 days following the adoption of this By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1. OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT


8.1.1. Purposes

The purposes of this Section 8.1 are to:

A.    Promote efficient use of land in harmony with the Town’s natural and heritage landscapes;

B.    Preserve valuable open space;

C.    Foster compact development patterns using flexible density and lot dimensional and to promote and encourage creativity in neighborhood design;

D.    Provide diverse and energy-efficient housing at all market levels;

E.    Protect surface water and groundwater, wetlands, floodplains, agricultural lands, wildlife, and other natural resources; and

F.    Promote aesthetics and the amenities of the Town.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.2. Applicability

To encourage open space design, OSRD is allowed by right, subject only to the requirements of the Planning Board’s subdivision rules and regulations (“subdivision regulations”) and this Section 8.1. An OSRD that does not require approval under subdivision control is allowed by right subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board in accordance with this section and Section 2.6. There is no minimum tract size for an OSRD.

An open space residential design (OSRD) may be proposed in any residential district. All subdivisions shall comply with the open space design provisions of this Section 8.1 unless the Planning Board grants a special permit to allow a development that deviates from the requirements herein. Such deviations may be approved if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed alternative development configuration provides adequate protection of the site’s environmental resources and fulfills the purposes of this Section 8.1 as well as or better than an OSRD.

This Section 8.1 applies only to subdivisions of land as defined in G.L. c. 41, §81L, and not to construction of homes or businesses on individual lots that existed prior to September 14, 2018, or to lots created through the approval not required (ANR) process with frontage on public ways existing as such as of September 14, 2018, described in the subdivision regulations.

If the proposed open space design also involves one or more common driveways, density bonuses, or any other use or purpose that requires a special permit, the proceedings for all special permits and the site plan review for the lot configuration shall occur in one consolidated special permit process with the Planning Board.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.3. Development Impact Statement and Conservation Analysis

The applicant shall present enough information about the site’s environmental and open space resources to enable the Planning Board to determine whether a proposed OSRD (or development by special permit that deviates from the requirements for an OSRD) satisfies the purposes and standards of this Section 8.1. Accordingly, the applicant shall prepare and submit a development impact statement (DIS) including a conservation analysis as described in the Planning Board’s subdivision regulations. For an OSRD that is not a subdivision, and that is presented as a site plan review application under Section 2.6, the applicant shall not be required to submit a full DIS. However, the Planning Board may require the submission of all or part of a conservation analysis as described in the subdivision regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.4. Conservation Analysis and Findings

A.    Prior to filing an application, an applicant is encouraged to meet with the Planning Board to discuss the conservation resources on the site. At this meeting, the Planning Board shall indicate to the applicant which land is likely to have the most conservation value and be most important to preserve and where development may be most appropriately located.

B.    In the case of a proposed plan that deviates from the requirements of this Section 8.1, if the Planning Board determines that the land with the greatest conservation value cannot be protected except by use of an OSRD, the Planning Board shall deny the special permit and require that the applicant submit a plan that complies with this Section 8.1.

C.    The Planning Board, in consultation with the Conservation Commission, shall study the conservation analysis, may conduct field visits, and shall formally determine which land should be preserved and where development may be located. The Planning Board shall make written findings supporting this determination (the “conservation findings”). The Planning Board shall deny any application that does not include sufficient information to make conservation findings or that does not preserve land that the Planning Board determines should be preserved from development as a result of the conservation analysis and findings.

D.    The Planning Board’s conservation findings shall be incorporated into its decision to approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application. The conservation findings shall show land to be permanently preserved by a conservation restriction, as well as recommended conservation uses, ownership, and management guidelines for such land. The conservation findings shall also indicate preferred locations for development if the plan is denied based upon such findings.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.5. Basic Requirements

A.    The proposed OSRD plan shall show that at least 50 percent total acreage on the site will be preserved by conservation restriction, based upon the conservation findings.

B.    The maximum number of dwelling units in an OSRD shall be calculated by a formula based on the net acreage of the property. The formula is intended to take into account certain development limitations that make some land less developable than other land. This calculation involves two steps, calculating the net acreage and dividing by the base allowed density.

1.    To determine net acreage, subtract the following from the total (gross) acreage of the site:

a)    Half of the acreage of land with slopes of 20 percent or greater (2,000 square feet or more of contiguous sloped area at least 10 feet in width); and

b)    The total acreage of lakes, ponds, land subject to easements or restrictions prohibiting development, 100-year floodplains, and all freshwater wetlands as defined in G.L. c. 131, §40, as delineated by an accredited wetlands specialist and approved by the Southbridge Conservation Commission.

Documentation of wetlands and site constraints shall be submitted in accordance with the Planning Board’s OSRD regulations.

2.    To determine the base maximum number of allowable dwelling units on the site, divide the net acreage by 2 in the R1 or TF district for a project that will be connected to sewer, and by 1.5 for a project that will not be connected to the sewer system; and in the R3 district, divide the net acreage by 3. Fractional units of less than 0.5 shall be rounded down and 0.5 or more shall be rounded up.

C.    The unit count determined above may be increased through density bonuses designed to advance important goals of the Southbridge master plan. Density bonuses are given by special permit at the discretion of the Planning Board based upon the expected public benefit. They are calculated by first determining the base allowable unit count without rounding fractional units up or down, and then multiplying that number by 100 percent plus the percentages listed below. Resulting fractional units, if any, shall be rounded up or down as in Section 8.1.5(B)(2).

1.    If the applicant allows deeded public access to the open space portion of the property and the Planning Board finds that such public access provides a significant recreational benefit to the Town: a maximum of 10 percent.

2.    If the applicant restricts ownership or rental and occupancy of units allowed by Section 8.1.5(B) as affordable housing and makes a binding commitment to construct such affordable dwellings: a maximum of 50 percent. For every unit dedicated as an affordable unit, the Planning Board may approve up to two bonus market rate units, up to the maximum 50 percent.

3.    If the applicant preserves as permanent open space more than the minimum required percentage: a maximum 10 percent density bonus per additional 5 percent of the parcel preserved as open space.

D.    The housing types allowed in an OSRD include single-family, two-family, or multifamily dwellings. The subdivision approval and special permit/site plan requirements shall be fulfilled concurrently in one proceeding to the extent practical. Any OSRD application involving two-family or multifamily dwellings shall include a site plan that shows the location, layout, height, and setbacks of such dwellings. Accessory apartments shall be permitted in OSRD developments and shall not be counted toward the total maximum number of units in the development.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.6. Dimensional and Design Requirements

A.    Minimum Lot Sizes in Open Space Designs. The limiting factor on lot size in an OSRD is the need for adequate water supply and sewage disposal. Accordingly, there is no required minimum lot size for zoning purposes. This does not affect the power of the Board of Health to require areas on a lot for the disposal of sewage and the protection of water supply.

B.    Setbacks, Road Frontage, and Road Requirements. The minimum setback shall be 10 feet from any property line. There shall be no numerical requirements for lot frontage in an OSRD; provided, that each lot has legally and practically adequate vehicular access to a public way or a way approved under the subdivision regulations across its own frontage or via a shared driveway approved by the Planning Board. All dwellings must comply with applicable Board of Health requirements. The Planning Board may modify the applicable road construction requirements for new roads within an OSRD as provided in the subdivision regulations if it finds that such modifications will be consistent with the purposes of this Section 8.1 and the master plan.

C.    Arrangement of Lots.

1.    Lots shall be located and arranged in a manner that protects views from roads and other publicly accessible points; farmland; wildlife habitat; large intact forest areas; hilltops; ponds; steep slopes; and other sensitive environmental resources, while facilitating pedestrian circulation. Generally, residential lots shall be located the minimum feasible distance from existing public roadways. The Planning Board shall take into consideration the conservation analysis and findings in approving the arrangement of lots.

2.    Lot, roadway, and driveway layouts, land alterations, and placement of structures shall follow any design guidelines for OSRD which may be adopted by the Planning Board.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.7. Open Space

A.    Open space set aside in an OSRD or as a condition of any special permit or site plan approval shall be permanently preserved from development as required by this Section 8.1. The Planning Board may not require such open space to be accessible to the public unless a density bonus is allowed under Section 8.1.5(C). Any development permitted in connection with the setting aside of open space land shall not compromise the conservation value of such open space land, based on the conservation findings of the Planning Board.

B.    All land required to be set aside as open space in connection with any OSRD shall be so noted on any approved plans and shall be protected by a permanent conservation restriction to be held by the Town of Southbridge, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or a nonprofit conservation organization qualified to hold conservation restrictions under G.L. c. 184, §31, and also qualified to hold tax-deductible conservation easements under Section 170(h) of the Internal Revenue Code. The restriction shall specify the permitted uses of the restricted land which may otherwise constitute development. The restriction may permit, but the Planning Board may not require, public access or access by residents of the development to the protected open space land.

C.    Protected open space may be held in private ownership, owned in common by a homeowner’s association (HOA), dedicated to the Town of Southbridge or state government with their consent, transferred to a nonprofit organization acceptable to the Planning Board, or held in such other form of ownership as the Planning Board finds appropriate to manage the open space land and protect its conservation value.

If the land is owned in common by an HOA, such HOA shall be established in accordance with the following:

1.    The HOA must be created before final approval of the development and must comply with all applicable provisions of state law.

2.    Membership must be mandatory for each lot owner, who must be required by recorded covenants and restrictions to pay fees to the HOA for taxes, insurance, and maintenance of common open space, private roads, and other common facilities.

3.    The HOA must be responsible for liability insurance, property taxes, the maintenance of recreational and other facilities, private roads, and any shared driveways.

4.    Property owners must pay their pro rata share of the costs in this subsection, and the assessment levied by the HOA must be able to become a lien on the property.

5.    The HOA must be able to adjust the assessment to meet changed needs.

6.    Ownership shall be structured in such a manner that real property taxing authorities may satisfy property tax claims against the open space lands by proceeding against individual owners in the HOA and the dwelling units they each own.

7.    The Town Attorney shall find that the HOA documents satisfy the conditions listed above and such other conditions as the Planning Board shall deem necessary.

D.    Maintenance Standards.

1.    Ongoing maintenance standards shall be established as a condition of development approval to ensure that the open space land is not used for storage or dumping of refuse, junk, or other offensive or hazardous materials. Such standards shall be enforceable by the Town against any owner of open space land, including an HOA.

2.    If the Board of Selectmen finds that the provisions of subsection (D)(1) are being violated to the extent that the condition of the land constitutes a public nuisance, it may, upon 30 days’ written notice to the owner, enter the premises for necessary maintenance, and the cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed ratably against the landowner or, in the case of an HOA, the owners of properties within the development, and shall, if unpaid, become a property tax lien on such property or properties.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.1.8. OSRD Rules and Regulations

The Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations, including administrative procedures and design guidelines, to implement this Section 8.1.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.2. AGRICULTURALLY RELATED USES


8.2.1. Purposes

The purpose of this Section 8.2 is to promote and maintain local farming. Toward that end, this Section 8.2 provides for a variety of agriculturally related uses and farm-affiliated businesses that are not explicitly exempt under G.L. c. 40A, §3, but which the Town of Southbridge deems important for the preservation of a rural economy in order to:

1.    Maintain and promote agriculture and its related activities, such as agricultural tourism;

2.    Preserve open space and farmland;

3.    Maintain both an agricultural heritage and a rural character;

4.    Increase community benefits by having fresh, local produce for sale; and

5.    Increase positive growing businesses that contribute to the economy of the region and the Commonwealth.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.2.2. Applicability.

The provisions of this Section 8.2 shall apply to any farm as defined in this By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.2.3. Use Regulations

A.    The following agriculturally related uses are permitted in any district:

1.    Seasonal outdoors mazes of agricultural origin such as straw bales or corn.

2.    Petting farm, animal display, and pony rides.

3.    Wagon, sleigh and hayrides.

4.    Nature trails.

5.    Open air or covered picnic area with restrooms.

6.    Educational classes, lectures, seminars.

B.    The following farm-affiliated businesses and uses are permitted in any district, subject to site plan approval by the Planning Board in accordance with Section 2.6 and this Section 8.2:

1.    Storage, retail or wholesale marketing, or processing of agricultural products into a value-added agricultural product is permitted if more than 50 percent of the stored, processed, or merchandised products are produced by the farm operator for at least 3 of the immediately preceding 5 years.

2.    Cider mill or winery selling product, in a tasting room, derived from crops grown primarily on site for at least 3 of the immediately preceding 5 years.

3.    Historical agricultural exhibits.

4.    Gift shop for the sale of agricultural products and agriculturally related products.

5.    Designated parking for 20 or more vehicles.

6.    Commercial or cooperative kitchen, cannery, or co-packing facility.

C.    The following uses are allowed only by special permit from the Planning Board:

1.    Restaurant related to the agricultural use on the site.

2.    Nonagriculturally related uses, such as small-scale entertainment venue or organized meeting space, made available for rent for weddings, corporate picnics, birthday parties, and the like.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3. SENIOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT


8.3.1. Purposes

The purpose of this Section 8.3 is to provide for a variety of housing types, settings, and residential services to meet the needs of people as they age.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.2. Applicability

A.    The Planning Board may grant a special permit for a senior residential development in accordance with this Section 8.3 on any tract of land meeting the following requirements:

1.    Two or more acres of land;

2.    Minimum of 100 feet of frontage on a public way; and

3.    Public water available at the street frontage.

B.    A senior residential development is intended for people age 55 or over. As such, buildings and site improvements in a senior residential development shall provide for visitability and universal design in accordance with the provisions of this Section 8.3.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.3. Uses

A.    A senior residential development shall include one or more of the following uses:

1.    Cottage dwellings.

2.    Two-family dwellings.

3.    Townhouse dwellings.

4.    Independent living units.

5.    Assisted living residence, with or without memory care units.

B.    Continuing care retirement community, which shall include an assisted living residence and one or more of the other uses listed above, and may include a skilled nursing facility or physical rehabilitation facility with not more than 100 beds.

C.    An assisted living residence or continuing care retirement community may include the following nonresidential uses for the benefit of its residents and their guests; provided, that aggregate floor area for the nonresidential uses shall not exceed 10 percent of the total gross floor area of the buildings in the development:

1.    Retail, up to a maximum of 2,500 sq. ft.

2.    Personal services.

3.    Medical office or clinic.

4.    Community center or senior center.

D.    A senior residential development may also include the following uses:

1.    Adult day care center.

2.    Accessory uses for residents, employees, and guests, such as central or common dining facilities or laundry facilities, or indoor or outdoor recreation facilities.

3.    Conservation or agricultural uses.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.4. Basic Requirements

A.    A senior residential development shall comply with the following density regulations:

	Use	Maximum Density	Maximum Building Height (Feet)

	Cottage dwellings or two-family dwellings	4 units/acre	32

	Townhouse dwellings	8 units/acre	32

	Independent living units	20 units/acre	55

	Assisted living residence	16 units/acre	40

B.    Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 35 percent of the lot area for new construction or expansion of existing structures.

C.    For detached single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and townhouses, the minimum setback shall be 30 feet from all property lines unless the Planning Board determines that a reduced setback is necessary to achieve the purposes of this section and will not have a detrimental impact on the neighborhood. The minimum setback for an assisted living residence, independent living units, or any buildings in a continuing care retirement community shall be 50 feet in all districts.

D.    No dwelling unit in a senior residential development shall have more than two bedrooms without approval from the Planning Board.

E.    The minimum common open space in the development shall be 30 percent of the lot area, and not more than 25 percent of the required minimum common open space shall consist of wetlands. A permanent conservation restriction running to or enforceable by the Town shall be recorded for the common open space area and shall include restrictions that the land be retained in perpetuity for conservation or passive recreation.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.5. Age-Appropriate Design

A senior residential development shall be designed to provide senior housing services in a setting that encourages and supports aging in community. Units must be “visitable” and age-appropriate by design. At minimum, these terms mean that a senior residential development shall have the following features:

A.    Single-family, two-family, and townhouse units shall provide for:

1.    At least one zero-step entrance;

2.    Doorways with a 36-inch clear passage space;

3.    Master bedroom and an accessible en suite bathroom located on the same floor as the kitchen, living room, and dining room, all being on the same floor as the zero-step entrance;

4.    Master bedroom and en suite bathroom designed and equipped for seniors and people with mobility impairments; and

5.    Indoor or structured parking.

B.    Independent living units and assisted living facilities shall comply with the accessibility requirements of the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board.

C.    Outdoor facilities, such as walkways, gardens, and recreation areas, shall be designed for universal access.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.6. Development Standards

As part of the Planning Board’s special permit review process, the Board shall evaluate the proposed senior residential development for conformance to the following minimum design standards.

A.    Architectural planning and design shall incorporate energy efficient design techniques, such as natural heating and cooling systems, use of sun and wind energy generation systems, and so forth.

B.    Structures located near the project property lines shall be designed and located in a manner that reflects consistency and compatibility with neighboring areas, and shall include appropriate use of building density, heights and design to minimize any intrusion on neighbors.

C.    Outdoor recreation or gathering areas, particularly those that may generate significant noise and/or light and glare, shall be located to minimize intrusion on neighboring properties.

D.    Structures shall be clustered to reduce site disturbance and protect open spaces, natural and environmentally sensitive areas.

E.    Building design shall avoid use of long, unbroken facades, and shall include use of balconies, offset walls, trellises and other design features.

F.    Building design, colors, and materials shall generally correspond to the natural setting of the project site, and to any prevalent design styles that may occur in neighborhoods within the general project area.

G.    The development shall be served by public water.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.7. Procedures

A.    The special permit application, public hearing, and decision procedures shall be in accordance with this Section 8.3, the Planning Board’s rules and regulations, and Section 2.5.

B.    The applicant shall submit a senior residential development special permit application together with the size, form, number, and contents of the required plans and any supplemental information as required in the Planning Board’s rules and regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.3.8. Decision

A.    The Planning Board may grant a senior residential development special permit with any conditions, safeguards, and limitations it deems necessary to mitigate the project’s impact on the surrounding area and to ensure compliance with this section only upon finding that:

1.    That the senior residential development meets the purposes, requirements, and development standards of this Section 8.3; and

2.    That the senior residential development is consistent with the goals of the Southbridge master plan.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.4. HOME OCCUPATION


8.4.1. Purposes

The purpose of this Section 8.4 is to provide for the conduct of home occupations while preserving the residential character of the premises and preventing adverse effects on the neighborhood.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.4.2. Basic Requirements

A home occupation shall be allowed by right as shown in Table 1, Schedule of Uses, if it meets the requirements of this Section 8.4:

A.    It is incidental to a permitted principal use on the same premises;

B.    It is not detrimental to a residential or rural neighborhood, and the existing character of the neighborhood is preserved;

C.    It is clearly secondary and subordinate to the residential use of the premises;

D.    It has no more than 2 nonresident employees working primarily on the premises;

E.    Adequate off-street parking is available;

F.    There are no exterior alterations that change the residential appearance of the dwelling;

G.    Except as provided in subsections (H) and (I) of this section, there is no exterior indication of the accessory use and no exterior display of merchandise of greater than 100 square feet in total area;

H.    All storage of materials, supplies, or equipment is within the principal building, suitable accessory buildings, and/or within no greater than 500 square feet of total outdoor yard area; and

I.    There shall be no sign to identify the home occupation.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.4.3. Special Permits

A home occupation that does not comply with all of the above standards shall only be allowed by special permit from the Planning Board. Special permits granted hereunder shall be based upon the criteria in Section 2.5.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5. SOLAR AS OF RIGHT


8.5.1. Purposes

The purpose of this By-law is to promote the creation of new commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards for the placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and to provide adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations. The Town encourages solar installations in the Industrial Districts.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.2. Applicability

This section applies to commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations proposed to be constructed after the effective date of the By-law codified in this section. This section also pertains to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of these installations or related equipment. This By-law shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or repair of commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations greater than 50 kilowatts and up to 700 kilowatts that occupy no more than five acres of land. Any facility larger than 700 kilowatts, or occupying more than five acres of land on one or more adjacent parcels in common ownership – including those separated by a roadway, shall require a special permit in accordance with Section 2.5. Smaller scale or noncommercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations that are an accessory structure to an existing residential or nonresidential use do not need to comply with this section, but shall require a building permit and must comply with all other applicable provisions of the Southbridge Zoning By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.3. General Requirements for all Commercial Ground-Mounted Solar Power Generation Installations

A.    Compliance with Laws, Ordinances, and Regulations. The construction and operation of all commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed in accordance with the current State Building Code.

B.    Building Permit and Building Inspection. No commercial solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit. The application for a building permit must be accompanied by the fee required. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall determine the number and dates of the inspections.

C.    Site Plan Review. Commercial solar photovoltaic installations (250 KW or larger of rated nameplate capacity) shall undergo site plan review by the Planning Board prior to construction, installation or modification as provided in this section. The contents of the site plan approval submission shall be in accordance with the Planning Board’s rules and regulations.

D.    Utility Notification. No commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed until evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the utility company that operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of the proposed installation’s owner’s or operator’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.4. Dimensional and Density Requirements

A.    Setbacks. For large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, front, side and rear setbacks shall be as follows:

1.    The front setback shall be at least 75 feet;

2.    Each side setback shall be at least 75 feet;

3.    The rear setback shall be at least 75 feet;

B.    Appurtenant Structures. All appurtenant structures to commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be considered accessory uses and shall be subject to Sections 4 and 5 regarding bulk, height, lot area, setbacks, open space, parking and building coverage requirements. All such appurtenant structures, including, but not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with each other. Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.5. Design Standards

All commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall be in compliance with Section 2.6.

A.    Lighting. Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where feasible, lighting of the solar photovoltaic installation shall be directed downward and shall incorporate full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.

B.    Signage. Signs on commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall conform to the Town of Southbridge sign By-law. A sign consistent with the sign By-law shall identify the owner and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number. Solar photovoltaic installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the solar photovoltaic installation.

C.    Utility Connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning Board, shall be made to place all utility connections from the solar photovoltaic installation underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.6. Safety and Environmental Standards

A.    Emergency Services. The commercial solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Southbridge Fire Department. Upon request, the owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the solar photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout the site of the installation.

B.    Land Clearing, Soil Erosion, and Habitat Impacts. Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the construction, operation and maintenance of the commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations, and By-laws.

C.    Monitoring and Maintenance.

1.    Solar Photovoltaic Installation Conditions. The commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, snow plowing, access road maintenance, mowing, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the Southbridge Fire and Police Departments. The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining the commercial solar photovoltaic installation and any access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.7. Modifications

All material modifications to a solar photovoltaic installation made after issuance of the required building permit shall require approval by the Planning Board.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.5.8. Abandonment or Decommissioning

A.    Removal Requirements. Any commercial ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with subsection (B) of this section shall be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify the Planning Board by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:

1.    Physical removal of all ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, structures, equipment, security barriers, and transmission lines from the site.

2.    Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.

3.    Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion and revert to the state and condition of the site prior to the ground-mounted photovoltaic installation, including planting of trees. The Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping or designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.

B.    Abandonment. The Planning Board shall require surety for decommissioning to ensure that removal requirements are met in the event the Town must remove the installation and remediate the landscape. Applicants shall provide a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of removal. The amount and form of surety shall be determined to be reasonable by the Planning Board, but in no event shall exceed 125% of the cost of removal and compliance as determined by the applicant and the Town. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, as prepared by a qualified, professional engineer. The estimate shall include the cost of removal of underground construction. The amount shall be no less than 10% of the expected construction costs, exclusive of panel purchase costs, and shall include a mechanism for calculating increased removal costs due to inflation. This surety may also be used to recover license fees or any other debt to the Town that the owner or operator might owe at the time of decommissioning.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6. MEDICAL MARIJUANA AND REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES


8.6.1. Purposes

The purpose and intent of Section 8.6 is to provide for the limited establishment of registered marijuana dispensaries, known hereafter as “RMD,” as registered medical marijuana cultivation centers (RMMCC) and registered medical marijuana dispensary centers (RMMDC), in locations suitable for lawful RMDs; to minimize any adverse impacts on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools, playgrounds and other areas where children commonly congregate, local historic districts and other areas that are incompatible with such uses; and for the location of RMDs where they may be readily monitored by law enforcement for health and public safety purposes.

Subject to the provisions of this Zoning By-law, Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws, and 105 CMR 725.000, registered medical marijuana cultivation centers and registered medical marijuana dispensary centers will be permitted to provide medical support, security, and physician oversight that meet or exceed state regulations as established by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (DPH).

It is neither the purpose nor intent of this section of the By-law to supersede any federal or state laws governing the sale or distribution of narcotic drugs.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6.2. Applicability

This section applies to registered marijuana dispensaries (RMD) to be constructed after the effective date of the By-law codified in this section. The commercial cultivation, production, processing, assembly, packaging, retail or wholesale sale, trade, distribution or dispensing of marijuana for medical use is prohibited unless permitted or established as an RMD under this Section 8.6. An RMD may be permitted upon application to and the granting of a special permit and site plan approval by the Planning Board, acting as the special permit granting authority, as specified in the Planning Board’s rules and regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6.3. Requirements for Registered Marijuana Dispensaries

In addition to the standard requirements for uses permitted by right or requiring a special permit or site plan approval, the following shall also apply to all registered medical marijuana cultivation centers and registered medical marijuana dispensary centers:

A.    Application Requirements.

1.    The special permit application, public hearing, and decision procedures shall be in accordance with this Section 8.6, the Planning Board’s rules and regulations, and Section 2.5.

2.    In addition to those materials required for special permit and site plan approval as listed in the Planning Board’s rules and regulations, no special permit will be granted by the Planning Board for an RMD unless an application containing the following is submitted:

a)    A copy of its certificate of registration to operate an RMD issued by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

b)    A proposed timeline for achieving operation of the RMD and evidence that the applicant will be ready to operate within that proposed timeline.

c)    A statement indicating the need for an RMD in the Town of Southbridge and the projected service area including the current patient population amounts in that service area.

d)    Evidence that the applicant has adequate liability insurance.

e)    A copy of the detailed written operating procedures as required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health in 105 CMR 725.105 (or its successor regulation) and as otherwise required by other applicable law or regulation.

f)    Locations of all other RMDs in Worcester County.

g)    A copy of the policies and procedures for patient or personal caregiver home delivery required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for the RMD.

h)    A copy of the policies and procedures for the transfer, acquisition, or sale of marijuana between the RMD and another or independent testing laboratory as required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.

i)    A copy of proposed waste disposal procedures.

j)    A description and list of any waivers granted by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for the RMD.

k)    Details of proposed fertilizer, pesticide, water usage, and wastewater plans for any site that will include cultivation.

l)    Evidence of the applicant’s right to use the proposed site of the RMD facility such as a deed, lease or other real estate instrument. Additionally, if a cultivation facility, evidence of contract or agreement to grow marijuana for a certified dispensary.

m)    If the applicant is a business organization, a statement under oath disclosing all of its owners, shareholders, partners, members, managers, directors, officers, or other similarly-situated individuals and entities and their addresses. If any of these above entities are business organizations rather than individuals, the applicant must disclose the identity of the owners of such entities or business organizations for each level of ownership until the disclosure contains the names of all individuals and their addresses.

n)    A detailed floor plan of the premises of the proposed RMD that identifies the square footage available and describes the functional areas of the RMD, including areas for any preparation of marijuana-infused products or open-air cultivation.

o)    A description of the security measures, including employee security policies, required by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for the RMD.

p)    Proposed security measures for the RMD, including lighting, fencing, storage, gates, and alarms to ensure the safety of persons and to protect the premises from theft.

q)    Detailed site plans that include all of the information required under rules and regulations of the Planning Board, including distances to any of the uses identified in subsection (D) of this section.

B.    Use.

1.    RMMCC and RMMDC facilities may only be involved in the uses permitted by its definition and may not include other businesses or services.

2.    No smoking, burning, application, or consumption of any product containing marijuana or marijuana-related products shall be permitted on the premises.

3.    Hours of operation for any RMD shall be established by the Planning Board, but in no event shall said facilities be open and/or operating between the hours of 9:00 PM and 8:00 AM, including delivery services.

4.    RMD facilities that can demonstrate that they comply with the agricultural exemption under M.G.L. Chapter 40A, §3, must still apply for site plan approval.

C.    Physical Requirements.

1.    No RMD shall have drive-through services.

2.    Ventilation. All RMMCC and RMMDC facilities shall be ventilated in such a manner that no:

a)    Pesticides, insecticides or other chemicals or products used in the cultivation or processing are dispersed into the outside atmosphere; and

b)    No odor from marijuana or its processing can be detected by a person with an unimpaired and otherwise normal sense of smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana business or at any adjoining use or property.

3.    Exterior signs shall identify only the name of the RMD, but shall not display advertisements for marijuana or any brand name, nor shall marijuana, marijuana-infused products, or associated products be displayed or clearly visible to a person from the exterior of the RMD.

4.    All exterior building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a manner as to prevent the public’s view of the interior from any public or private way or from any abutting property.

5.    If cultivation facility, a 6-foot fence or screening with security top should be erected.

D.    Location Requirements.

1.    No RMD facility shall be located within five hundred feet (500') of the following, or two hundred fifty feet (250') if located in the Central Core, as measured in a straight line from the building and/or area actively used;

a)    Public or private preschool, primary or secondary school, dance or gymnastics school, martial arts school, licensed day care center, or any other facility where children commonly congregate in an organized ongoing formal basis under 105 CMR 725.110(A)(14); or

b)    A public library; or

c)    A playground, athletic field, or any other recreational areas where children commonly congregate under CMR 725.110(A)(14) that are not contained within a building.

2.    No RMMCC is to be located within:

a)    One hundred feet (100') of any abutting, occupied residence in a residential zoning district, as measured in a straight line from existing structure to proposed development.

b)    Two hundred fifty feet (250') of any nonconforming residential structures in nonresidential districts, as measured in a straight line from existing structure to proposed development.

3.    No RMMDC is to be located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of any Residential Zoning District, residential structure, or any nonconforming residential structures in nonresidential districts. Distance shall be measured in a straight line from residential zone boundary line or from existing structure to proposed development.

4.    No marijuana or marijuana-based products shall be sold or grown or cultivated in motels and dormitories, or inside a mobile structure such as a cargo container, motor vehicle or other similar nonpermanent enclosure.

5.    The distance requirements may be reduced at the discretion of the Planning Board through the special permit application, if the applicant demonstrates that the marijuana establishment will employ adequate security measures to prevent diversion of marijuana to minors.

E.    Reporting Requirements.

1.    All special permit and site plan approval holders for an RMMCC or RMMDC facility shall provide the Police Department, Fire Department, Department of Inspections Services and the Planning Board with the names, phone numbers and email addresses of all management staff and key-holders, including a minimum of two (2) operators or managers of the facility identified as contact persons to whom one can provide notice if there are operating problems associated with the establishment. All such contact information shall be updated as needed to keep it current and accurate.

2.    The permit holder shall file a copy of any incident report required under 105 CMR 725.110(F) with the Department of Inspections Services, Board of Health, Police Department, Fire Department, and the Planning Board within 24 hours of creation by the RMD. Such reports may be redacted as necessary to comply with any applicable state or federal laws and regulations.

3.    The permit holder shall file a copy of any deficiency statement, plan of correction, summary cease and desist order, quarantine order, summary suspension order, order limiting sales, notice of a hearing, or final action issued by DPH or the Division of Administrative Law Appeals, as applicable, regarding the RMD with the Department of Inspection Services, Police Department, and Planning Board within 48 hours of receipt by the RMD.

4.    Each RMD permitted under this Zoning By-law shall as a condition of its special permit file an annual report to the Planning Board and the Town Clerk and provide a copy of all current applicable state licenses and registrations for the RMD and/or its owners, any updated operating policies required under 105 CMR 725.105 or by the Department of Public Health, the current insurance policies for the RMD, and demonstrated compliance with the conditions of the special permit.

5.    The owner or manager is required to respond by phone or email within twenty-four hours of contact by a city official concerning their RMMCC or RMMDC at the phone number or email address provided to the City as the contact for the business.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6.4. Approval/Transfer/Discontinuance of Use

A.    The special permit shall remain exclusively with the applicant (who shall also be known as “permit holder” after the granting of the special permit), who shall be the owner or lessee of the premises described in the application as the site for the proposed RMD, and shall terminate automatically on the date there is a voluntary or involuntary separation of the applicant’s title or leasehold interest in the premises or the applicant’s right to occupy the premises terminates for any reason.

B.    A special permit granted under this section is nontransferable and shall have a term limited to the duration of the applicant’s ownership or leasing of the premises as an RMD, dependent on the applicant’s continued existence as the same legal entity. Any violation of subsection (E) of this section shall be considered a “transfer” for purposes of this By-law.

C.    The special permit shall lapse upon the expiration or termination of the applicant’s registration by DPH.

D.    The permit holder shall notify the Department of Inspection Services and Police Department, and Planning Board in writing within 48 hours of the cessation of operation of the RMD or the expiration or termination of the permit holder’s registration with DPH.

E.    The legal entity and structure of the applicant/permit holder shall not change, as represented in compliance with Section 8.6.3(A)(2)(m).

F.    An RMD shall be required to remove all material, plants, equipment, and other paraphernalia, in compliance with 105 CMR 725.105(J) and (O), prior to surrendering state-issued licenses or permits; or within six months of ceasing operations, whichever comes first.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.6.5. Findings

In addition to the standard findings for a special permit or site plan approval the special permit granting authority must also find all the following:

A.    That the RMMCC or RMMDC facility demonstrates that it will meet all the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations;

B.    That the applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements of this section and other applicable sections of this By-law/Ordinance;

C.    That the RMMCC or RMMDC facility is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic impacts on abutters and other parties in interest;

D.    That the RMMCC or RMMDC facility provides adequate security measures to ensure that no individual participant will pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals, and that the storage and/or location of cultivation is adequately secured;

E.    That the RMMCC or RMMDC facility adequately addresses issues of traffic demand, circulation flow, parking and queuing, particularly at peak periods at the facility, and their impact on neighboring uses.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


8.7. ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES

A.    No special permit for an adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult paraphernalia store or adult video store may be issued to any person convicted of violating the provisions of G.L. c. 119, §63, or G.L. c. 272, §28.

B.    Adult-oriented businesses shall be permitted only when located outside the area circumscribed by a circle which has a radius consisting of the following distances from the specified uses or zoning districts:

1.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any residence zone;

2.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any public or private school;

3.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any church or other religious facility or institution;

4.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any public park;

5.    Seven hundred feet (700') from any day care center, nursery school, or kindergarten.

The radius distance shall be measured by following a straight line, without regard to intervening buildings or structures, from the nearest point of the property parcel upon which the proposed use is to be located, to the nearest point of the parcel of property or the land use district boundary line from which the proposed adult-oriented business is to be separated.

C.    Any existing adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult paraphernalia store or adult video store shall apply for a special permit within 90 days following the adoption of this By-law.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


SECTION 9. SPECIAL DISTRICTS


9.1. FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT


9.1.1. Purposes

The purposes of the Flood Plain District are to:

A.    Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and personal injury;

B.    Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials;

C.    Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from water quality, contamination, and pollution due to flooding;

D.    Avoid the loss of utility services which if damaged by flooding would disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions of the community beyond the site of flooding;

E.    Eliminate costs associated with the response and cleanup of flooding conditions;

F.    Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from flooding waters.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.1.2. Overlay District Defined

The Flood Plain District is herein established as an overlay district. The underlying permitted uses are allowed; provided, that they meet the requirements of this Section 9.1 and those of the Massachusetts State Building Code dealing with construction in flood plains. The Flood Plain District includes all special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A, A/1-30 on the Southbridge flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and the flood boundary and floodway maps, dated March 15, 1982, on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board and Zoning Enforcement Officer. These maps as well as the accompanying Southbridge flood insurance study are incorporated herein by reference.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.1.3. Base Flood Elevation and Floodway Data

A.    Floodway Data. In Zones A and AE along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B.    Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.1.4. Notification of Watercourse Alteration

Notify, in a riverine situation, the following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

A.    Adjacent communities;

B.    NFIP State Coordinator – Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation;

C.    NFIP Program Specialist – FEMA Region 1.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.1.5. Development Regulations

A.    Special Permits. In the floodway, designated on the flood boundary and floodway map, no structure or building shall be erected, constructed, substantially improved, or otherwise created or moved; no earth or other materials dumped, filled, or otherwise created or moved; no earth or other materials dumped, filled, excavated, or transferred, unless a special permit is granted by the Planning Board. A special permit may be issued under this Section 9.1 (subject to other applicable provisions of this By-law) if the application complies with all of the following provisions:

1.    The proposed use shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the underlying district.

2.    Within 10 days of receipt of the application, the Planning Board shall transmit one copy of the development plan to the Conservation Commission, Planning Board, Board of Health, DPW Director or designee and Zoning Enforcement Officer. Final action shall not be taken until reports have been received from the above boards or until 35 days have elapsed.

3.    All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and other development are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood.

4.    The Planning Board may specify such additional requirements and conditions it finds necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and the occupants of the proposed use.

B.    All development in the Flood Plain District, including structural and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit, must comply with G.L. c. 131, §40, and the following:

1.    780 CMR (Massachusetts State Building Code);

2.    310 CMR (Commonwealth of Massachusetts Regulations), Department of Environmental Protection, wetlands protection regulations (currently Section 10.00);

3.    Minimum requirements for the subsurface disposal of sanitary sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5).

Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above-referenced state regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of those regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2. WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT


9.2.1. Purposes

The purposes of this Section 9.2 are to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the Town by ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of drinking water for the residents, institutions, and businesses of Southbridge; and to preserve and protect the Town’s drinking water supplies from the detrimental use and development of land and waters within the watershed of the Town’s water supply reservoirs.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.2. Scope of Authority

A.    The Watershed Protection District is an overlay district and shall be superimposed on other zoning districts established by this By-law. The regulations applicable to the underlying districts shall remain in effect, except that where the Watershed Protection District imposes additional regulations, such regulations shall prevail.

B.    The Watershed Protection District includes all lands within the Town of Southbridge in which the topography of the land causes surface waters to drain into public water supply reservoirs. These areas are delineated on a map entitled "Watershed Protection District," dated January 25, 1993, which is hereby made a part of this By-law and is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk. The source map for the district is the Southbridge 7.5 X 15 minute quadrangle map prepared by the U.S. Geological Survey, 1982.

C.    When a lot is partially located within the Watershed Protection District, the regulations of this district shall only apply to the portion of the lot that lies within the district. Applicants are encouraged to locate uses and activities outside the district and as far from the watershed boundary as is feasible.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.3. Resolution of Disputes

A.    Due to the scale of the map, there may be small inaccuracies in the delineation of the watershed boundary. Where the bounds delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the applicant and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall conduct an on-site investigation to determine where the drainage divide lies.

B.    If agreement cannot be reached based on the on-site investigation, the burden of proof shall lie with the applicant to provide the Planning Board with information from a registered land surveyor showing where the drainage divide lies. The Director of Public Works shall review such information and submit a recommendation to the Planning Board. The Planning Board, by a simple majority vote, shall determine whether the regulations of the Watershed Protection District apply to the land in question.

C.    If agreement is reached regarding the location of the watershed boundary, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify the Planning Board on how the matter was resolved and include a map showing the location of the proposed use in relation to the boundary.

D.    When a building permit is requested for any proposed use within 100 feet of the watershed boundary, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forward to the Planning Board and Director of Public Works a copy of the application along with a map showing the proposed use in relation to the watershed boundary. Such officials may submit a recommendation to the Zoning Enforcement Officer whether or not they believe the use lies within the Watershed Protection District. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forward a copy of his decision on the matter to such officials, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer’s decision may be appealed pursuant to Section 2.2.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.4. Use Regulations

A.    Permitted Uses.

Uses permitted in the Residence 1 District (R1) are permitted in the same manner in the Watershed Protection District unless prohibited under subsection (B) of this section.

B.    Prohibited Uses.

1.    OSRD.

2.    Library or museum.

3.    Licensed hospital, sanitarium, nursing, rest, or convalescent home, boarding home for the aged or orphanage, other institution not for correctional purposes.

4.    Country club, fraternal lodge, or other social, civic, or recreational use of a nonprofit organization or membership club.

5.    Any of the following commercial recreational uses: boat, livery, ice skating rink, recreation camp, ski ground, riding academy or stable, picnic grounds, campground, tourist camp, swimming area, sporting events, other recreational and sporting facilities.

6.    Commercial golf courses.

7.    A dwelling or motel type unit complete with kitchen facilities erected for temporary or permanent residence.

8.    Commercial kennel, animal or veterinary hospital.

9.    Mortuary, undertaking or funeral establishment.

10.    Airport or other landing and servicing facility.

11.    Plant or structure for bulk processing of wood or lumber.

12.    Underground storage of oil, gasoline or other petroleum products.

13.    The dumping of snow containing salt or deicing chemicals.

14.    The rendering impervious by any means of more than either 25 percent of the area of a lot or 5,000 square feet. The Planning Board may grant a special permit to exceed this standard if it determines that a system for controlling runoff is installed that will maintain the quality of runoff to that prior to development.

15.    The removal of more than 25 percent of the natural and existing vegetation of a lot, except when necessary for an agricultural operation or pursuant to a state-approved forest cutting practices plan. The Planning Board may grant a special permit to exceed this standard if it determines that best management practices will be used during and after construction to prevent sediment-laden waters from leaving the site.

16.    Privately owned sewage treatment facilities treating more than 15,000 gallons per day.

17.    Landfills and open dumps; landfilling of sludge and septage; and automobile graveyards and junkyards.

18.    Home occupations involving the use or storage of hazardous materials in excess of normal residential use.

C.    Special Permit Uses. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, grant a special permit for any of the following uses:

1.    Storage of salt and other deicing chemicals, fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides, and manure shall be within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate.

2.    The use of road salt for ice control shall be minimized, consistent with public safety requirements.

3.    Above-ground storage tanks for oil, gasoline or other petroleum products shall be within a building, or in a freestanding container above ground level, on an impervious surface with protection adequate to contain a spill the size of the container’s total storage capacity. Floor drains shall be plugged to prevent discharges of leaks and spills.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.5. Minimum Lot Size 

The minimum lot size for all permitted uses shall be three (3) acres.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.6. Nonconforming Uses and Structures

Nonconforming uses and structures in the Watershed Protection District may be extended or altered through the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board upon a finding that such extension or alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the water supply than the existing use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.7. Erosion and Sedimentation Control

A.    When the vegetative cover is to be changed or removed on over five acres, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for the activity must be approved by the Planning Board.

B.    Soil erosion and sedimentation shall be minimized by the following erosion control management practices:

1.    Areas stripped of vegetation, graded, or otherwise disturbed shall be kept to the minimum size necessary for the use or activity. Sediment control measures shall be installed to remove sediment from runoff waters leaving the site.

2.    Vegetative stabilization measures shall also be employed. The banks of all dikes, slopes, basins or traps shall be stabilized with sod, seed, and anchored straw mulch within seven calendar days of disturbance. All other disturbed areas upon which active construction is not being undertaken shall be stabilized within 14 days.

3.    Topsoil stripped from disturbed areas shall be stockpiled in an approved area and stabilized with temporary vegetative cover if left for more than 30 days. Perimeter sediment controls shall be installed around the stockpiled topsoil.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.8. Setbacks

A.    Natural vegetation shall be retained in a buffer strip extending 150 feet inland from the bank of a public water supply or tributary. No new structures shall be constructed or located within the buffer strip except for structures required for operation of the municipal water supply. Driveways are permitted, and selective thinning and pruning are allowed to enhance views of the water.

B.    Wastewater disposal systems are prohibited within 200 feet of a public water supply and within 100 feet of a tributary to a public water supply. Replacement or repair of an existing septic system is permitted, subject to the approval of the Board of Health.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.1. FLOOD PLAIN OVERLAY DISTRICT


9.1.1. Purposes

The purposes of the Flood Plain District are to:

A.    Ensure public safety through reducing the threats to life and personal injury;

B.    Eliminate new hazards to emergency response officials;

C.    Prevent the occurrence of public emergencies resulting from water quality, contamination, and pollution due to flooding;

D.    Avoid the loss of utility services which if damaged by flooding would disrupt or shut down the utility network and impact regions of the community beyond the site of flooding;

E.    Eliminate costs associated with the response and cleanup of flooding conditions;

F.    Reduce damage to public and private property resulting from flooding waters.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.1.2. Overlay District Defined

The Flood Plain District is herein established as an overlay district. The underlying permitted uses are allowed; provided, that they meet the requirements of this Section 9.1 and those of the Massachusetts State Building Code dealing with construction in flood plains. The Flood Plain District includes all special flood hazard areas designated as Zone A, A/1-30 on the Southbridge flood insurance rate maps (FIRM), and the flood boundary and floodway maps, dated March 15, 1982, on file with the Town Clerk, Planning Board and Zoning Enforcement Officer. These maps as well as the accompanying Southbridge flood insurance study are incorporated herein by reference.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.1.3. Base Flood Elevation and Floodway Data

A.    Floodway Data. In Zones A and AE along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

B.    Base Flood Elevation Data. Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.1.4. Notification of Watercourse Alteration

Notify, in a riverine situation, the following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

A.    Adjacent communities;

B.    NFIP State Coordinator – Massachusetts Department of Conservation and Recreation;

C.    NFIP Program Specialist – FEMA Region 1.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.1.5. Development Regulations

A.    Special Permits. In the floodway, designated on the flood boundary and floodway map, no structure or building shall be erected, constructed, substantially improved, or otherwise created or moved; no earth or other materials dumped, filled, or otherwise created or moved; no earth or other materials dumped, filled, excavated, or transferred, unless a special permit is granted by the Planning Board. A special permit may be issued under this Section 9.1 (subject to other applicable provisions of this By-law) if the application complies with all of the following provisions:

1.    The proposed use shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the underlying district.

2.    Within 10 days of receipt of the application, the Planning Board shall transmit one copy of the development plan to the Conservation Commission, Planning Board, Board of Health, DPW Director or designee and Zoning Enforcement Officer. Final action shall not be taken until reports have been received from the above boards or until 35 days have elapsed.

3.    All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements to existing structures, and other development are prohibited unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided by the applicant demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood.

4.    The Planning Board may specify such additional requirements and conditions it finds necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public and the occupants of the proposed use.

B.    All development in the Flood Plain District, including structural and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit, must comply with G.L. c. 131, §40, and the following:

1.    780 CMR (Massachusetts State Building Code);

2.    310 CMR (Commonwealth of Massachusetts Regulations), Department of Environmental Protection, wetlands protection regulations (currently Section 10.00);

3.    Minimum requirements for the subsurface disposal of sanitary sewage, DEP (currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5).

Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above-referenced state regulations may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of those regulations.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2. WATERSHED PROTECTION DISTRICT


9.2.1. Purposes

The purposes of this Section 9.2 are to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the Town by ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of drinking water for the residents, institutions, and businesses of Southbridge; and to preserve and protect the Town’s drinking water supplies from the detrimental use and development of land and waters within the watershed of the Town’s water supply reservoirs.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.2. Scope of Authority

A.    The Watershed Protection District is an overlay district and shall be superimposed on other zoning districts established by this By-law. The regulations applicable to the underlying districts shall remain in effect, except that where the Watershed Protection District imposes additional regulations, such regulations shall prevail.

B.    The Watershed Protection District includes all lands within the Town of Southbridge in which the topography of the land causes surface waters to drain into public water supply reservoirs. These areas are delineated on a map entitled "Watershed Protection District," dated January 25, 1993, which is hereby made a part of this By-law and is on file in the Office of the Town Clerk. The source map for the district is the Southbridge 7.5 X 15 minute quadrangle map prepared by the U.S. Geological Survey, 1982.

C.    When a lot is partially located within the Watershed Protection District, the regulations of this district shall only apply to the portion of the lot that lies within the district. Applicants are encouraged to locate uses and activities outside the district and as far from the watershed boundary as is feasible.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.3. Resolution of Disputes

A.    Due to the scale of the map, there may be small inaccuracies in the delineation of the watershed boundary. Where the bounds delineated are in doubt or in dispute, the applicant and Zoning Enforcement Officer shall conduct an on-site investigation to determine where the drainage divide lies.

B.    If agreement cannot be reached based on the on-site investigation, the burden of proof shall lie with the applicant to provide the Planning Board with information from a registered land surveyor showing where the drainage divide lies. The Director of Public Works shall review such information and submit a recommendation to the Planning Board. The Planning Board, by a simple majority vote, shall determine whether the regulations of the Watershed Protection District apply to the land in question.

C.    If agreement is reached regarding the location of the watershed boundary, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify the Planning Board on how the matter was resolved and include a map showing the location of the proposed use in relation to the boundary.

D.    When a building permit is requested for any proposed use within 100 feet of the watershed boundary, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forward to the Planning Board and Director of Public Works a copy of the application along with a map showing the proposed use in relation to the watershed boundary. Such officials may submit a recommendation to the Zoning Enforcement Officer whether or not they believe the use lies within the Watershed Protection District. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forward a copy of his decision on the matter to such officials, and the Zoning Enforcement Officer’s decision may be appealed pursuant to Section 2.2.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.4. Use Regulations

A.    Permitted Uses.

Uses permitted in the Residence 1 District (R1) are permitted in the same manner in the Watershed Protection District unless prohibited under subsection (B) of this section.

B.    Prohibited Uses.

1.    OSRD.

2.    Library or museum.

3.    Licensed hospital, sanitarium, nursing, rest, or convalescent home, boarding home for the aged or orphanage, other institution not for correctional purposes.

4.    Country club, fraternal lodge, or other social, civic, or recreational use of a nonprofit organization or membership club.

5.    Any of the following commercial recreational uses: boat, livery, ice skating rink, recreation camp, ski ground, riding academy or stable, picnic grounds, campground, tourist camp, swimming area, sporting events, other recreational and sporting facilities.

6.    Commercial golf courses.

7.    A dwelling or motel type unit complete with kitchen facilities erected for temporary or permanent residence.

8.    Commercial kennel, animal or veterinary hospital.

9.    Mortuary, undertaking or funeral establishment.

10.    Airport or other landing and servicing facility.

11.    Plant or structure for bulk processing of wood or lumber.

12.    Underground storage of oil, gasoline or other petroleum products.

13.    The dumping of snow containing salt or deicing chemicals.

14.    The rendering impervious by any means of more than either 25 percent of the area of a lot or 5,000 square feet. The Planning Board may grant a special permit to exceed this standard if it determines that a system for controlling runoff is installed that will maintain the quality of runoff to that prior to development.

15.    The removal of more than 25 percent of the natural and existing vegetation of a lot, except when necessary for an agricultural operation or pursuant to a state-approved forest cutting practices plan. The Planning Board may grant a special permit to exceed this standard if it determines that best management practices will be used during and after construction to prevent sediment-laden waters from leaving the site.

16.    Privately owned sewage treatment facilities treating more than 15,000 gallons per day.

17.    Landfills and open dumps; landfilling of sludge and septage; and automobile graveyards and junkyards.

18.    Home occupations involving the use or storage of hazardous materials in excess of normal residential use.

C.    Special Permit Uses. The Planning Board may, in its discretion, grant a special permit for any of the following uses:

1.    Storage of salt and other deicing chemicals, fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides, and manure shall be within a structure designed to prevent the generation and escape of contaminated runoff or leachate.

2.    The use of road salt for ice control shall be minimized, consistent with public safety requirements.

3.    Above-ground storage tanks for oil, gasoline or other petroleum products shall be within a building, or in a freestanding container above ground level, on an impervious surface with protection adequate to contain a spill the size of the container’s total storage capacity. Floor drains shall be plugged to prevent discharges of leaks and spills.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.5. Minimum Lot Size 

The minimum lot size for all permitted uses shall be three (3) acres.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.6. Nonconforming Uses and Structures

Nonconforming uses and structures in the Watershed Protection District may be extended or altered through the issuance of a special permit by the Planning Board upon a finding that such extension or alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the water supply than the existing use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.7. Erosion and Sedimentation Control

A.    When the vegetative cover is to be changed or removed on over five acres, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for the activity must be approved by the Planning Board.

B.    Soil erosion and sedimentation shall be minimized by the following erosion control management practices:

1.    Areas stripped of vegetation, graded, or otherwise disturbed shall be kept to the minimum size necessary for the use or activity. Sediment control measures shall be installed to remove sediment from runoff waters leaving the site.

2.    Vegetative stabilization measures shall also be employed. The banks of all dikes, slopes, basins or traps shall be stabilized with sod, seed, and anchored straw mulch within seven calendar days of disturbance. All other disturbed areas upon which active construction is not being undertaken shall be stabilized within 14 days.

3.    Topsoil stripped from disturbed areas shall be stockpiled in an approved area and stabilized with temporary vegetative cover if left for more than 30 days. Perimeter sediment controls shall be installed around the stockpiled topsoil.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


9.2.8. Setbacks

A.    Natural vegetation shall be retained in a buffer strip extending 150 feet inland from the bank of a public water supply or tributary. No new structures shall be constructed or located within the buffer strip except for structures required for operation of the municipal water supply. Driveways are permitted, and selective thinning and pruning are allowed to enhance views of the water.

B.    Wastewater disposal systems are prohibited within 200 feet of a public water supply and within 100 feet of a tributary to a public water supply. Replacement or repair of an existing septic system is permitted, subject to the approval of the Board of Health.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)


SECTION 10. DEFINITIONS

For purposes of this By-law and unless the context of usage clearly indicates another meaning, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated herein. Words used in the present tense include the future. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. The word "and" includes "or" unless the contrary is evident from the text. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances, circumstances, or items of like character or kind. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "designed," "arranged," "intended," or "offered" to be used or occupied; the words "building," "structure," "lot," "land," or "premises" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or any portion thereof"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.

Terms and words not defined herein but defined in the State Building Code shall have meanings given therein unless a contrary intention clearly appears in this By-law. Words not defined in either place shall have the meaning given in the most recent edition of Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.

ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure located on the same lot with the main building, detached or attached, and customarily incidental and subordinate to the use of the main building.

ACCESSORY USE: A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the main building or use of land and that is located on the same lot and under the same ownership in all respects.

ADULT DAY CARE: A social day care or adult day health facility as those terms are defined by the Massachusetts Department of Elder Affairs.

ADULT USES. The following terms are associated with adult uses:

ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade books, magazines, and other matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in G.L. c. 272, §31.

ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant, tavern, dance hall, or similar commercial establishment which presents: (a) persons who appear in a state of nudity as defined in G.L. c. 272, §31; or (b) live performances which are characterized by an emphasis depicting anatomical areas specified as less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, and human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in G.L. c. 272, §31; or (c) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, photographic reproductions or any other visual media which are characterized by the depiction or description of anatomical areas specified as above, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in G.L. c. 272, §31.

ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building used for presenting material (including, but not limited to, motion picture films, video cassettes, cable television, slides or any other such visual media) distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in G.L. c. 272, §31.

ADULT PARAPHERNALIA STORE: An establishment having as a portion of its stock devices, objects, tools, or toys which are distinguished by their association with sexual activity, including sexual intercourse, sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in G.L. c. 272, §31.

ADULT USE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its business activity, stock-in-trade, or other materials for sale, rental or display, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct as defined in G.L. c. 272, §31, including but not limited to the following: any adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult paraphernalia store or adult video store as defined in these ADULT USES definitions.

ADULT VIDEO STORE: An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade – for sale or rent – motion picture films, video cassettes, and similar audio/visual media, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis depicting, describing, or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined in G.L. c. 272, §31.

SUBSTANTIAL OR SIGNIFICANT PORTION: The terms "substantial or significant portion" as used herein shall mean any of the following: (a) 20 percent or more of the business inventory or stock of merchandise for sale, rental distribution, or exhibition during any period of time; or (b) 20 percent or more of the annual number of gross sales, rentals, or other business transactions; or (c) 20 percent or more of the annual gross business revenue; or (d) 20 percent or more of the hours during which the establishment is open.

AGRICULTURE, EXEMPT: As defined in G.L. c. 40A, §3.

AGRICULTURE, NONEXEMPT: The keeping of livestock on a nonexempt farm in a manner that complies with regulations of the Board of Health, including chickens, turkeys, ducks, cows, goats, sheep, alpaca, llamas, donkeys, burros and mules, wild rabbits, and emu, and excludes roosters, pigs, geese, bulls, and oxen, and other nondomestic animals.

AS OF RIGHT SITING: A use designated as YES (Y) in the Table of Use Regulations that may proceed without the need for a special permit, amendment, waiver, variance, or other discretionary approval, but may be subject to site plan review to determine conformance with these By-laws. Such uses can be reasonably regulated by site plan approval and inspections staff.

AUTO-RELATED USES. The following terms relate to auto services and sales:

AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE: An establishment, garage or work areas enclosed within a building for the servicing and repair of motor vehicles, but not including (1) installing new parts or accessories that are not replacements for existing parts or accessories (e.g., customizing), or (2) towing or storing a motor vehicle, or (3) storage of vehicles for the cannibalization of vehicle parts, or (4) fuel sales, or (5) indoor or outdoor sale and rental of motor vehicles, box truck, cargo van, motorcycle, trailer, all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile, boat or personal water craft.

AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: Any building, structure, or area of land used for the retail sale of automobile fuels, oils, and accessories, where repair service, if any, is incidental; excluding storage of abandoned motor vehicles on the premises. May include the sale of propane or kerosene as accessory uses.

GARAGE, PRIVATE: Covered space for the housing of motor vehicles, but not for commercial storage or rental of more than two (2) stalls.

GARAGE, PUBLIC OR STORAGE: A building or part thereof, other than private garage, for the storage of motor vehicles.

BED AND BREAKFAST: An owner-occupied dwelling providing overnight accommodations for transient guests where only breakfast is served.

BILLBOARD: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service entertainment or attraction, sold, offered or located elsewhere than upon the same lot where such sign is displayed or only incidentally upon such lot.

BODY ART: The practice of physical adornment by permitted establishments and practitioners using, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Board of Registration in medicine, such as implants under the skin, which are prohibited.

BUILDING-RELATED TERMS. The following terms apply to buildings:

BUILDING: A combination of any materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for shelter of persons, animals or property. For this definition, "roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering whether or not permanent in nature. The word "building" shall be construed where the context requires as though followed by the words "or part or parts, thereof."

BUILDING AREA: The ground area enclosed by the walls of a building together with the area of all covered porches and other roofed portions.

BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the established grade in business or industry districts, or from the natural grade in residence districts if higher than the established grade or if no grade has been established, to the level of the highest point of the roof beams in the case of flat roofs or roofs inclining not more than one inch to the foot, and to the mean height level between the top of the main plate and the highest ridge in the case of other roofs. Where the lot faces on two or more streets the "established grade" is the average level of the grade on that street frontage where the average grade is highest.

STORY: A "story" is that portion of a building between a floor and the ceiling next above it.

STORY, GROUND: A "ground" story or "first" story is the lowest story entirely above the established or natural grade, whichever level is higher, except that if any basement or cellar is used for residence purposes by more than one person, such basement or cellar shall be deemed to be the first story.

STORY, HALF: The space used for residence purposes above the highest full story provided the roof plate is not higher than four (4) feet above the floor. An "attic" is the space between the top story and a pitched roof.

BUILDING COMMISSIONER: The administrative chief of the Building Department, meeting the minimum qualifications in G.L. c. 143, §3, and certified in accordance with 780 CMR R7, with responsibility for administering and enforcing 780 CMR in the Town of Southbridge.

CAFETERIA: A type of food service establishment where food is provided for consumption on the premises on a self-serve or limited-service basis where customers select food from a buffet-style display, and with tables or group seating arrangements in a common dining room.

CAMP, VACATION: Land used, or intended to be used, let, or rented for occupancy by campers traveling by automobile or otherwise; or for occupancy by house trailers, tents, or moveable or temporary dwellings, rooms or sleeping quarters of any kind.

CHILD CARE CENTER: As defined in G.L. c. 15D, §1A.

CLEARING: The removal and/or cutting of trees, shrubs, bushes, or bush; or grubbing.

CLUB: An association of persons which is the owner, lessee or occupant of an establishment operated solely for a recreational, social, fraternal, religious, political, or athletic purpose, whose activities are confined to the members and guests and are not generally extended to the general public and includes the establishment so operated.

COMMERCIAL RECREATION, INDOOR: A structure for recreational, social, or amusement purposes, which may include as an accessory use the consumption of food and drink, including all connected rooms or space with a common means of egress and entrance. Places of assembly shall include theatres, concert halls, dance halls, skating rinks, bowling alleys, health clubs, dance studios, or other commercial recreational centers conducted for or not for profit.

COMMERCIAL RECREATION, OUTDOOR: Drive-in theatre, golf course/driving range, bathing beach, sports club, horseback riding stable, boathouse, game preserve, marina or other commercial recreation carried on in whole or in part outdoors, except those activities more specifically designated in this By-law.

CONTRACTOR’S YARD: Land used for the storage of commercial construction equipment, materials, and supplies and for the parking of registered commercial vehicles.

CORNER LOT: See LOT.

DORMITORY: Housing for students and faculty of educational institutions.

DWELLING- AND RESIDENCE-RELATED TERMS. The following terms relate to dwellings and types of dwellings (See also SENIOR HOUSING):

DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY: A building designed or intended or used as the residence of three or more families, each occupying a separate dwelling unit and living independently of each other, and who may have a common right in halls and stairways; with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided.

DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A dwelling other than a mobile home, singly and apart from any other building, designed or intended or used exclusively as the residence of one family.

DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE OR SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A residential building of at least three but not more than eight single-family dwelling units sharing at least one common or party or fire wall, and with each building having at least one floor at ground level with a separate entrance.

DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached residential building designed or intended or used exclusively as the residence of two families. A two-family dwelling shall not include a detached single-family dwelling with an accessory apartment.

GROUP HOME: A premises licensed by or operated by an agency of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or subdivision thereof as a special residence for people with disabilities.

FAMILY: Any number of persons related to one another by blood, marriage, or adoption, all residing together as a single integral housekeeping unit; or not more than three unrelated persons residing together as a single, integral housekeeping unit. This definition shall not preclude more than three unrelated people with disabilities, as defined in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, as amended, occupying a group home.

FARM: Any parcel of land which is used primarily for the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry and dairy products. It includes farm structures within the prescribed limits, and the storage of equipment used. (See also AGRICULTURE.)

FAST ORDER FOOD: Food which is primarily intended for immediate consumption; available upon a short waiting time; packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold.

FLOOR AREA, GROSS: The sum of the areas of the several floors of a building, including areas used for human occupancy in basements, attics and penthouses as measured about the exterior face of the exterior walls.

FLOOR AREA, NET: The interior floor area of a dwelling unit exclusive of basements, stairwells, halls, bathrooms, corridors, attics, walls, partitions and attached accessory buildings.

FRONTAGE STREET: A street which provides the required lot frontage for a building. When a lot is bounded by more than one street, any one of them, but only one, may be designated as the frontage street by the owner; provided, that the street meets the frontage requirement and that the principal permitted building on the lot is numbered on such frontage street. However, in the case of a lot bounded by two streets forming an interior angle of more than 135 degrees, their combined frontage between lot lines may be used to satisfy the lot frontage requirement.

GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION: A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof mounted and has a minimum output of electric power of 250 kilowatts, direct current.

HOME OCCUPATION: Any activity conducted as a residential accessory use by a resident within the dwelling for financial gain. A home occupation is incidental to, and clearly subordinate to, the residential use of the property.

HOTEL: A building intended and designed primarily for transient or overnight occupancy, divided into separate units within the same building, with or without public dining facilities, with access to units primarily from interior lobbies, courts, or halls. (See also MOTEL.)

LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET: An off-street space or berth, on the same lot with a building, for the temporary parking of vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or material, which has access to a street, alley or other appropriate means of ingress and egress.

LOT-RELATED TERMS. The following terms apply to the regulation of lots:

LOT: A single tract of land held in single ownership throughout and which is bounded by streets, ponds, waterways, or by land of other owners.

LOT, CORNER: A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more intersecting streets 20 feet or more in width.

LOT DEPTH: The mean distance from a street line of the lot to its opposite rear line, measured in the mean general direction of the side lines of the lot. The "width of a lot" is its mean width measured at right angles to its depth.

LOT FRONTAGE: The continuous portion of the line separating a lot from a street to which the owner of the lot can provide the physical access to a principal building on the lot, in compliance with applicable By-laws, regulations or laws, for motor vehicles to reach required off-street parking spaces or loading bays, and for emergency services such as fire protection or ambulance service, and for other vehicles to gain access to the principal building for deliveries, such as mail.

LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite to the street line or in the case of a corner lot the rear lot line may be elected by the owner.

YARD, FRONT: A space across the full width of the lot and extending from the street line of such lot to that point on the building nearest to such street line.

YARD, REAR: A space across the full width of the lot and extending from the rear lot line to that point on the building nearest to such rear lot line. In the case of a triangular lot with only one side fronting on a street, the rear yard shall be the open unoccupied space between the rear wall of the building and a line halfway between such rear wall and the point of intersection of the side lines of the lot.

YARD, SIDE: A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between a building and the adjacent side line of the lot on which the building is located.

MANUFACTURING: The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products, and the blending of materials, such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors.

MIXED-USE BUILDING: A building or group of buildings under one or single ownership which contains dwellings located above the ground floor of an institutional, civic, office, commercial, or retail use.

MOBILE HOME: Any structure with wheels or designed for the attachment of wheels built on a chassis, enabling it to be conveyed upon the public streets or highways, and is duly licensable as a vehicle, designed and constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or a sleeping place for one or more persons and is equipped with bath facilities, flush toilet and designed to be connected to a water supply and to a sewage disposal system, whether resting on wheels, jacks or other foundations.

MOTEL: A building intended and designed primarily for transient or overnight occupancy, divided into separate units within the same building, with or without public dining facilities, and characterized by direct access to every unit from an automobile, parking spaces or facility. (See also HOTEL.)

NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE: A lawfully existing use or structure which does not conform to the provisions of this By-law.

OPEN LAND: Any space on a lot not occupied by a building.

PARKING AREA: Any open space used for parking motor vehicles exclusively, and in which no gasoline or fuel or motor vehicle accessories are sold or no other business is conducted.

PREMISES: That portion of a lot, structure or building actually in use for the specific purpose or use under consideration.

PROFESSIONAL OR BUSINESS OFFICE: A building or part thereof for the transaction of business or the provision of services exclusive of the receipt, sale, storage, or processing of merchandise, including, but not limited to, offices of banks and financial institutions, medical offices, medical clinics, and others.

RESTAURANT: A place where the primary function is the serving of food and beverages.

ROOMING HOUSE: An owner-occupied dwelling providing rooms for rent to not more than four unrelated people paying rent on a weekly or monthly basis, with shared cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities and adequate means of emergency egress as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer and subject to annual licensure by the Town Council.

SAFE/SOBER HOUSE: A single-family dwelling, certified by the National Alliance for Recovery Residences, Massachusetts Alliance of Sober Houses, or other recognized professional organization, providing temporary accommodations to individuals recovering from substance abuse and addiction.

SENIOR HOUSING. The following uses are associated with senior residential development:

ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE: An assisted living residence is a long-term senior residential facility that provides personal care support services such as meals, medication management, bathing, dressing, and transportation, principally for people age 55 years and over, and certified by the Massachusetts Office of Elder Affairs.

CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY: A senior residential development that provides a continuum of senior housing and care services principally for people age 55 years and over, operated or sponsored as a coordinated unit by a corporation or organization, having among its principal purposes the provision of housing and associated services for senior citizens. A CCRC shall include a variety of housing types and may also include semi-institutional facilities such as skilled nursing care or a rehabilitation facility.

INDEPENDENT LIVING UNITS: Multifamily buildings in a senior residential development that are designed and intended for occupancy principally by people age 55 years and over, with units that include some basic services such as meals, housekeeping, grounds maintenance, security, and common areas and common facilities for events and activities benefiting residents of the development.

SHOPPING CENTER: A group of retail and other commercial tenants that is planned, owned, and managed as a single property, with on-site parking for patrons of the tenant establishments.

SIGN: The term "sign" shall include outdoor structures for advertising, letters, words, models, devices, symbols, revolving or flashing lights, trademarks, and shall include every kind of structure that is arranged, designed or used as an outdoor advertisement, announcement or direction.

STREET LINE: The "street line" is the dividing line between a street and a lot.

STREET, ROAD OR WAY: An area of land dedicated, approved by the Planning Board, or legally open for public travel under at least one of the following classifications: a public way duly laid out by the Town of Southbridge, the Worcester County Commissioners, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or a way which the Southbridge Town Clerk certifies is maintained by public authority and used as a public way excluding, however, limited access highway; or a way shown on a definitive plan approved and endorsed in accordance with the subdivision control laws; or a way in existence prior to said subdivision control law having become effective in the Town of Southbridge (March 11, 1940), having, in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the building erected or to be erected thereon.

STRUCTURE: A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give support or shelter, such as a building, framework, retaining wall, tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole, mast for radio antenna or the like. The word "structure" shall be construed, where the context allows, as though followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."

USE: The purpose for which land or building is occupied, or maintained, arranged, designed or intended.

ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The Building Inspector unless otherwise designated by the Town Manager.

(Town Council Minutes 11/5/2018)



-----------------------------

The Southbridge Code of By-Laws is current through legislation passed April 22, 2019.

Disclaimer: The Town Clerk's Office has the official version of the Southbridge Code of By-Laws. Users should contact the Town Clerk's Office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

Town Website: http://www.ci.southbridge.ma.us/ Town Telephone: (508) 764-5408

Code Publishing Company