COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
COUNTY OF MIDDLESEX
BY-LAWS
of the
TOWN OF WESTON
Includes additions and amendments through November 2018
i
TOWN OF WESTON, MASSACHUSETTS
GENERAL BY-LAWS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I TOWN MEETING ..................................................................................1
Article II POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWN OFFICERS .................................3
Article III POLICE REGULATIONS ......................................................................6
Article IV USE OF WAYS .......................................................................................8
Article V PENALTIES ............................................................................................9
Article VI BUILDING CODE ................................................................................10
Article VII GAS PIPING AND GAS APPLIANCES .............................................10
Article VIII ZONING BY-LAW ...............................................................................10
Article IX BILLBOARDS, SIGNS OR OTHER ADVERTISING DEVICES ......10
Article X PLANNING BY-LAW ..........................................................................11
Article XI MATERIAL REMOVAL BY-LAW .....................................................11
Article XII EMPLOYEES' VACATIONS ...............................................................12
Article XIII PARK LAND ........................................................................................12
Article XIV FIRE FIGHTER'S INDEMNIFICATION.............................................12
Article XV CONSERVATION LAND ....................................................................12
Article XVI (Accumulated Sick Leave) ....................................................................13
Article XVII COUNCIL ON AGING .........................................................................14
Article XVIII (Operation Of Ambulance Service) .......................................................14
Article XIX TEMPORARY REPAIRS ON PRIVATE WAYS ...............................15
Article XX DOG REGULATIONS .........................................................................15
Article XXI BURGLAR ALARMS ..........................................................................18
Article XXII PERMANENT BUILDING COMMITTEE .........................................19
Article XXIII SCENIC ROADS BY-LAW .................................................................23
Article XXIV CRESCENT STREET HISTORIC DISTRICT ....................................26
Article XXV DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION ....................................................31
Article XXVI DEMOLITION DELAY .......................................................................32
Article XXVII STORMWATER AND EROSION CONTROL ...................................35
Article XXVIII WATER CONSERVATION .................................................................45
Article XXIX COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE ..............................48
Article XXX FARM PRESERVATION .....................................................................50
Article XXXI ILLICIT DISCHARGE .........................................................................51
Article XXXII STRETCH ENERGY CODE ................................................................58
Article XXXIII WESTON AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND.......................58
Article XXXIV DEPARTMENTAL REVOLVING FUNDS ........................................60
Article XXXV PLASTIC BAG BAN ............................................................................62
Article XXXVI MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS ..................................................63
ii
Article
XXXVII WESTON HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY…………………………………63
Appendix 1 STATUTES ACCEPTED……………………………………………….A1
Appendix 2 SPECIAL ACTS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL COURT
LISTING……………………………………………………………….. A6
Appendix 3 SPECIAL ACTS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL COURT
TEXT……………………………………………………………...…......A9
1
ARTICLE I
TOWN MEETING
SECTION 1. For the election of officers and the determination of matters by ballot the annual
town meeting shall be held on such Saturday in March, April or May as the Selectmen shall fix.
For the transaction of all other business the meeting shall be held on the next Monday after such
Saturday. Special town meetings may be held at such times as the Selectmen may order.
SECTION 2. Subject to law, the Selectmen shall fix and state in the warrant for the annual town
meeting the hour at which the meeting shall be called and the polls opened, and the hour at
which they may be closed, on the Saturday fixed under Section 1 for the election of officers and
the determination of matters by ballot; and an hour, not earlier than 7:00 P.M., on the next
Monday after such Saturday for the holding of the meeting for the transaction of all other
business.
SECTION 3. Notice of an annual town meeting shall be given by posting at the Town Hall a
copy of the warrant therefor not less than seven days before the day named in the warrant for
said annual meeting and notice of a special town meeting shall be given by posting at the Town
Hall a copy of the warrant therefor not less than fourteen days before the day named in the
warrant for said special town meeting, and for every town meeting by posting at least two other
copies at such other places in the Town as may hereafter be fixed by vote of the Town, or by
vote of the Selectmen in case the Town has taken no action in the matter. The foregoing shall be
deemed to be legal notification of such meeting, and the legal service of such warrant. In
addition, the Town Clerk shall cause a copy of the warrant to be delivered or mailed, postage
prepaid, to every residence in the Town at least seven days prior to the time named in the warrant
for holding the meeting, but such delivering and mailing shall not be deemed to be a part of the
legal service of the warrant and failure on the part of the Town Clerk to comply with this by-law
shall not be considered a default of legal notice of said annual or special town meeting.
SECTION 4. In the event a town meeting, whether an annual town meeting or a special town
meeting, fails to complete the business required by the warrant to be acted upon on the date
designated in the warrant, the town meeting shall be adjourned from time to time, as designated,
by vote of the meeting, Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays only excepted, until such business is
completed.
SECTION 5. Notice of the adjournment of any town meeting, stating the time and place to
which the meeting has been adjourned, shall be posted by the Town Clerk at the Town Hall as
soon as practicable after the adjournment.
(Sections 1 - 5 amended effective 9-4-73.)
(Section 3 further amended effective 9-23-93.)
(Section 2 further amended effective 3-26-2015.)
SECTION 6. The number of voters necessary to constitute a quorum at any town meeting shall
be eighty (80), but any number may adjourn any meeting to a stated time and place. The
Moderator shall determine and announce the presence of a quorum, and his determination shall
be conclusive upon the question of fact unless his determination be doubted by a registered voter,
in which case a count shall be taken and recorded in the records by the Town Clerk.
(Amendment Effective 9-11-12.)
SECTION 7. All articles in the warrant shall be acted upon in their numerical order unless the
meeting by vote of two-thirds of the registered voters present and voting shall otherwise
determine.
2
SECTION 8. After any article in the warrant has been acted upon, and disposed of, or passed
over and so disposed of, such article shall not be considered at the same session of an annual or
special town meeting except by vote of two-thirds of the registered voters present and voting on
a motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider may be made by either the prevailing or losing
side but may not be entertained by the moderator unless made not later than the same session of
the meeting at which all action is completed on the article under which the vote to be
reconsidered has taken place. (Effective 8-30-86.)
SECTION 9
A. Voting Procedures. All votes on all motions, unless otherwise mandated by the laws of
the Commonwealth or otherwise provided hereinafter, shall be taken initially by display
of official voting cards or by such other methods or procedures, which may include the
use of any electronic tally system, as may be voted from time to time by Town Meeting.
Town Meeting may use an electronic tally system to provide for individually counted and
reported votes on all motions or only on those motions that would require a supermajority
greater than 2/3, or otherwise as may also be voted by Town Meeting.
B. Counting Votes.
i. The Moderator shall declare all votes, regardless of required quantum. If a supermajority is
required by statute, such vote shall be individually counted using a standing vote count or an
electronic tally system or otherwise; provided, however, that the Moderator shall have authority
to declare a 2/3 vote without a count. If the Town uses an electronic tally system with individual
votes counted and reported, the count shall be declared by the Moderator with the vote, even if a
count is not otherwise required.
ii. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Section 9, if any voter calls for a count
immediately after the Moderator's declaration of the vote, or if the Moderator deems a count
necessary or advisable for any reason, the Moderator shall call for a count using a standing vote
count or an electronic tally system or otherwise and declare the outcome of the count. For any
such vote initially taken using an electronic tally system, the Moderator shall manually tally the
electronically recorded votes, if the electronic tally system so permits, order another electronic
tally to be taken that provides a count of individual votes, or call for a standing vote count. In
lieu of a complete vote count, the Moderator may choose to count the voters who appear to the
Moderator to be in the minority first and then count the voters who appear to the Moderator to be
in the majority only or at least to the extent necessary to determine the result of the vote, based
on the required quantum.
iii. If the Moderator has reason to question the validity or accuracy of any kind of voting system,
the Moderator may instead call for voice votes, standing vote counts, and/or ballot votes.
(Amendment Effective 5/15/2013)
(Amendment Effective 5/8/2017)
SECTION 10. When a question is before the meeting, the following motions, to wit:
To adjourn,
To lay on the table,
For the previous question,
To postpone to a time certain,
To commit, recommit, or refer,
3
To amend,
To postpone indefinitely,
shall be received and shall have precedence in the foregoing order, and the first three shall be
decided without debate.
SECTION 11. The procedure in town meetings when not otherwise prescribed shall be
governed by the latest published edition of Town Meeting Time so far as applicable.
(Amendment to Section 11, Effective
5/12/2014.)
ARTICLE II
POWERS AND DUTIES OF TOWN OFFICERS
SECTION 1. The Selectmen shall have general direction and management of the property and
affairs of the Town in all matters not otherwise provided by the law of the Commonwealth or by
these by-laws.
SECTION 2. In all cases not otherwise provided for by law, the Selectmen may bring suit in the
name of the town against the principal and sureties named in any bond given to the Town by any
officer, agent, contractor, or other person for breach of the condition of such bond. The
Selectmen shall cause the appearance and answer of the Town to be entered and made in all suits
brought against the town at law or in equity, and may employ counsel to defend the same. They
may commence and prosecute suits at law and in equity in the name and behalf of the Town in
all cases not otherwise provided for by law, and may employ counsel therein. The Selectmen
shall consider all claims made against the Town and may authorize the payment of any amount
not exceeding twelve hundred ($1,200.00) dollars in settlement of any such claim, and to effect
such settlement the Selectmen may authorize the necessary payment from the town treasury of
any funds not otherwise appropriated.
(Amendment effective 8-16-72.)
SECTION 3. Within forty-eight hours after the dissolution or adjournment without day of any
town meeting, the Town Clerk shall transmit to the Selectmen, to the Town Treasurer, to the
Auditor, and to the Assessors respectively, a certified copy of all votes appropriating money or
authorizing the expenditure of money or otherwise affecting the finances of the Town, and
within the same period the Town Clerk shall transmit to all other town officers or committees a
certified copy of any vote of the Town affecting their respective powers or duties.
SECTION 4. The annual town report shall be printed and bound under the direction of the
Board of Selectmen. It shall contain the reports of town officers and committees required by
law, and such other reports or materials as the Town or the Board of Selectmen may direct. All
Town officers and committees of the Town shall, unless otherwise directed, file their reports by
the date determined by the Board of Selectmen.
(Amendment effective 10-10-02.)
SECTION 5. All Town officers and committees who intend to recommend appropriations or
expenditures of money for the new fiscal year shall file such recommendations with the
Selectmen not later than the twentieth day of December, and shall accompany such
recommendations with all such information as may be requested by the Selectmen. The
Selectmen in their annual report shall recommend a budget for the new fiscal year. This budget
shall include in detail definite recommendations of the Selectmen relative to the amounts which
4
should be appropriated by the Town for all public purposes, and may include recommendations
as to the financing of the expenditures recommended.
SECTION 6. The Town Clerk shall post the annual town report on the Town’s website and
shall cause a sufficient number of printed copies of the annual town report to be made available
for Town residents desiring copies at the Town Library, Town Hall and at other such locations
determined by the Board of Selectmen, not less than seven days before the day fixed for the
annual town meeting.
(Amendment effective 12-1-08.)
SECTION 7. The Collector of Taxes shall cause to be printed upon each tax bill a statement of
the law relative to the date when taxes are payable, the rate of interest charged on unpaid taxes,
and the valuation upon which such tax is based.
SECTION 7A. Interest Charges-Past Due Bills. The due dates for the payment of all municipal
charges and bills shall be 30 days after the charge or bill is issued by the Town, unless otherwise
specified by a general law, special act of the Commonwealth or by the Board of Selectmen.
Interest accrues at the same rate as charged on tax bills under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter
59, Section 57. The Collector shall have the authority to waive interest totaling up to $10. The
Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to abate any such interest charges, in whole or in
part.
(Effective 11-24-03.)
SECTION 8. Except as otherwise provided by law, no property of the Town shall be sold,
exchanged, or otherwise disposed of, except with the written approval of the Selectmen duly
recorded in their records.
SECTION 8A. The Selectmen may sell or authorize Town Committees or Officers to sell
personal property of the Town of value not greater than two thousand ($2,000.00) dollars. All
other sales of personal property of the Town shall be made by the Selectmen either: (1) for the
amount offered by the highest bidder after advertising such personal property for sale for one
week in any newspaper having general circulation in the Town or (2) for an amount consistent
with the value of the personal property as established by an up-to-date appraisal of such personal
property obtained by the Selectmen prior to sale. (Effective 9-30-77.)
SECTION 9. Except as otherwise provided by law, the Treasurer shall have custody of deeds,
bonds, contracts, insurance policies, and other similar documents owned by the Town, except
that the bond given by the Treasurer to the Town shall be in the custody of the Selectmen.
SECTION 10. There shall be a Finance Committee composed of nine voters of the Town who
shall serve without pay and shall not, while serving on said committee, hold any other town
office. Within thirty days after the adjournment of the annual town meeting, the Moderator shall
appoint three persons to serve on said committee for a term of three years, ending with the final
adjournment of the third annual town meeting thereafter held. The members of the committee
shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified, and any vacancy shall be
filled by the remaining members of the committee and the Town Clerk. The committee shall
choose a chairman and a secretary, and shall, prior to the annual town meeting, confer with the
Selectmen for consideration of the annual budget, and may confer with other town officers, and
may hold public hearings. The committee may consider all financial and other questions coming
before the Town for action or affecting the interests of the Town, and may at any time make
reports or recommendations in print or otherwise to town officers or committees or to the voters,
5
and all such reports and recommendations shall be printed at the expense of the Town, if the
committee so requests.
SECTION 11. The Collector of Taxes shall collect under the title of Town Collector all
accounts due the Town, except the collection of interest on investments of sinking or trust funds.
All bills for accounts due the Town shall state that all checks, drafts, or money orders shall be
made payable or to the order of the Town of Weston and not to or to the order of any officer,
board or commission.
SECTION 12. All town officers shall pay into the town treasury all fees received by them by
virtue of their office.
SECTION 13.1 The town collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all
municipal taxes, assessments, betterments, and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to as
the collector, shall annually, and may periodically, furnish to each department, board,
commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the licensing authority, that issues licenses or
permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise,
hereinafter referred to as the party, that has neglected or refused to pay any local taxes, fees,
assessments, betterments or other municipal charges and that such party has not filed in good
faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the appellate
tax board. (Section 13.1 amended May 8, 2017)
SECTION 13.2 The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list furnished to the
licensing authority from the collector or with respect to any activity, event or other matter which
is the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried out or
exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose
name appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the collector; provided,
however, that written notice is given to the party and the collector, as required by applicable
provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen days after
said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said
license or permit to any party. The collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing
conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made by
the licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be
made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any
other proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or
suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be
reissued or renewed until the licensing authority receives a certificate issued by the collector that
the party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as of the date of issuance of
said certificate.
SECTION 13.3 Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the
license or permit, and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory
compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the
suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given
notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
SECTION 13.4 The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it
finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or
6
stockholders, if any, or members of his/her immediate family, as defined in section 1 of Chapter
268A in the business or activity conducted in or on said property.
Section 13 shall not apply to the following licenses and permits authorized by the following
Massachusetts General Laws: open burning, section 13 of chapter 48; bicycle permits, section
11A of chapter 85; sales of articles for charitable purposes, section 33 of chapter 101; children’s
work permits, section 69 of chapter 149; clubs, associations dispensing food or beverage
licenses, section 21E of chapter 140; dog licenses, section 137 of chapter 140; fishing, hunting,
trapping licenses, section 12 of chapter 131; marriage licenses, section 28 of chapter 207 and
theatrical events and public exhibition permits, section 181 of chapter 140.
(Effective 5/12/2004)
SECTION 14. The Town Manager shall, pursuant to the provisions of G.L. c. 82A and 520
CMR 14.00, designate a board or officer to issue permits for trench excavations and to establish
fees therefor.
SECTION 15. The first 10 minutes of each meeting of every Town of Weston board and
committee be made available for resident questions and comments, whenever possible, in the
discretion of the chair.
(Effective 4/12/2008)
(Section 15 added Effective
5/20/2013)
SECTION 16. There shall be a Memorial Day Committee of three (3) members to be appointed
by the Moderator to implement and oversee the Town’s Memorial Day activities. In appointing
members to the committee, the Moderator shall seek, but not be limited to, members from groups
representing school parents, the Boy Scouts of America and Girl Scouts of the USA (or similar
organizations), and veterans. Members shall be appointed by the Moderator to initial terms of
one, two and three years, and thereafter for terms of three years.
provided, further, that the vote taken hereunder shall supersede any previous votes establishing a
Memorial Day Committee in the Town.
(Section 16 added Effective 11/29/2016)
(Section 16 amended 11/28/2018 Effective 3/26/2019)
ARTICLE III
POLICE REGULATIONS
SECTION 1. No person shall affix, or in any way attach any poster, handbill, notice, figure, or
advertisement to, or otherwise deface any wall, fence, tree, post, building, or structure within the
limits of any highway, park, or other public property in the Town.
SECTION 2. No person shall throw, scatter, or place, or cause or permit to be thrown, scattered
or placed within the limits of any highway, park, or other public property, or in any public
building, or on any private property, except with the consent of the owner thereof, any ashes,
garbage, papers, glass, crockery, metal, cigars, cigarettes or matches or any other form of
7
rubbish, refuse or waste material, or within the limits of any highway, except with the approval
of the Superintendent of Streets, any rock, stone, crushed stone or gravel.
SECTION 3. No person, except by authority lawfully given by a public officer, shall cut, prune,
or trim any trees, shrubs, or plants within the limits of any highway, path, or other public
property, whether for the purpose of erecting poles and wires thereon or otherwise, without the
consent in each instance of the Tree Warden, or on any private property without the consent of
the owner thereof.
SECTION 4. No person shall pasture cattle or other animals, or tie or fasten any horse, cattle or
other animal to any tree or shrub within the limits of any highway, path, or other public property.
SECTION 5. Every person operating or in charge of an automobile, motorcycle, or other
vehicle with the limits of any highway, park, or other public property in the Town shall, upon
request of any constable or police officer, forthwith move the same as directed by said officer.
SECTION 6. No person shall fire or discharge any firearms or explosives of any kind within the
limits of any highway, park, or other public property, or on any private property, except with the
consent of the owner or legal occupant thereof; provided, however, that this by-law shall not
apply to the lawful defense of life or property, nor to any discharge of firearms in accordance
with law.
SECTION 7. No person shall use any highway for any game except with the written permission
of the Selectmen.
SECTION 8. No person shall distribute or display posters, handbills, placards, pamphlets, or
other advertising matter within the limits of any highway, park, or other public property in the
Town, without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the Selectmen.
SECTION 9. No person shall collect or otherwise deal in junk, old metals, or second-hand
articles, without a written license granted by the Selectmen and signed by the Town Clerk.
SECTION 10. No person shall loaf or loiter within the limits of any highway, park, or other
public property after having been requested by a constable or police officer to move.
SECTION 11. No person shall sell, or display or advertise for sale any articles, goods, wares, or
merchandise of any description whatsoever within the limits of any highway, park, or other
public property without a written permit from the Selectmen.
SECTION 12. No person shall operate a bicycle in violation of M.G.L. Chapter 85, section
11B, or of any regulations issued by the Board of Selectmen with regard to the equipment and
operation of a bicycle. Violations of this bylaw and of any regulation of the Board of Selectmen
adopted hereunder may be enforced by any available means in law or equity by the Board of
Selectmen or its respective designee, and by any Police Officer of the Town of Weston;
provided, further that any police officer of the Town may also, pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 85,
section 11C, enforce by non-criminal ticketing violations of this section and of any regulations
adopted hereunder.
Penalties
1. Refusal to State Name and Address when Requested to Do So: $50.00
2. All Other Violations: $20.
SECTION 13. Construction activity shall be permitted Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to
6:30 p.m. Construction activity shall also be permitted on Saturdays from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.;
8
provided however that such activity shall be limited to interior work only, and may be
undertaken only when the home or structure is constructed to the point where such activity
cannot be heard outside the home or structure. No outside construction activity shall take place
on Saturdays except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. No outside construction
activity shall take place outside the specified permitted hours or on Sundays or New Year’s Day,
Memorial Day, July Fourth, Labor Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas, or other legal holiday, except
as may be permitted on a case by case basis by the Chief of Police, or his designee, based on
unusual circumstances.
For purposes of this by-law, the term “construction activity” shall include those activities
requiring a building permit or any site preparation, seismic surveys, grading, assembly, erection,
substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, including demolition, for or of public or private
rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property, as well as the noise and other impacts
caused by arrival on, and departure from, a site by laborers and equipment.
This by-law shall not apply to: (1) residents of the Town of Weston personally undertaking
construction activities on the homes in which they reside or the property upon which such homes
are located; (2) routine gardening and landscaping services; or (3) the Town of Weston acting in
response to an emergency.
If construction activity occurs at a time other than during the hours authorized herein for such
activity, the person found to be in violation, or the owner of, or the person with responsibility
for, property on which construction activity occurs, including but not limited to a general
contractor overseeing a project, shall be deemed to have violated this by-law.
This By-law may be enforced as provided in Article V, Sections 1 and 2 of the General By-laws,
including non-criminal disposition.”
(Effective 5/12/2004)
(Amended effective 5/18/ 2009)
ARTICLE IV
USE OF WAYS
SECTION 1. No person shall excavate or dig up any portion of the ground within the limits of
any public way for the laying of wires, pipes, or conduits, or for any other purpose, or move any
building along such way, or use or occupy any portion of such way for staging or other structures
or for the storage of building or other materials without a written permit from the Department of
Public Works. Such permit shall be in such form and for such duration as the Director of
Operations may determine, and shall be upon condition that the permittee maintain suitable
lanterns, danger signals, and barriers for the protection of the public, and restore such way to its
original condition or to a condition approved by the Director of Operations. The Director may
require that before any such permit is granted, the applicant therefor shall give a bond to the
Town, in form and with sureties satisfactory to the Director, to indemnify and save harmless the
Town against any and all damage, cost, and expense on account of the issuance of such permit
and the work to be done thereunder, and to guarantee the proper performance and completion of
said work. (Effective October 9, 1997)
SECTION 2. The Selectmen shall have authority to make rules and regulations with regard to
the excavation and use of public ways and with regard to the parking of automobiles and other
vehicles upon land owned by the Town and upon highways and streets of the Town; said
regulations to establish fees for permit application and inspection, and penalties for violation of
said regulations. (Effective October 9, 1997)
9
SECTION 3. The Superintendent of Streets shall have authority for the purpose of removing or
plowing snow, or removing ice from any public way, to remove, or cause to be removed, to some
convenient place, including in such term a public garage, any vehicle interfering with such work
and the owner of such vehicle shall be liable to the Town for the cost of such removal and
storage charges.
SECTION 4. No person shall operate a motor truck or other vehicle within the limits of any
highway in the town for the purpose of collecting and disposing of ashes, rubbish, garbage, or
other refuse unless such truck or vehicle is supplied with a suitable cover of wood, canvas or
other material satisfactory to the Selectmen.
SECTION 5. No person, other than an employee or other person in the service of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the Town of Weston shall direct, discharge, dump, shovel,
pile, push, blow, plow or deposit snow, ice or water under conditions where water would be
subject to freezing onto, into or across any public way, including sidewalks, or public property,
or cause, direct, sanction or authorize any such activity involving snow, ice or water on a public
way or public property. No person shall discharge, cause the discharge, or divert a natural flow
of surface or ground water in such a manner that it will cause an icing condition on a way.
This By-law may be enforced as provided in Article V, Sections 1 and 2 of the General By-laws,
including non-criminal disposition.
(Effective May 18, 2009)
ARTICLE V
PENALTIES
SECTION 1. A violation of any Town Bylaw may be enforced by any means available in law
or in equity. When enforced on indictment or on complaint before a district court, any person
violating any provision of these by-laws shall be punished by a fine of not more than three
hundred dollars for each offense.
SECTION 2. Non-Criminal Disposition
(a) Scope and Authority
This Bylaw provides for a non-criminal disposition of a violation of any Town Bylaw,
the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty. This Bylaw is enacted in
accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D.
(b) Enforcing Person
"Enforcing person," as used in this Bylaw, shall mean any police officer of the Town of
Weston, with respect to any offense; the Fire Chief and his or her designees; the
Building Inspector and his or her designees; the Public Health Director and his or her
designees; the Director of Operations, Department of Public Works and his or her
designees; the Sealer of Weights and Measures and his or her designees; the Dog
Officer; and such other officials as the Board of Selectmen or Bylaw may from time to
time designate, each with respect to violation of Bylaws within their respective
10
jurisdictions. If more than one official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such official
may be an enforcing person with respect thereto.
(c) Fines
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, when enforced pursuant to the noncriminal
disposition procedures of MGL c. 40, § 21D, the following shall be the fines
applicable to the listed offenses, unless otherwise specifically provided by Bylaw:
First violation: Warning
Second violation: $100
Third violation: $200
Fourth and subsequent violations: $300
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.”
(Effective 11-28-2008)
ARTICLE VI
BUILDING CODE
Superseded by State Building Code
ARTICLE VII
GAS PIPING AND GAS APPLIANCES
The Selectmen shall appoint an Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances, and may appoint a
Deputy Inspector to act in instances of inability of the Inspector to act. The Selectmen shall fix
the terms of office and the compensation, if any, of the Inspector and the Deputy Inspector.
ARTICLE VIII
ZONING BY-LAW
(Printed separately)
Last revision effective as of May 2017
ARTICLE IX
BY-LAWS REGULATING BILLBOARDS, SIGNS
OR OTHER ADVERTISING DEVICES
(Not available in print for distribution)
11
ARTICLE X
PLANNING BY-LAW
SECTION 1. Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals established under the Zoning By-Law,
Article VIII of the By-Laws, shall also act as a Board of Appeals under this By-Law (Article X)
pursuant to General Laws, Chapter 41, Section 81 I.
SECTION 2. Approval of Plat. Before approving a plat under Section 81 F of said Chapter
41, the Planning Board shall consider and may require such provision of street development and
utilities as in its opinion will justify the subdivision, and may in its discretion require a bond,
with or without sureties, to be furnished to the Town in an appropriate penal sum, conditioned
upon proper and reasonable performance of any such requirements.
SECTION 3: No building or structure within the municipal boundaries of Weston shall be
connected to any sanitary sewer system in order to discharge wastewater outside the Town of
Weston, and no building or structure with an existing connection to such a system shall be
enlarged so as to result in an increase in its design flow capacity as defined in 310 CMR
15.203, or changed in use unless such discharge is authorized by vote of the Town, except for
such discharges as may be already authorized for traditional educational uses under Sec. 619
of Chapter 151 of the Acts of 1996.
SECTION 4: Upon receipt of any request from any party for authorization by Town Meeting
for discharge to a new sewer connection, or enlargement of an existing sewer connection,
under Section 3, above, the Board of Selectmen shall forward such request to the Planning
Board for hearing, recommendation and report. Following said hearing the Board of
Selectmen shall place the request for discharge on the warrant for the next special or annual
town meeting.
The Planning Board shall (1) give notice of the date, time and place of a public hearing on the
request, the first of two notices being at least two weeks in advance of the hearing date,
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, (2) specify information that must
be available at least two weeks prior to the hearing date, (3) conduct the hearing and (4) make
a recommendation and report to the Town Meeting at which such request is to be considered.
(Sections 3 & 4 added effective 10-10-2002)
SECTION 5. Notification of Watercourse Alteration. In a riverine situation, the Conservation
Commission or Agent shall notify the following of any request received by the Conservation
Commission to alter or relocate a watercourse:
? Adjacent communities
? National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) State Coordinator
? National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) Program Specialist
(Section 5 added effective May 12, 2010)
ARTICLE XI
MATERIAL REMOVAL BY-LAW
SECTION 1. The removal of soil, loam, sand or gravel from any land in the Town not in public
use is prohibited.
12
SECTION 2. The preceding section shall not prohibit such removal in any instance where it is
expressly allowed by the provisions of Section V, Subsection I.3 of the zoning by-law of the
town or in any instance where it is authorized by the Board of Appeals or Planning Board by
special permit granted thereunder and is in accordance with the terms of such permit.
SECTION 3. The penalty for violation of this by-law (Article XI) shall be a fine of fifty dollars
for the first offense, one hundred dollars for the second offense, and two hundred dollars for
each subsequent offense.
(Amened effective 5/09/2011)
ARTICLE XII
EMPLOYEES' VACATIONS
Excepting employees appointed by the school committee, all regular full-time employees of the
Town may be granted reasonable vacations with pay in the discretion of the officer or officers
appointing or employing such employees, respectively, provided that vacations shall be granted
for at least the periods required by any applicable statutes and shall be granted for at least three
weeks in each year to employees who have been continuously in the service of the town for ten
years or more.
ARTICLE XIII
PARK LAND
Any petition to the General Court for the enactment of legislation relating to the disposition of,
or change in the use, care, custody, management, and control of, park land of the Town may be
authorized only by a two-thirds vote at an annual or special town meeting.
ARTICLE XIV
FIRE FIGHTER'S INDEMNIFICATION
A majority of the members of a panel as provided for in General Laws, chapter 41, section 100,
as amended, shall exercise the powers and perform the duties specified in section 100 with
respect to indemnification of fire fighters.
ARTICLE XV
CONSERVATION LAND
SECTION 1. The following restrictions shall be applicable to Town land under the care and
management of the Conservation Commission (herein referred to as Conservation Land).
A. The following activities are prohibited on Conservation Land, unless otherwise permitted
in Section 1B:
i) Using paintball guns;
ii) Swimming;
iii) Cutting, breaking, removing, defacing, defiling, or ill-using any building, structure,
fence, or sign;
iv) Cutting, removing, defacing, or otherwise damaging trees, shrubs, flowers, fungus,
grass, or other flora;
v) Drinking alcoholic beverages;
vi) Disturbing the peace; and
13
vii) Depositing litter, yard waste, garbage, brush, excavated fill or any hazardous waste.
B. The following activities are prohibited on Conservation Land without a written Use
Permit from the Weston Conservation Commission:
i) Conducting organized group events or activities;
ii) Starting fires;
iii) Camping overnight;
iv) Operating cars, trucks, motorbikes, snowmobiles, or power tools; and
v) Collecting or removing mushrooms, plants, or wood.
vi) Cutting or removing trees for firewood or lumber, or tapping trees for their sap.
C. The following activities are prohibited on Conservation Land except as expressly
permitted in Weston’s Bow Hunting Regulations, promulgated by the Conservation
Commission, as they may exist from time to time:
i) Hunting or trapping;
ii) Carrying firearms; and
iii) Willfully disturbing or endangering wildlife.
SECTION 2. The Conservation Commission shall hereby be authorized to adopt rules and
regulations governing the use of land and waters under its control, which rules and regulations
shall address matters including but not limited to the procedure for application and issuance of a
Use Permit under Article XV, Section 1(B), which process shall ensure that Conservation Land
can be appropriately protected and that such a permit shall not be unreasonably withheld. It is
further recognized that dog walking on Conservation Land is regulated by the provisions of
Article XX of the By-Laws of the Town of Weston. Notwithstanding any provision of this
section to the contrary, however, the Conservation Commission shall continue to have and
exercise all authority granted to said Conservation Commission in accordance with the
provisions of G.L. c.40, §8C.
SECTION 3. Non-Criminal Disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil
action, the Town may utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in M.G.L. Ch. 40,
§21D and Article V of the By-Laws of the Town of Weston, in which case any police officer of
the Town of Weston, the Conservation Commission, the Conservation Administrator, and such
other persons as are authorized by the Commission shall be the enforcing person. If non-criminal
disposition is used, the following fine schedule shall be applicable for any violation of this By-
Law, or any regulation, order or permit issued hereunder and each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation:
A. First violation: warning
B. Second violation: $100
C. Third violation: $200
D. Fourth and subsequent violations: $300
(Effective 8/10/15)
ARTICLE XVI
(Accumulated Sick Leave)
Officers, Boards and Commissions of the Town, other than the School Committee, are
authorized but not required to pay to Town employees other than School Committee employees,
upon voluntary or compulsory retirement or upon resignation after twelve (12) years of
continuous full-time service and who have accumulated sick leave, as part of their termination
14
pay, fifty (50) per cent of their accumulated sick leave, not to exceed one hundred and five (105)
days at the rate of pay being paid to the employee immediately prior to his retirement or
resignation.
(Effective 7/24/74.)
ARTICLE XVII
COUNCIL ON AGING
There is hereby established a Council on Aging consisting of from nine to thirteen citizens of the
Town, appointed by the Selectmen for terms not to exceed four years for any member.
Said terms shall be staggered so that after the initial appointments not more than three
appointments shall be made in any calendar year. Members can be reappointed for consecutive
terms. The Selectmen shall fill any vacancies occurring in the Council.
The duties of said Council on Aging shall be to:
1) identify the total needs of the community's elderly population;
2) educate the community and enlist support and participation of all citizens concerning
these needs;
3) design, promote, or implement services to fill these needs, or coordinate present existing
services in the community;.
4) Promote and support any other programs which are designed to assist elderly programs in
the community.
Said Council on Aging shall cooperate with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of
Elder Affairs and shall be cognizant of all state and federal legislation concerning funding,
information exchange, and program planning which exists for better community programming
for the elderly.
Said Council on Aging shall give an annual report to the Selectmen with a copy of that report
directed to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Elder Affairs.
Said Council may appoint such clerks and other employees as it may require.
(Effective 7-24-1974)
(Effective 11-28-2008)
(Effective 12-18-2015)
ARTICLE XVIII
(Operation of Ambulance Service)
The Selectmen shall have the authority to establish and waive rules and regulations governing
the operation of any Town ambulance service, which rules and regulations may be concerned
with the use of any ambulance, its maintenance, the qualifications and identity of those persons
manning the service, the charge (if any) for the use of the service, and other reasonable
restrictions and conditions applicable to the service (Effective 6-27-75.)
15
ARTICLE XIX
TEMPORARY REPAIRS ON PRIVATE WAYS
SECTION 1. Upon application to the Board of Selectmen by a majority of the abutters on a
private way, open to public use within the Town, and in need of repair, the Board of Selectmen
may approve the temporary repair and maintenance of such private way. The cost and payment
procedures for said repair and maintenance shall be determined by the Town Manager.
(Effective 11-24-03.)
SECTION 2. Before ordering the temporary repairs authorized in Section 1 hereof, the Board of
Selectmen shall determine that the public necessity requires the requested repairs in that the
safety of the public using the road is endangered or that public services, such as police and fire
vehicles and personnel, are being or may be impeded by the condition of the road.
SECTION 3. The temporary repairs so made shall include the filling of potholes, the
elimination of road hazards (including drainage), partial resurfacing and the removal of sand
from the private way, but shall not include the complete reconstruction of the road.
SECTION 4. No betterments shall be assessed upon any abutter to such a way for such repairs;
nor shall the Town be responsible on account of damages to abutting property caused by such
repairs. (Effective 6-25-80.)
ARTICLE XX
DOG REGULATIONS
SECTION 1. The owner or keeper of a dog that is over six months old shall cause it to be
licensed annually. All dogs shall be licensed by April 30 of each calendar year. Failure to do so
will result in a fine of $25 for the owner or keeper of the dog.
SECTION 2. No license shall be granted for any dog, unless the owner or keeper thereof
provides a veterinarian’s certification that such dog has been vaccinated in accordance with the
provisions of M.G.L. Ch. 140, Sec. 145B, or a metal rabies tag bearing an expiration date
indicating that such certification is still in effect. An exemption from the provisions of M.G.L.
Ch. 140, Sec. 145B may be granted for any dog which has not yet attained the age of six months,
any dog which the board of health, for a specified period of time, declared exempt upon
presentation of a veterinarian’s certificate stating that because of an infirmity, other physical
condition or regimen of therapy, that inoculation is thereby deemed inadvisable, or any dog in
transit, or dog brought into the town temporarily, for the sole purpose of showing in dog shows
or exhibition.
SECTION 3. The owner or keeper of a licensed dog shall cause it to wear around its neck, or
body, a collar to which shall be securely attached a tag in a form prescribed by the licensing
authority and upon which shall appear the license number, the name of the Town of Weston and
the year of issue. If any such tag shall be lost, the owner or keeper of such dog shall forthwith
secure a substitute tag from the licensing authority.
SECTION 4. No fee shall be charged for a license for a dog specially trained to lead or serve a
blind person; provided, that the Massachusetts commission for the blind certifies that such dog is
so trained and actually in the service of a blind person. No fee shall be charged for a license for
16
a dog professionally trained in the hearing dog business to serve a deaf person; provided, that the
director at the office of deafness certifies that such dog is so trained and actually in the service of
the deaf person.
SECTION 5. No license fee or part thereof shall be refunded because of the subsequent death,
loss, neutering, spaying or removal from the Town or other disposal of the dog, nor shall any
license fee be recovered after it has been paid to the licensing authority.
SECTION 6. The fees for registering and licensing dogs of all types in the Town shall be
established from time to time by vote of the Selectmen. When application is made to license any
dog found upon the public ways of the Town not currently licensed, the owner or keeper thereof
shall pay a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) to the Town as a condition to obtaining such
license.
SECTION 7. Control of Dogs
Number of dogs: With the exception of commercial dog walkers, persons walking more than
three dogs shall have all their dogs leashed.
Running at large: No owner or keeper of any dog shall permit such dog to run out of the owner’s
or keeper’s direct control by voice or lead at any time.
Voice control: Unless indicated below, a dog shall be on leash or under effective voice control
of its owner or keeper while on Town-owned land. Owners or keepers shall not let their dogs out
of their control or sight. When approaching persons, dogs, or horses, those walking dogs shall
call their dogs to their side and keep them under control until the persons, dogs, or horses pass.
Dogs shall be immediately leashed at the first sign of aggression or unruliness.
a. Owners or keepers shall carry a leash for each dog under their control and keep
each dog on leash when entering and exiting trails.
b. Public gatherings - Dogs shall always be leashed at public gatherings.
c. Schools - Dogs shall always be leashed on school grounds and playing fields.
Dogs shall not be allowed at all on playing fields that are enclosed by fencing. It shall not
constitute a violation of this section if a dog remains unleashed in a vehicle while on school
grounds.
d. Recreation playgrounds and playing fields – Dogs shall be leashed on
playgrounds and playing fields during organized activities. Dogs shall not be allowed at all on
playing fields that are enclosed by fencing. It shall not constitute a violation of this section if a
dog remains unleashed in a vehicle while on recreation grounds.
e. Agricultural fields - Dogs shall not be allowed on agricultural fields where food is
being grown, except to the extent that such fields are owned by the owner or keeper of the
dogs.
f. Cemeteries – Dogs shall not be allowed in any Town-owned cemetery for
recreational purposes, but a dog may be permitted in such a cemetery when accompanying its
owner or keeper for the purposes of attending a funeral or visiting a grave site. If a dog is
permitted in a Town-owned cemetery for an allowable purpose, the dog shall always be
leashed.
g. Restrictions – Custodians of municipal property may restrict dogs from property
under their respective jurisdictions following a public hearing by the posting of signs for such
purposes.”
17
The provisions of this Section shall not apply to dogs participating in any dog show, nor to
"seeing-eye" dogs properly trained to assist blind persons for the purpose of aiding them in
going from place to place, nor to any dogs properly trained and under the control of and aiding
the deaf or other persons with severe disabilities, nor to any dogs being trained or actually
being used for hunting, sporting or obedience purposes, nor to any dogs on private property
with the permission of the property owner.
Nothing contained in the foregoing paragraph shall prevent the Selectmen from passing any
orders authorized by the Massachusetts General Laws or by Chapter 140, Section 157 thereof
at such times as they shall deem necessary to safeguard the public.
SECTION 8. Conduct of Dogs
Endangering safety. No dog keeper or owner shall allow the dog to bite, menace (disturb),
chase or threaten, all without provocation, so as to endanger the safety of any person. This
section is not meant to preclude a dog from acting as a watchdog on its owner or keeper’s
property.
No dog owner or keeper shall allow the dog to worry, kill, maim or otherwise injure any
domesticated or farm animals.
Disturbing the peace. No dog keeper or owner shall allow the dog to disturb the peace by
making excessive noise without provocation. For purposes of this section, noise shall be
considered excessive if it constitutes uninterrupted barking, yelping, whining, or howling for a
period of time exceeding 15 minutes. This section is not meant to preclude a dog from acting
as a watchdog on its owner or keeper’s property.
Damaging property. No dog keeper or owner shall allow the dog to damage public or private
property.
Dog litter. Every dog keeper or owner is responsible for expeditiously removing any dog
feces the dog deposits anywhere except on its owner’s private property, or on other private
property with the property owner’s permission. Any owner or keeper walking a dog off the
owner’s property is required to have the means for removing any dog feces left by such dog
and must properly dispose of such waste. This provision does not apply to any assistance dog
while it is performing its duties.
SECTION 9. Commercial Dog Walkers
9.1 Except in accordance with an annual permit issued by the Board of Selectmen, or its
designee, no person shall act as a commercial dog walker in the Town. For purposes of this
section, a commercial dog walker shall mean a person engaged in the business of exercising
or handling dogs owned by another using public land, and who receives compensation for this
work. Provided, however, that this definition shall exclude elementary, middle, high school
and college students providing dog walking services for a fee, but such persons shall be
prohibited from exercising or handling simultaneously more than two dogs. The permit
issued under the authority of this section shall be non-transferable and the fee therefor shall be
non-refundable. The fee for such permit shall be established by the Board of Selectmen.
9.2 The permit issued under this section shall be comprised of two parts, a permit which the
commercial dog walker shall carry upon his or her person, and a placard that shall be
displayed in the commercial dog walker’s vehicle. The permit shall include thereon a
18
photograph of the commercial dog walker, and shall state the number of dogs that the
commercial dog walker is licensed to walk at any one time, provided, however, that such
number shall not exceed five dogs. Permits shall not be granted under this section unless the
commercial dog walker: (1) agrees that he/she shall indemnify and hold harmless the Town of
Weston from any and all loss, liability, damage or cost incurred related to the permit holder’s
activities or the activities of dogs under his/her care; and (2) provides evidence of commercial
general liability insurance coverage in limits established by the Town, naming the Town as an
additional insured. No more than three commercial dog walkers may be licensed for any one
dog walking business.
9.3 In addition to any conditions imposed by the Board of Selectmen for use of a commercial
dog walker permit, the following conditions shall apply:
a. All dog waste shall be cleaned up and properly disposed of.
b. All dogs walked shall wear a current license and rabies tag. If the dog is too young to be
licensed, the commercial dog walker shall provide, at the request of an enforcing
authority, proof of vaccinations.
c. The commercial dog walker shall carry one leash for each dog being walked. Each
coupler leash used by an owner or walker shall count as multiple leashes based on the
number of clips attached to the dog collars.
d. All requirements of Section 7 shall apply to commercial dog walkers.
9.4 Penalties for non-compliance:
a. This By-law may be enforced as provided in Article V, Sections 1 and 2 of the
General By-laws, including non-criminal disposition. For purposes of non-criminal
disposition, the Board of Selectmen or its designee, the Animal Control Officer and
any police officer of the Town shall constitute an “enforcing authority.”
b. The Board of Selectmen, or its designee, may for cause suspend for a period of time
or revoke a permit issued under this section following a hearing.
(Effective: 8-30-98)
(Amended May 18, 2009)
ARTICLE XXI
BURGLAR ALARMS
SECTION 1. All burglar alarms installed or present in the Town are dependent for their
primary effectiveness upon notification to and response by the Police Department shall be
subject to rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen after public hearing, which
rules and regulations shall set out the standards for the installation, maintenance and repair of
such alarms, the administration by the Police Department of the installations and responses to the
alarms, the procedures and penalties for dealing with misuse of the alarms and such other matters
as are deemed reasonable and appropriate by the Board of Selectmen to the establishment and
maintenance of effective systems within the Town.
SECTION 2. The Chief of Police of the Town and persons designated by him shall be charged
with the administration of the rules and regulations so adopted.
19
SECTION 3. Such rules and regulations may be amended at any meeting, but after public
hearing, by majority vote of the Board of Selectmen.
SECTION 4. The charges and conditions for original installation and/or connection and
subsequent reinstallation and/or reconnection of an alarm shall be as set out in the rules and
regulations.
SECTION 5. The penalty for violation of this article of the by-laws shall be FIFTY ($50.00)
DOLLARS. Each day during which such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Effective April 8, 1982.)
ARTICLE XXII
PERMANENT BUILDING COMMITTEE
SECTION 1: Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to provide a Permanent Building Committee having continuing
responsibility for the execution of major construction and maintenance projects for the Town and
for the development of a capital spending plan. Working with the Board of Selectmen, School
Committee, Historical Commission, Planning Board, and other Town committees and boards
which propose building and renovation projects, the Permanent Building Committee establishes
general criteria for Town building projects and guidelines for communication regarding these
projects between and among interested committees and the public.
SECTION 2: Establishment
There is hereby established a Permanent Building Committee, which shall oversee and supervise
the design, construction, reconstruction, major alteration, renovation, enlargement, major
maintenance, demolition, and removal of Town buildings, including School Department
buildings and municipal buildings, and including any significant installation, renovation or
upgrade of service equipment and major systems as provided in this bylaw.
SECTION 3: Definitions
For purposes of this Bylaw, the following definitions shall apply:
1) “Major maintenance” shall not include routine maintenance and upkeep of a building or
other structure, or its service equipment, which is performed on a regular basis and
shall include projects that are capital in nature, that is, having a useful life of five or
more years and an estimated cost of more than $25,000, or such other amount as may
be established from time to time by the Town Manager subject to approval by the
Board of Selectmen and School Committee, in writing addressed to the Committee.
2) “Construction” and “Demolition” shall include excavation, filling and grading of the
building or project site.
3) “Service equipment and major systems” shall include boilers, elevators, generators,
HVAC systems, septic systems, fire alarms, overhead doors, automatic handicapped
access doors, major electrical service including wiring and fixtures, major plumbing
service including piping and sanitation fixtures, building skin (roofs, gutters, masonry,
windows, exterior paint, etc.). It shall not include information system technology
(computers and computer systems).
20
4) “Design” includes selection of architects and consultants as needed in compliance with
applicable provisions of the General Laws.
5) “Municipal” shall refer to public buildings that are not under the jurisdiction of the
School Department.
6) “Proposing Body” means the Town of Weston appointed or elected board or committee
sponsoring or requesting a construction or major maintenance project, or in the case of
major maintenance initiated by the Permanent Building Committee itself, the board or
committee whose facility would be the recipient thereof. The Proposing Body is
responsible for:
a) Determination of the program for the proposed project, including the function
and needs which it is designed to fulfill, expanded services, auxiliary public
use if any, additional personnel required to maintain the facility, annual
maintenance costs, expected hours of the facility’s availability, and overall
effect on the Town.
b) Performance of feasibility studies and determination of the estimated size and
cost requirements of the project.
c) Determination of the estimated requirements for equipment and furnishings.
d) Approval of transitional building plans, including health and safety protocols
for maintaining the underlying service associated with the facility while
construction takes place.
e) Approval of any design change or budget reprioritization having a material
impact, as determined by the Proposing Body, on the programmatic design,
transitional building plans, or outcome of the project.
SECTION 4: Membership
1) Regular Members. The Permanent Building Committee shall consist of five (5) regular
voting members, all serving without compensation. The composition of the Committee
shall include, to the extent possible, one registered architect, one licensed engineer, one
licensed builder and one attorney. All regular members shall be residents of the Town
of Weston. All regular members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and
School Committee acting jointly in accordance with the following procedures:
a) An advertisement shall be published in a newspaper having local circulation
and on the Town’s website inviting interested residents to submit letters of
interest, including a resume setting out their professional credentials and
relevant experience. The newspaper advertisement shall be published at least
once not less than two weeks prior to the deadline stated therein for
submission of responses stated. The website notice shall be posted and
remain posted for at least two weeks prior to the deadline for submission.
Letters of interest shall be submitted to the office of the Town Manager.
b) Interviews of candidates shall be conducted in an open meeting of the Board
of Selectmen and School Committee convened in joint session.
c) Appointment shall be made by majority vote of the combined membership of
the Board of Selectmen and School Committee.
2) Temporary Members. For each municipal project, a temporary member who is a
member or representative of the Proposing Body shall be appointed by the Board of
Selectmen. For each school project, a temporary member shall be a School Committee
21
member or designee. Temporary members shall have the right to vote on the activities
of the Permanent Building Committee only with respect to the particular project for
which such member was appointed.
3) Ex Officio Members. For each project, the Permanent Building Committee may appoint
staff or other Town residents with particular expertise to advise the Committee related
to that project. The Permanent Building Committee may also request the designation of
Town staff with similar expertise to serve in an advisory capacity for a particular
project. Any such request shall be made to the Town Manager for Town employees
other than School Department personnel, and to the Superintendent for School
Department personnel. The Town Manager and Superintendent shall determine the
appropriate staff member in each case. Ex Officio members shall have no voting
authority.
4) Term of Appointment.
a) Regular members shall be appointed for a three (3) year term. In making the
original appointments under this bylaw, the appointing authority shall
designate two regular members to serve for three years, two regular members
to serve for two years and one regular member to serve for one year.
Thereafter, vacancies shall be filled for a three year term. Upon expiration of
a term, members shall continue to serve until a successor has been appointed
and qualified.
b) Temporary members shall be appointed to the Committee for the period of
time during which the Committee is exercising its functions with respect to
the project for which the original appointment was made.
SECTION 5: Powers and Duties of the Committee
In carrying out its duties and responsibilities under this Bylaw, the Committee shall:
1) Oversee and supervise the design and construction of all projects within its
jurisdiction, including the designer selection process for the solicitation, evaluation
and recommendation of a project designer, schematic design, design development,
production of construction documents, public construction bidding, contract award
recommendation and construction administration in compliance with the General
Laws. All projects shall be developed in a manner consistent with the project goals
and physical requirements established by the Proposing Body and the applicable
provisions of the General Laws. All solicitations for designer services and invitations
for bids for construction shall be coordinated with the Town Manager, acting as the
Chief Procurement Officer, to assure compliance with the applicable provisions of the
General Laws. The Town Manager shall award and execute all designer services
contracts and construction contracts.
2) Coordinate with other Town boards and committees:
a. In consultation with the Planning Board, oversee site planning for new
construction and additions; such planning to include building location,
roadways, parking, lighting, and general landscape design concepts.
b. In consultation with the Public Spaces Committee, oversee plant selection,
cost, and installation of landscaping for new, enlarged, or renovated building
projects within its jurisdiction.
22
c. In consultation with the Historical Commission, oversee enlargement,
remodeling and/or restoration of Town-owned historic buildings to insure that
work is done in compliance with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and
Guidelines for Historic Preservation.
3) Review and report the financial requirements of all projects within its jurisdiction, or
for which it may become responsible, and oversee the expenditure of funds in the
course of execution of such projects.
4) Conduct periodic review and audit of the physical condition of all municipal and
school buildings, including service equipment and major systems.
5) Develop a rolling 10-year capital property management plan for the major
maintenance, construction, enlargement, or replacement of all municipal and school
buildings, including service equipment and major systems.
6) On or about November 15 of each calendar year, prepare and present to the Board of
Selectmen and to the School Committee a recommendation of major construction
and/or maintenance project(s) to be undertaken by the Town in the ensuing fiscal
year.
7) Make an annual report of its activities and recommendations to be published in the
Annual Town Report.
8) The Committee shall act by majority of the regular membership except for those
projects for which a temporary member has been appointed, in which case, action on
such project shall be by a majority of the regular membership plus the temporary
member.
9) The Committee shall, subject to agreement by the Proposing Body, waive its duties
and responsibilities and relinquish them to the Proposing Body in connection with
projects for which design funding had been approved at Town Meeting prior to the
adoption of this Bylaw.
10) The Committee may, subject to agreement by the Proposing Body, waive its duties
and responsibilities with respect to any project for which it would otherwise be
responsible and relinquish them to the Proposing Body.
SECTION 6: Policies and Procedures
1) The Committee shall adopt local designer selection procedures consistent with the
requirements of G. L. c. 7, §38A½ - 38O.
2) The Committee shall in consultation with the Board of Selectmen and School
Committee adopt and make available to all boards, officers, and officials policies and
procedures implementing the provisions of this Article. Said policies and procedures
shall address at least the following subjects:
a) Financial requirements and notification for each project within its jurisdiction,
including the time period(s) within which information must be available for
presentation to the voters at Town Meeting, if necessary.
23
b) General criteria the Committee will use in reviewing project designs,
including but not limited to “green” considerations such as energy
conservation.
c) Guidelines to be utilized by Proposing Bodies in developing the structure and
content of project documentation to be utilized by the Committee in carrying
out its responsibilities under this Bylaw.
d) Guidelines for the review and discussion of project progress with the
Proposing Body during the design and construction thereof.
e) Guidelines for communication with Town boards and committees, including
the Finance Committee, in connection with the Committee’s periodic review
and audit of building facilities.
f) Guidelines for presentation of projects at Town Meeting, including
designation of responsibilities as between the Committee and the Proposing
Body.
3) Staff support for the Committee shall be provided by the Director of Facilities.
(Effective 5/8/2006)
ARTICLE XXIII
SCENIC ROADS BY-LAW
Section I: Purpose
The purpose of this By-Law is to maintain the scenic beauty, aesthetic value, and historic
significance of certain roads in the Town of Weston by designating them as "Scenic Roads." For
a road that has been designated a Scenic Road, any repair, maintenance, reconstruction or paving
work done with respect thereto shall not involve or include the cutting down or removal of
significant trees, or the tearing down, burial, relocation, or destruction of stone walls, or portions
thereof, except with the prior written consent of the Planning Board.
Section II: Authority
The enactment of this By-Law is authorized by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40, section
15C.
Section III: Definitions
In the absence of any contrary meaning established through legislation or judicial action in
regard to G.L. c. 40, §15C, the following terms contained in said statute and used in this By-Law
shall mean and be construed as follows:
3.1 Cutting or Removal of Trees: cutting through or removing any of the following:
(a) one or more tree trunks having a diameter of nine (9) inches or more measured four feet
above the ground, or
(b) two or more tree trunks having a diameter of six (6) inches or more measured four feet
above the ground, or
(c) seven or more limbs or roots of more than four (4) inch diameter where cut, on a single
tree.
24
3.2 Repair, Maintenance, Reconstruction or Paving Work: any such work done within the
right-of-way by any person or agency, public or private, including roadway widening and
or construction of a new private driveway within the right-of-way, but not including utility
work in trees not affecting the road itself.
3.3 Road: Any road in Weston, including a public road, private road, or paper road, other than
a state highway or a numbered route, unless the entire length is of the numbered route is
contained within the boundaries of Weston and no part of the numbered route is owned or
maintained by the Commonwealth.
3.4 Scenic Road: Any eligible road or portion of a road designated as a Scenic Road by vote of
Town Meeting pursuant to this By-Law. The boundary of a Scenic Road shall be the rightof-
way line of such road, and shall include anything touching or located on the right-ofway
line.
3.5 Significant Tree: Any woody plant with a trunk circumference of six feet or more as
measured twenty-four inches above the ground.
3.6 Stone Wall: Any structure of natural stones, cut or uncut, built to order, enclose, divide, or
define an area, regardless of the condition of that structure.
Section IV: Designation of a Scenic Road
4.1 Considerations for Scenic Road Designation: In determining which roads or portions of
roads should be recommended for designation as Scenic Roads, the following criteria shall
be considered:
a) overall scenic beauty;
b) overarching tree canopy and other contribution of vegetation to scenic beauty;
c) contribution of stone walls, fences, narrow shoulders, and other elements, natural or
man-made, to scenic beauty;
d) age and historic significance of way, trees and stone walls, including preservation of
historic way width grade, and alignment;
e) potential for lessening of scenic beauty, aesthetic value, or historical significance of
natural and man-made features by alteration.
4.2 Procedure for Designation of a Scenic Road: Upon recommendation or request of the
Planning Board, Conservation Commission, or Historical Commission, any road shall,
upon vote of a majority of the voters present and voting at any annual or special Town
Meeting, become a Scenic Road subject to the provisions hereof.
Section V: Procedure for Actions Affecting Scenic Road Stone Walls or Trees
5.1 Actions requiring Prior Written Approval: Any repair, maintenance, reconstruction, or
paving work to be done within the Scenic Road Boundary that will involve or include (i)
cutting down or removing significant trees or (ii) tearing down, burial, relocation, or
destruction of stone walls or portions thereof shall require prior written approval of the
Planning Board after a public hearing.
5.2 Actions Which Do Not Require Prior Written Approval:
a) Emergency Work: In the event that emergency conditions require that work otherwise
requiring Planning Board approval must proceed before such approval can be
obtained, the work may proceed to the extent which is deemed necessary to protect
public health and safety. The work shall be reported to the Planning Board within
twenty-four hours of the emergency condition.
b) Repair of a stone wall using natural stones and of similar appearance to the original
wall does not require approval hereunder.
25
5.3 Determination of Scenic Road Boundary: When a dispute as to the boundary of a Scenic
Road arises, it will be presumed that the tree or stone wall in question is within the
boundary until the contrary is shown by an applicant hereunder to the satisfaction of the
Planning Board.
5.4 Filing: Any person, organization, state or municipal agency, utility or any other party that
desires to undertake any action that requires prior approval pursuant to Section 5.1 hereof
shall file an application with the Planning Board.
5.5 Public Hearing: The Planning Board shall schedule a public hearing as soon as is feasible
after the Planning Board receives an application. The Planning Board shall give notice of
its public hearing by advertising twice in a newspaper of general circulation in Weston, as
to time, date, place and purpose, the last publication to occur at least seven days prior to
such hearing. Such hearing shall be consolidated with any hearing required under M.G.L.
Chapter 87, Section 3 whenever so required.
5.6 Considerations for Planning Board Decision: In making a decision with respect to any
written request made hereunder, the Planning Board shall consider the following:
preservation of natural resources; environmental issues; historical values; scenic and
aesthetic characteristics; public safety; existence or absence of reasonable alternatives
(including a no-build alternative); consistency with articulated town policies; other sound
planning considerations.
5.7 Decision of the Planning Board: The Planning Board shall make a determination with
respect to a written request within fourteen days after the close of the public hearing.
Failure of the Planning Board to make its decision and file it with the Town Clerk within
the time allotted shall be construed as approval of the request.
5.8 Additional Rules and Regulations: The Planning Board may adopt more detailed
regulations for carrying out its duties under this By-Law.
The following roads upon recommendation of the Planning Board, are to be designated as Scenic
Roads, pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40, Section 15C, which states that a
numbered route may be designated as a scenic road if its entire length is contained within the
boundaries of said city or town and no part of said route is owned or maintained by the
Commonwealth, and Article XXIII of the General By-Laws of the Town:
1. Ash Street north of reservoir bridge
2. Boston Post Road (excluding Rte. 20)
3. Brown Street
4. Chestnut Street
5. Church Street
6. Conant Road
7. Concord Road
8. Crescent Street
9. Fiske Lane
10. Glen Road
11. Highland Street
12. Hilltop Road
13. Kingsbury Lane
14. Lexington Street
15. Lincoln Street
16. Loring Road
17. Love Lane
18. Maple Road
19. Merriam Street
20. Newton Street
21. Oak Street
22. Pigeon Hill Road
23. Pine Street
24. Ridgeway Road
25. Ripley Lane
26. School Street
27. Silver Hill Road
28. Sudbury Road
29. Summer Street including By-Pass
30. Viles Street
31. Ware Street
32. Webster Road
18
33. Wellesley Street 34. Winter Street
(Effective 10/26/89 - amended
effective 8-30-98 and 10/10/2002)
(amended effective May, 18, 2009)
(amended effective April 10, 2015)
(amended effective 5/7/18)
26
ARTICLE XXIV
CRESCENT STREET HISTORIC DISTRICT
SECTION 1. This By-Law shall be known and may be cited as the Crescent Street Historic
District By-Law and is adopted pursuant to Chapter 40C of the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as amended, hereinafter the Historic Districts Act.
SECTION 2. Purpose.
The purpose of this By-Law is to promote the educational, cultural, economic and general
welfare of the public through the preservation and protection of the distinctive characteristics of
buildings and places significant in the history of the Commonwealth and the Town of Weston or
their architecture, and through the maintenance and improvement of settings for such buildings
and places and the encouragement of design compatible therewith.
SECTION 3. Historic District Boundaries.
There is hereby established under the Historic Districts Act an historic district to be known as the
Crescent Street Historic District (the "District"), comprised of land shown on the Atlas of the
Town of Weston as parcels 23-57, 23-58-01, 23-58-20, 28-13, 28-14, 28-15, 28-16, 28-17, 28-
18, 28-19, 28-20, and 28-21, which District's location and boundaries are shown on a map
entitled "Crescent Street Historic District Map, Weston, Massachusetts, April 1993" attached to
and made a part of this By-Law.
SECTION 4. Historic District Commission Membership.
There is hereby established under the Historic Districts Act with all the powers and duties of an
historic district commission under such statute, a Crescent Street Historic District Commission,
consisting of five members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the
provisions of such statute. The appointments to membership in the commission shall be so
arranged that the term of at least one member will expire each year, and their successors shall be
appointed in the same manner as the original appointment for terms of three years. Vacancies
shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the unexpired term. All
members shall serve without compensation. The Commission shall elect annually a chairman
and vice-chairman from its own number and a secretary from within or without its number.
Three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
SECTION 5. Definitions.
altered: includes the words "rebuilt," "reconstructed," "restored," "removed" and "demolished";
building: a combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or property;
certificate: certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability, or a certificate of
hardship as set forth in the Historic Districts Act and in this By-Law;
Commission: the commission acting as the historic district commission;
constructed: includes the words "built, erected, installed, enlarged and moved";
exterior architectural feature: such portion of the exterior of a building or structure as is open to
view from Crescent Street, including but not limited to the architectural style and general
arrangement and setting thereof, the kind, and texture of exterior building materials and the type
and style of windows, doors, lights, signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures; and the relation
of such factors to similar features of buildings and structures in the immediate surroundings and
the position of such building or structure in relation to the street and to other buildings and
structures;
Historic Districts Act: Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40C, as amended;
27
person aggrieved: the applicant, an owner of adjoining property, an owner of property within the
district as that is within one hundred feet of said property lines and any charitable corporation in
which one of its purposes is the preservation of historic structures or districts;
structure: means a combination of materials other than a building, including a sign, fence, wall,
terrace, walk or driveway.
SECTION 6. Alterations and Construction Prohibited Without Certificate.
No building or structure within the District shall be constructed or altered in any way that affects
exterior architectural features unless the Commission shall first have issued a certificate of
appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability or a certificate of hardship with respect to such
construction or alteration.
No building permit for construction of a building or structure or alteration of an exterior
architectural feature within the District and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a
building or structure within the District shall be issued by the Inspector of Buildings until the
Certificate required by this section has been issued by the Commission.
SECTION 7. Procedure for Review of Applications.
(a) Any person who desires to obtain a certificate from the Commission shall file an application
for a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of non-applicability or a certificate of hardship.
The application shall be filed in such manner and shall be accompanied by such plans, materials
and their information as may reasonably be required by the Commission as set forth in its rules
and regulations.
(b) A filing fee shall be included with all applications (except applications for a certificate of
non-applicability), to be computed as follows: Twenty ($20.00) dollars or 1/10 of one percent
(1%) of the cost of the proposed exterior renovations, whichever is higher.
(c) The Commission shall determine within fourteen (14) days of the filing of a completed
application whether such application involves any exterior architectural feature that is within the
jurisdiction of the Commission. If the Commission determines that an application does not
involve any exterior architectural feature or involves an exterior architectural feature that is not
subject to review by the Commission under this Article, the Commission shall issue a certificate
of non-applicability.
(d) If the Commission determines that an application does involve an exterior architectural
feature subject to review hereunder, it shall hold a public hearing on the application, except as
otherwise provided hereunder. The Commission shall hold such public hearing within thirty (30)
days from the date of the filing of the completed application. At least fourteen (14) days prior to
the public hearing, the Commission shall give public notice of the date, time, place and purpose
of the public hearing by posting it in Town Hall and in a newspaper of general circulation in
Weston.
A copy of said notice shall be mailed to the applicant, to the owners of all adjoining property and
other property deemed by the Commission to be materially affected thereby as they appear on
the most recent real estate tax list of the Board of Assessors, to the Weston Planning Board, to
any person filing written request for notice of hearings, such request to be renewed yearly in
December, and to such other persons as the Commission shall deem entitled to notice.
Within forty-five (45) days after the filing of the completed application, or within such further
time as the applicant may allow in writing, the Commission shall make a determination on the
application. If the Commission shall fail to make a determination within such period of time, the
Commission shall thereupon issue a certificate of hardship.
28
A public hearing on an application may be waived if all persons entitled to notice hereunder
agree to such waiving in writing, or a public hearing on an application may be waived by the
Commission if the Commission determines that the exterior architectural feature involved is so
insubstantial in its effect on the District that it may be reviewed by the Commission without
public hearing on the application, provided, however, that if the Commission dispenses with a
public hearing on an application, notice of the application and the waiver of the public hearing
shall be given to the owners of all adjoining property and other property deemed by the
Commission to be materially affected thereby as above provided and ten (10) days shall elapse
after the mailing of such notice before the Commission may act upon such application.
SECTION 8. Factors to be Considered by the Commission.
In acting upon applications for a certificate of appropriateness, applicability or hardship, and in
any matters before it, the Commission shall consider, among other things, the historic and
architectural value and significance of the site, building or structure, the general design,
arrangement, texture and material of the features involved, and the relation of such features to
similar features of buildings and structures in the surrounding area. The Commission shall also
consider any existing Deed Restrictions or other restrictive covenants and their effect on sites,
buildings and structures within the district.
In the case of new construction or additions to existing buildings or structures the Commission
shall consider the appropriateness of the size and shape of the building or structure both in
relation to the land area upon which the buildings or structure is situated and to buildings and
structures in the vicinity, and the Commission may in appropriate cases impose dimensional and
setback requirements in addition to those required by the Weston Zoning By-Law.
When ruling on applications for certificates of appropriateness for solar energy systems, as
defined in Section 1A of M.G.L. c.40A, the Commission shall also consider the policy of the
Commonwealth to encourage the use of solar energy systems and to protect solar access.
SECTION 9. Limitation and Exceptions.
(a) The Commission shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural features not subject
to view from Crescent Street.
(b) The Commission shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for the purpose
of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects or the architectural
characteristics of the surroundings and of the district.
(c) The authority of the Commission shall not extend to review of one or more of the following
categories of buildings or structures or exterior architectural features in the district:
(i) Temporary structures or signs, subject, however, to such conditions as to duration of
use, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the Commission may reasonably
specify;
(ii) Terraces, walks, driveways and similar structures, or any one or more of them, provided
that any structure is substantially at grade level;
(iii) Storm doors and windows, screens and window air conditioners;
(iv) Exterior colors, including the color of paint and the color of materials used on roofs;
(v) Signs of not more than one square foot in area in connection with use of a residence for
a customary home occupation or for professional purposes, provided only one such sign
is displayed in connection with each residence and, if illuminated, is illuminated only
indirectly; and one sign in connection with the nonresidential use of each building or
structure, which is not more than twelve square feet in area, consisting of letters painted
on wood without symbol or trademark and, if illuminated, is illuminated only indirectly;
or either of them.
29
(vi) The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a building, structure or
exterior architectural feature damaged or destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster,
provided such reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried forward
with due diligence.
(d) The Commission may determine from time to time after public hearing that certain other
categories of exterior architectural features, structures or signs in addition to any of those
enumerated in this Section, may be constructed or altered without review by the Commission
without causing substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this Article.
(e) Nothing in this By-Law shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance, repair or
replacement of any exterior architectural feature within the district, which does not involve a
change in design, material, or the outward appearance thereof, nor to prevent landscaping
with plants, trees or shrubs, nor construed to prevent the meeting of requirements certified by
a duly authorized public officer to be necessary for public safety because of unsafe or
dangerous condition, nor construed to prevent any construction or alteration under a permit
duly issued prior to the effective date of this By-Law.
SECTION 10. Issuance of Certificate of Appropriateness; Certificate of Non-Applicability;
Certificate of Hardship.
(a) Certificate of Appropriateness. If the Commission determines that the construction or
alteration for which an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been filed will be
appropriate for or compatible with the preservation or protection of the district, the
Commission shall cause a certificate of appropriateness to be issued to the applicant.
In the case of a disapproval of an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Commission shall place upon its records the reasons for such determination, and shall
forthwith cause a notice of its determination, accompanied by a copy of the reasons therefor
as set forth in the records of the Commission, to be issued to the applicant, and the
Commission may make recommendations to the applicant with respect to appropriateness of
design, arrangement, texture, material and similar features. Prior to the issuance of any
disapproval, the Commission may notify the applicant of its proposed action accompanied by
recommendations of changes in the applicant's proposal which, if made, would make the
application acceptable to the Commission. If within fourteen days of the receipt of such a
notice the applicant files a written modification of his application in conformity with the
recommended changes of the Commission, the Commission shall cause a certificate of
appropriateness to be issued to the applicant.
(b) Certificate of Non-Applicability. The Commission shall issue a certificate of nonapplicability
to an applicant in any case where the Commission determines that the
construction or alteration under review does not involve any exterior architectural feature, or
involves an exterior architectural feature which is not then subject to review by the
Commission in accordance with this By-Law.
An applicant can apply for a certificate of non-applicability or the Commission can issue
such a certificate of non-applicability in the event of an application for a certificate of
appropriateness.
(c) Certificate of Hardship. The Commission may issue a certificate of hardship in a case where
the Commission determines that owing to conditions especially affecting the building or
structure involved but not affecting the District generally, failure to approve an application
will involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the applicant and approval
thereof may be made without substantial detriment to the public welfare and without
substantial derogation from the intent and purposes of this By-Law.
30
An applicant can apply for a certificate of hardship or the Commission can issue such a
certificate of hardship in the event that it determines that the construction or alteration for
which a certificate of appropriateness has been filed is inappropriate and the other conditions
for a certificate of hardship set forth herein have been met.
The Commission shall also issue a certificate of hardship in the event the Commission fails
to make a determination of an application within the time specified in this By-Law.
SECTION 11. Other Power and Duties of the Commission.
(a) Each certificate issued by the Commission shall be dated and signed by its chairman, vicechairman,
secretary or such other persons designated by the Commission to sign such
certificate on its behalf.
(b) The Commission shall keep a permanent record of its resolutions, transactions, and
determinations and of the vote of each member participating therein, and may adopt and
amend such rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Article and the
Historic Districts Act, and prescribe such forms as it shall deem desirable and necessary for
the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its business. The Commission shall file a
copy of any such rules and regulations with the Town Clerk.
(c) The Commission shall file with the Town Clerk and with the Inspector of Buildings a copy
or notice of all certificates and determinations of disapproval issued by it.
(d) The Commission may, after public hearings, set forth in such manner as it may determine
the various designs of certain appurtenances, such as light fixtures, which will meet the
requirements of the District and a roster of roofing materials, which will meet the
requirements of the District, but no such determination shall limit the right of an applicant to
present other designs to the Commission for its approval.
(e) The Commission may, subject to appropriation, employ clerical and technical assistants or
consultants and incur other expenses appropriate to the carrying on of its work. The
Commission may receive and accept appropriations, grants and gifts for furthering the
purposes of this By-Law and may expend the same for such purposes.
(f) Meetings of the Commission shall be held at the call of the chairman and shall be called at
the request of two members of the Commission and in such other manner as the
Commission shall determine in its rules. A majority of the members of the Commission
shall constitute a quorum. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the
Commission shall be necessary to issue a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability
or a certificate of hardship.
SECTION 12. Severability.
In case any section, paragraph or part of the By-Law be for any reason declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph or part shall continue
in full force and effect.
SECTION 13. Appeals to and Enforcement by the Superior Court.
All appeals from any determination of the Commission shall be to the Massachusetts Superior
Court. Any person aggrieved by a determination of the Commission may, within twenty (20)
days after the filing of the notice of such determination with the Town Clerk, appeal to the
Superior Court of Middlesex County, in accordance with the provisions of the Historic Districts
Act.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this By-Law shall be punished by a fine of not less
than ten ($10.00) dollars nor more than five hundred ($500.00) dollars. Each day during any
portion of which a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Effective: 9/23/93)
31
ARTICLE XXV
DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION
Section 1. Purpose.
This By-Law, adopted pursuant to G.L. c. 43B, Section 13 and Article 89 of the Amendments to
the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, establishes registration requirements
for all persons intending to engage in door-to-door canvassing or solicitation in the Town of
Weston in order to (1) protect its citizenry from disruption of the peaceful enjoyment of their
residences and from the perpetration of fraud or other crimes; and (2) to allow for reasonable
access to residents in their homes by persons or organizations who wish to communicate either
commercial or non-commercial messages.
Section2. Registration.
Every person or organization intending to engage in soliciting or canvassing door-to-door in the
Town of Weston must register with the Police Department at least 3 days in advance by filing a
registration application form with the Chief of Police.
Section 3. Registration Cards.
a) The Police Chief shall furnish each person engaged in solicitation or canvassing with a
registration card which shall contain identifying information as required by the Police Chief.
b) Persons engaged in solicitation or canvassing must carry the registration card at all times and
present the card to any person solicited or upon request of any police officer.
c) Registration cards are valid only for the specific dates or time period specified thereon and in
no case for longer than 90 days.
d) The Police Chief shall refuse to register an organization or individual whose registration has
been revoked for violation of this By-Law within the previous two-year period, or who has
been convicted of any crime affecting personal safety.
Section4. Exceptions.
a) Registration shall not be required for officers or employees of the Town, county, state
or federal governments when on official business.
b) Individual registration shall not be required for minors under the age of 18 except in
connection with for-profit, commercial activity.
Section 5. Duties of Solicitors.
a) Any solicitor or canvasser who has entered any premises shall immediately, and
peacefully, depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
b) Immediately upon entering any premises, the solicitor or canvasser must do the
following:
i) Present his registration card for inspection by the occupant.
ii) Request that the occupant read the registration card.
iii) Inform the occupant in clear language of the nature and purpose of his business
and, if he is representing an organization, the name and nature of that
organization.
c) It shall be the duty of every organization employing solicitors or canvassers to notify the
Police Department daily as to the area(s) of the Town in which they will be operating.
Section 6. Penalty.
a) Any person or organization violating any of the provisions of this By-Law shall be
subject to a fine of $20.00 for each offense.
32
b) Any person or organization who violated any provision of this By-Law, or who knowingly
provides false information on the registration application, shall have his, her or its
registration revoked by the Chief of Police by written notice delivered to the holder of the
registration in person, or sent to the holder by certified mail at the address set forth in the
application.
Section 7. Appeals.
Any person or organization who is denied registration or whose registration has been revoked
may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Board of Selectmen. Such appeal must
be filed within 10 days after receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The Board of
Selectmen shall hear and determine the appeal within 30 days after the filing of the written notice
of appeal.
Section 8. Severability.
Invalidity of any individual provision of this By-Law shall not affect the validity of the By-Law
as a whole. (Effective: 9/23/93)
ARTICLE XXVI
DEMOLITION DELAY
Intent and purpose: The Demolition Delay by-law is enacted for the purpose of preserving and
protecting significant buildings within the Town of Weston which are outside Local Historic
Districts. Such buildings reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, economic,
political or social history of the Town, and their preservation promotes the public welfare by
making the Town a more attractive and desirable place to live and work.
The intent of the by-law is not to permanently prevent demolition, but rather, to provide an
opportunity to develop preservation solutions for properties threatened with demolition. The bylaw
is intended to encourage owners and townspeople to seek out persons who might be willing
to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such buildings rather than demolish them, and to
limit the detrimental effect of demolition on the historical architectural resources of the Town.
To achieve these purposes, the Weston Historical Commission (“the Commission”) is
empowered to advise the Building Inspector with respect to the issuance of permits for
demolition of significant buildings, and, where appropriate and consistent with the intent and
purpose of this by-law, to allow demolition under conditions designed to minimize the loss of
distinctive features of significant buildings.
Definitions:
I. “Building” - any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals, or
property.
II. “Demolition” – any act of pulling down, destroying, removing, razing or moving a building
or any portion thereof, or commencing the work of moving or of total or substantial
destruction of a building or portion thereof, with the intent of completing the same;
III. “Significant Building” – any building or portion thereof which in whole or in part was
constructed by 1945, or is of unknown age, and which meets one or more of the following
three criteria:
A. is listed on, or is within an area listed on, the National Register of Historic Places, or is
the subject of a pending application for listing on said National Register; or
33
B. is included within a “significant area” or “further study area” inventoried or outlined by
the Commission in the 1993-1994 Historical Resources Survey; or
C. is documented on a Cultural Resources Inventory form prepared by the Commission;
and, in addition, is determined by vote of the Commission to be of historical or architectural
significance by reason of period, style, method or building construction, or by reason of its
association with a particular architect, or a builder, or with a person or event of importance to
the Town’s history:
IV. “Commission” - the Weston Historical Commission.
V. “Business Day” - any day which is not a legal municipal holiday, Saturday or Sunday.
Procedure
I. No demolition of a building, or any portion of a building, which was in existence as of
January 1, 1945 or which is of an indeterminate age, shall be permitted except in
conformity with the provisions of this by-law.
II. Upon receipt of an application for a demolition permit for any building, or portion thereof,
which was in existence as of January 1, 1945 or which is of indeterminate age, the Building
Inspector shall forward a copy thereof to the Commission within five (5) business days, and
shall notify the applicant in writing of this action. No demolition permit shall be issued at
that time.
III. Within twenty-one (21) business days of its receipt of a copy of an application for a
demolition permit, the Commission shall make an Initial Determination as to the
significance of the subject building. The Initial Determination shall be positive if the
building, or a portion thereof, meets one or more of criteria (a) through (d) of the above
definition of “Significant Building.” Otherwise, the Initial Determination shall be in the
negative. The Commission shall notify the applicant of the meeting at which it intends to
make its Initial Determination at lease seven (7) days in advance of said meeting, and the
applicant shall be given an opportunity to make a presentation to the Commission.
IV. The Commission shall notify the Building Inspector and the applicant in writing within ten
(10) business days of its Initial Determination. If the Initial Determination is in the
negative, or if the Commission fails to notify the Building Inspector of its Initial
Determination within the said ten (10) business days, the Building Inspector may, subject
to the requirements of the State Building Code and any other applicable law, by-laws, rules
and regulations, issue a demolition permit.
V. If the Commission’s Initial Determination is positive, the Commission shall, within thirty
(30) days of its Determination, conduct a public hearing to determine whether the
Significant Building is preferably preserved; the Commission shall give public notice of
said hearing by publishing notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town twice, the first notice to be published at least
fourteen (14) days before the hearing and the second notice no more than seven (7) days
before the hearing, and by mailing a copy of said notice to the applicant, to the owner of
the premises on which the Significant Building is located (if other than the applicant) to the
owners of all property within three hundred feet of the premises on which the Significant
Building is located as appearing on the most recent tax list, and to such other persons as the
Commission shall deem entitled to notice.
VI. If, after a public hearing, the Commission determines that demolition of the Significant
Building would not be detrimental to the historical or architectural heritage or resources of
the Town, the Commission shall so notify the applicant, the owner, if other than the
34
applicant, and the Building Inspector, in writing, within ten (10) business days of such
determination. Upon receipt of such notice, or upon the expiration of ten (10) business
days from the date of the close of the Commission’s public hearing, without having
received any notification from the Commission, the Building Inspector may, subject to the
requirements of the State Building Code and any other applicable laws, by-laws, rules and
regulations, issue a demolition permit for the subject building.
VII. If, after the public hearing, the Commission determines that demolition of the Significant
Building would be detrimental to the historical or architectural heritage or resources of the
Town, such building shall be considered to be a preferably preserved building, and the
Commission shall so advise the applicant, the owner if other than the applicant, and the
Building Inspector, in writing, within (10) business days, and no demolition permit shall be
issued until twelve months after the date of such determination by the Commission.
VIII. During the twelve months delay period following the Commission’s determination that a
building is to be considered preferably preserved, the Commission shall notify the
Massachusetts Historical Commission, the Town Planner, and any other interested party in
an effort to obtain assistance in obtaining preservation funding or in finding an adaptive use
of the building which will result in its preservation.
IX. Notwithstanding the preceding paragraphs, the Building Inspector may issue a demolition
permit for a preferably preserved significant building at any time after receipt of written
advice from the Commission to the effect that
i) the Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable likelihood that either the owner
or some other person or group is willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore
such building, or
ii) the Commission is satisfied that for at least twelve months the owner has made
continuing, bona fide and reasonable efforts to locate a purchaser to preserve,
rehabilitate and restore the subject building, and that such efforts have been
unsuccessful;
iii) the Commission has determined that the proposed moving or demolition may be
conducted in a specified manner so as not to be detrimental to the historical or
architectural heritage or resources of the Town.
Responsibilities of the Owner
Once a Significant Building is determined to be a preferably preserved building, the owner shall
be responsible for properly securing the building, if vacant, to the satisfaction of the Building
Inspector. Should the owner fail to so secure the building, a subsequent destruction of the
building at any time during the twelve months demolition delay period, which destruction could
have been prevented by the required security measures, shall be considered a demolition in
violation of this by-law.
Emergency Demolitions
Notwithstanding the following provisions, the Building Inspector may issue a demolition permit
at any time in the event of imminent and substantial danger to the health or safety of the public
due to deteriorating conditions. Prior to doing so, the Building Inspector shall inspect the
building and document, in writing, the findings and reasons requiring an emergency demolition,
a copy of which shall be forwarded immediately to the Commission. Before allowing emergency
demolition, the Building Inspector shall make every effort to inform the Chairperson of the
Commission of his intention to allow demolition before he issues a permit for emergency
demolition.
35
No provision of this by-law is intended to conflict with or abridge any obligations or rights
conferred by G.L.c.143 regarding removal or demolition of dangerous or abandoned structures.
In the event of a conflict, the applicable provisions of Chapter 143 shall control.
Historic Districts Act
Nothing in this by-law shall be deemed to conflict with the provisions of the Historic Districts
Act, Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 40C, with respect to requirements of notice, hearing
and issuance by the Commission of a Certificate of Appropriateness, a Certificate of Nonapplicability
or a Certificate of Hardship prior to demolition of any building in an historic
district.
Enforcement and Remedies
1. Except as provided below, whenever a significant building or any portion thereof has been
voluntarily demolished in violation of this by-law, and for a period of two years after the date
of completion of such demolition, no building permit shall be issued with respect to any
premises upon which such demolition has occurred. As used herein, “premises” includes the
parcel of land upon which the demolished significant building was located.
2. Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the Commission shall, on its own initiative, or on
application of the landowner, determine that earlier reconstruction, restoration or other
remediation of any demolition in violation of this by-law better serves the intent and purpose
of this by-law, it may, prior to the expiration of said period of two years, but no sooner than
six months from the date of completion of any demolition in violation of this by-law,
authorize issuance of a building permit, upon such conditions as the Commission deems
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the purposes of this by-law, and may so notify the
Building Inspector pursuant to Section VIII of this by-law.
Severability
If any section, paragraph or part of this by-law for any reason declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph and part shall continue in full force
and effect.
(Effective: 8-30-98
amended effective 3-15-00
amended effective 8-10-15)
ARTICLE XXVII
STORMWATER AND EROSION CONTROL
Section I. Purpose
A. The purpose of this By-Law is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety,
environment and general welfare of the Town by establishing minimum requirements and
procedures to control the adverse effects of soil erosion and sedimentation, construction site
runoff, increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution
associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper
management of stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and
infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the
public, protect water and aquatic resources, protect and enhance wildlife habitat, and promote
groundwater recharge to protect surface and groundwater drinking supplies. This By-Law
seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives:
36
1. Establish a mechanism by which the municipality can monitor and ensure compliance
with requirements of its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General
Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems
(MS4) and other applicable State and Federal mandates.
2. Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect
the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources.
3. Require that new development, redevelopment and other land alteration activities
maintain the after-development runoff characteristics as equal to or less than the predevelopment
runoff characteristics where appropriate in order to reduce flooding, stream
bank erosion, siltation, nonpoint source pollution, property damage, and to maintain the
integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats.
4. Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design
criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; establish
minimum design criteria for the protection of properties and aquatic resources downstream
from land development and land conversion activities from damages due to alterations in
volume, velocity, frequency, duration, and peak flow rate of storm water runoff; establish
minimum design criteria for measures to eliminate or minimize to the extent feasible
nonpoint source pollution from stormwater runoff which would otherwise degrade water
quality.
5. Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural
stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet or exceed the minimum postdevelopment
stormwater management standards.
6. Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management, better site design practices or
“low-impact development practices”, such as reducing impervious cover, increasing sitewide
infiltration, and preserving open space and other natural areas, to the maximum extent
practicable.
7. Promote water conservation through the re-use of stormwater for irrigation.
8. Establish provisions that require practices that eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation
and control the volume and rate of stormwater runoff resulting from land disturbance
activities.
9. Establish provisions to ensure that soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and
stormwater runoff control practices are incorporated into the site planning and design process
and are implemented and maintained.
10. Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural
stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure
that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety
or the environment.
11. Establish provisions to ensure there is an adequate funding mechanism for the proper
review, inspection and long-term maintenance of stormwater facilities implemented as part of
this By-Law.
37
12. Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval or disapproval
of stormwater management plans, erosion and sediment controls, and for the inspection of
approved active projects, and long-term follow up; Establish certain administrative
procedures and fees for the submission, review, approval, or disapproval of stormwater plans,
inspection of construction sites, and the inspection of approved projects.
13. Ensure that construction and waste materials, toxic materials, hazardous materials, and
other pollutants are prevented from mixing with stormwater runoff, which would degrade
water quality.
14. Establish the Town of Weston’s legal authority and capacity to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this By-Law through funding, permitting, inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement.
B. Nothing in this By-law is intended to replace the requirements of the Town of Weston
Zoning By-Law, the Mass Wetlands Protection Act, the Town of Weston General By-Law,
any other By-Law that may be adopted by the Town of Weston, or any Rules and
Regulations adopted there under.
Section II Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this By-
Law. Additional definitions may be adopted by separate regulation:
ALTER: Any activity that will measurably change the ability of a ground surface area to
absorb water, will change existing surface drainage patterns, or will increase or decrease the
rate or volume of flow from a site.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Structural, non-structural and managerial
techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and practical means to prevent and/or
reduce increases in stormwater volumes and flows, reduce point source and nonpoint source
pollution, and promote stormwater quality and protection of the environment. “Structural”
BMPs are devices that are engineered and constructed to provide temporary storage and
treatment of stormwater runoff. “Nonstructural” BMPs use natural measures to reduce
pollution levels, do not require extensive construction efforts, and/or promote pollutant
reduction by eliminating the pollutant source.
BETTER SITE DESIGN: Site design approaches and techniques, including low-impact
development (LID) that can reduce a site’s impact on the watershed through the use of
nonstructural stormwater management practices. Better site design includes conserving and
protecting natural areas and green space, reducing impervious cover, using natural features
for stormwater management, and providing site-wide infiltration.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction that disturbs or alters a parcel of land.
DISTURBANCE OF LAND (Land Disturbance): any action causing any removal of
vegetation including tree and brush clearing; importation, removal or redistribution of soil,
sand, rock, gravel or similar earth material. (Amendment effective 5/12, 2014)
38
EXISTING LAWN: Grass area which has been maintained and mowed in the previous two
years. (Amendment effective 5/12, 2014)
IMPERVIOUS: Any material or structure on, above or below the ground that prevents
water from infiltrating through the underlying soil. Impervious surface is defined to include,
without limitation: paved surfaces (parking lots, sidewalks, and driveways), concrete, brick,
stone, and roof tops.
INFILTRATION: The act of conveying surface water into the ground to permit groundwater
recharge and the reduction of stormwater runoff from a project site.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): An ecosystem-based approach to land
development and stormwater management that ensures that each development site is
designed to protect, or restore, the natural hydrology of the site.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS: The latest version
as may be amended from time to time of the Stormwater Management Standards and
accompanying Stormwater Handbook issued by the Department of Environmental Protection
pursuant to authority under the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. c. 131, § 40, and the
Massachusetts Clean Waters Act, M.G.L .c. 21, §§ 26-53. The Stormwater Management
Standards are incorporated in the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations, 310 CMR
10.05(6)(k) and the Water Quality Certification Regulations, 314 CMR 9.06(6)(a).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL STORM
DRAIN SYSTEM: The system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm
drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage
channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage
system owned or operated by the Town of Weston.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from many diffuse sources caused by
rainfall, snowmelt, or other method of pollutant transport moving over and through the
ground. As the runoff moves, it picks up and carries away natural and human-made
pollutants, finally depositing them into water resource areas.
NORMAL MAINTENANCE: Activities that are regularly scheduled to maintain the health
and condition of a landscaped area. Examples include removal of weeds or invasive species,
pruning, mowing, raking, and other activities that are done at regular intervals within the
course of a year.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that exist prior to the proposed disturbance
activity. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads
and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first plan submission shall
establish pre-development conditions.
POST-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to
exist after completion of the land development activity in accordance with approved plans on
a specific site or tract of land. Post-development refers to the phase of a new development or
redevelopment project after completion, and does not refer to the construction phase of a
project.
39
RECHARGE: The replenishment of underground water reserves.
RECONSTRUCTION: Any action causing complete removal and replacement of paved
surfaces, such as driveways, parking areas and roads.
REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction, alteration, improvement, repaving, or resurfacing
on a previously-developed site.
RUNOFF: Rainfall or snowmelt water flowing over the ground surface or other source
which may result in transport of pollutants.
SITE: The entire parcel of land being developed.
STOCKPILING: The storage of unsecured material for future use, excluding the storage of
materials 10 cubic yards or less when secured utilizing erosion controls to prevent erosion of
material.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The use of structural or non-structural practices that are
designed to control or treat stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or
peak flow discharge rates. Stormwater Management includes the use of Low-Impact
Development (LID) management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT (SMP): A permit issued by the Stormwater
Permitting Authority (SWPA), after review of an application, plans, calculations, and other
supporting documents, which is designed to protect the environment of the Town from the
deleterious effects of uncontrolled and untreated stormwater runoff.
Section III. Authority
This By-Law is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule statutes, and pursuant to the regulations of the
federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34., and as authorized by the residents of the
Town of Weston at Town Meeting dated May 10, 2011
Section IV. Applicability
Where a project is subject to Site Plan Approval, Definitive Subdivision or Special Permit
Approval from the Planning Board, the Stormwater Regulations adopted by the Planning Board
shall apply and the stormwater review shall be completed as part of the Planning Board process
provided that the Planning Board also finds that the activity is in compliance with any additional
performance standards contained in the Regulations promulgated to implement this By-Law.
A. For projects not subject to Site Plan Approval, Definitive Subdivision or Special Permit
Approval from the Planning Board, this By-Law shall be applicable to all new development
and redevelopment, land disturbance and any other activity that may result in an increased
amount of stormwater runoff or pollutants, or changes to drainage characteristics causing an
increases in runoff, flowing from a parcel of land, unless exempt pursuant to Section V 5 of
this By-Law. This By-Law shall apply to land or parcels of land that are held in common
ownership (including ownership by related or jointly-controlled persons or entities) as of the
effective date of this By-Law, if the total land-disturbing activities on said land or parcels,
considered as a whole, would presently or ultimately exceed the minimum thresholds in
40
Section IV.B and are not exempted by Section V. A development shall not be segmented or
phased in a manner to avoid compliance with this By-Law.
B. No Permit Required – For activities listed below, no permit shall be required by the SWPA
provided that erosion control measures are used and the activity will not result in an
increased amount of stormwater runoff or pollutants flowing from a parcel of land and
entering a traveled way or adjacent properties.
1. Land Disturbance not to exceed 5,000 square feet in area other than work described in
Section IV.B.4 and Section IV.C.1.
2. The creation of new impervious area, or expansion of existing impervious area, not to
exceed 750 square feet.
3. Repair, replacement or reconstruction of an existing driveway.
4. Restoration of existing lawn areas provided that any imported material is spread at a
thickness no greater than four inches and the total imported material does not exceed 250
cubic yards.
5. The addition or on-site redistribution of up to 250 cubic yards of material.
6. Demolition of a structure provided that any land disturbance, including the area of the
structure, does not exceed 5,000 square feet.
7. Routine maintenance and improvement of institutional, open space, and recreational uses,
provided that an annual letter or plan is filed with and approved by the SWPA describing
the work to be done.
(Subsection 7 added effective
5/12/2014)
C. Stormwater Management Permit Thresholds - A Stormwater Management Permit shall be
required for any of the following, except for an activity exempt per Section V:
1. Minor Permit
a) The creation of new impervious area, or expansion of existing impervious area, greater
than 750 square feet and not exceeding 2,500 square feet.
b) Repair, replacement, expansion of septic systems provided the work does not exceed
the thresholds in Section IV.C.2.d.
c) The addition or on-site redistribution of more than 250 cubic yards, but not exceeding
500 cubic yards, of earth materials including, but not limited to, sand, gravel, stone,
soil, loam, clay, sod, fill and mineral products.
2. Major Permit
a) Construction of any new dwelling or new dwelling replacing an existing dwelling in
conformance with Article VIII, Section V.B.1.a and Section V.C.1.a of the Weston
Zoning By-Laws;
b) Any land disturbance exceeding an area of 5,000 square feet, or more than 20% of a
parcel or lot, whichever is less, other than activities described in section IV.B.4.
c) Creation of new impervious surface area greater than 2,500 square feet.
d) The addition or on-site redistribution of more than 500 cubic yards of earth materials
including, but not limited to, sand, gravel, stone, soil, loam, clay, sod, fill and mineral
products.
e) Reconstruction of public or private way.
f) Reconstruction or replacement of existing non-residential parking lots, including
41
associated driveways, greater than 2,500 square feet.
Section V. Exemptions
Exemptions from this By-Law apply to the following activities, provided that a project is solely
comprised of any one of these activities:
A. Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as defined by the Wetlands
Protection Act Regulations at 310 CMR 10.04 (“Agricultural”) and the conversion of
additional land to agricultural use, when undertaken in such a manner as to prevent erosion
and siltation through the use of Best Management Practices recommended by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service or the Massachusetts
Department of Agricultural Resources.
B. Any work or projects for which all necessary approvals and permits were issued before the
effective date of this By-Law.
C. Normal maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas
D. Construction of any fence that will not alter existing terrain or drainage patterns.
E. Construction of utilities (gas, water, sanitary sewer, electric, telephone, cable television, etc.)
other than drainage which will not alter terrain, ground cover, or drainage patterns, so long as
BMPs are used to prevent erosion, sedimentation and release of pollutants.
F. Emergency repairs to any existing utilities (gas, water, sanitary sewer, electric, telephone,
cable television, etc.) and emergency repairs to any stormwater management facility that
poses a threat to public health or safety, designated by the SWPA. Where such activity is
subject to the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission, the work shall not proceed
without the issuance of an Emergency Certification by the Commission.
G. The maintenance or resurfacing (not including reconstruction) of any public or private way.
Section VI. Administration
A. The Board of Selectmen shall be the appointing authority for the Stormwater Permitting
Authority. The Stormwater Permitting Authority is responsible for the administration,
implementation, and enforcement of this By-Law. Meetings of the Stormwater Permitting
Authority shall be subject to the Massachusetts Open Meeting Law, MGL Ch. 30A, §§ 18-
25.
B. Stormwater Permitting Authority (SWPA). The SWPA shall consist of (5) five members,
four of whom shall permanently be the Town Engineer, the Town Planner, the Conservation
Administrator, and the Public Health Director. One (1) member shall be a resident of the
Town of Weston and possess a degree in landscape architecture, environmental or civil
engineering or environmental science appointed by the Board of Selectmen serving a (3) year
term. The SWPA shall administer, implement and enforce this By-Law. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the SWPA may be delegated in writing by the SWPA to
any Town employee, board or agent.
C. Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations (“Regulations”). The SWPA may adopt, and
periodically amend, rules and regulations relating to the terms, conditions, definitions,
enforcement, fees (including application, inspection, and/or consultant fees), delegation of
authority, procedures and administration of this By-Law after conducting a public hearing to
receive comments on the proposed rules and regulations or any proposed revisions. Such
42
hearing dates shall be advertised in a newspaper of general local circulation at least seven (7)
days prior to the hearing date. Failure of the SWPA to promulgate such rules and regulations
or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court shall not act to suspend or invalidate the
effect of this By-Law.
D. Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook
The SWPA will utilize the policy, criteria and information including specifications and
standards of the most recent edition of the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook for
execution of the provisions of this By-Law. Unless otherwise specified in the Regulations,
stormwater management practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in
accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to be protective of
Massachusetts water quality standards.
E. Stormwater Management Permit
The SWPA shall have the authority to issue a Stormwater Management Permit (SMP) for
projects exceeding the thresholds defined in Section IV.C. of this By-Law and not
otherwise exempted by Section V. Requirements of the SMP may be defined and included
within the Regulations promulgated pursuant to Section VI.C of this By-Law.
F. SWPA Approval Process.
1. Action by SWPA
a. Determination of Completeness: The SWPA shall review the application submission
and issue a determination stating whether the application is complete and whether it
complies with the Design Standards established in the Stormwater Rules and
Regulations, as may be waived in accordance with Section 3.E. of this By-Law.
b. Incomplete Applications: If the SWPA determines the application is incomplete,
including insufficient information to describe the site, the work, or the effect of the
work on water quality and runoff volume, the SWPA may require the submission of
additional information and/or disapprove the application and deny the Permit.
c. Applications deemed to be complete and in compliance with Design Standards. Each
application for a Stormwater Management Permit that complies with the Regulations,
and is determined to be a complete application by the SWPA shall be acted upon within
thirty (30) days of the date of filing with the SWPA, unless such application has been
withdrawn from consideration. The SWPA may:
i. Approve the Permit Application upon finding that the proposed plan will protect
water resources and meets the objectives and requirements of this By-Law;
ii. Approve the Permit Application with conditions, modifications or restrictions that
are required to ensure that the project will protect water resources and meets the
objectives and requirements of this By-Law; or
iii Disapprove the Permit Application if the proposed plan will not protect water
resources or fails to meet the objectives and requirements of this By-Law.
d. Applications not in compliance with Design Standards.
i. For applications where the SWPA has determined that the Design Standards are not
met, the Applicant may appeal the determination and request a public hearing with
the SWPA to consider the application or resubmit the application demonstrating
43
compliance.
ii. For applications where the Design Standards cannot be met due to site conditions or
the applicant wishes to propose an alternative design not consistent with the Design
Standards, the applicant may immediately request a public hearing with the SWPA.
2. Public Hearing Process
a. A public hearing is required for all Minor and Major Stormwater Management Permits
(SMP) where design standards cannot be met. Minor Permits and Major Permits that
meet design standards shall not require a public hearing. Public hearings shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation for two (2) consecutive weeks. The first
publication date shall be published not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the
hearing. A copy of the hearing notice shall be posted in the Office of the Town Clerk for
a period of not less than fourteen (14) days before the date of the hearing. Copies of the
notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant, property owner (if different)
and to direct abutters and owners of land directly opposite on a public or private way as
they appear on the most recent Assessor’s list.
b. The SWPA may take any of the following actions following the close of the public
hearing for an application for a Stormwater Management Permit
i. Approve the Permit Application upon finding that the proposed plan will protect
water resources and meets the objectives and requirements of this By-Law;
ii. Approve the Permit Application with conditions, modifications or restrictions that
are required to ensure that the project will protect water resources and meets the
objectives and requirements of this By-Law; or
iii. Disapprove the Permit Application if the proposed plan will not protect water
resources or fails to meet the objectives and requirements of this By-Law.
G. Appeals of Action by the SWPA. A decision of the SWPA shall be final. Further relief of a
decision by the SWPA made under this By-Law shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
H. Waivers. The SWPA may waive strict compliance with any of the requirements of this By-
Law or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, if it determines that some of the
application requirements are unnecessary because of the size or character of the development
project or because of the natural conditions at the site and where such action is:
1. Allowed by federal, state and local statutes and/or regulations,
2. In the public interest, and
3. Not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this By-Law.
Any request from an Applicant for a waiver of these rules shall be submitted, in writing, to
the SWPA at the time of submission of the application. Such requests shall clearly identify
the provision/s of the rule from which relief is sought and be accompanied by a statement
setting forth the reasons why, in the applicant’s opinion, the granting of such a waiver would
be in the public interest or the specific information required to show strict compliance is
irrelevant to the project, and why a waiver would be consistent with the intent and purpose of
this By-Law and the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder.
Section VII. Performance Standards
44
Criteria for Stormwater Management Standards shall be defined and included as part of any
Rules and Regulations promulgated under Section VI.C of this By-Law.
Section VIII. Enforcement
A. The SWPA, or an authorized agent of the SWPA, shall enforce this By-Law, and any
Regulations, permits orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all
civil and criminal remedies for violations.
B. If a person violates the provisions of this By-Law or its Regulations, or a permit, notice or
order issued there under, the SWPA may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction to restrain the person from activities which would create further violations or to
compel the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
C. The SWPA, or an authorized agent of the SWPA, may issue a written order to enforce the
provisions or this By-Law or the Regulations, which may include requirements to:
1. Cease and desist from land-disturbing activity until there is compliance with the By-Law
or provisions of an approved Stormwater Management Permit;
2. Maintain, install or perform additional erosion and sediment control measures;
3. Perform monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
4. Remediate erosion and sedimentation resulting directly or indirectly from land-disturbing
activity;
5. Comply with requirements in the Stormwater Management Permit for operation and
maintenance of stormwater management systems; and,
6. Remediate adverse impacts resulting directly or indirectly from malfunction of the
stormwater management systems.
If the SWPA or its authorized agent determines that abatement or remediation is required, the
order shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed.
D. Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this By-Law, regulation,
order or permit issued hereunder, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300. Each
day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
E. Non-Criminal Disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the
Town may utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in M.G.L. Ch. 40, §21D
and Article V of the Town By-Laws, in which case any police officer of the Town of
Weston, the Town Engineer, and such other persons as are authorized by the SWPA shall be
the enforcing person. If non-criminal disposition is used, any person who violates any
provision of this By-Law, regulation, order or permit issued thereunder, shall be punished as
follows:
1. First Violation: Warning
2. Second violation: $100
3. Third violation: $200
4. Fourth and subsequent violations: $300
5. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation
F. Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this By-Law are not exclusive of any other
remedies available to the SWPA or the Town under any applicable federal, state or local law.
45
Section IX. Severability
The invalidity of any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this By-Law shall not
invalidate any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause thereof, nor shall it invalidate
any permit or determination that previously has been issued.
Section X. Effective Date
This By-Law shall take effect on October 1, 2011, provided that all other requirements of G.L.
c.40, §32 have been met.
AND FURTHER, to amend the By-laws of the Town of Weston by inserting, at the end of
Article IV, Section 5, the following sentence:
“No person shall discharge, cause the discharge, or divert a natural flow of surface or ground
water in such a manner that it will cause an icing condition on a way.”
(Effective 11/3/2011)
(Effective: 11/12/2003)
(Amended 5/08/2006)
(Amended 5/12/2010)
(Amended 5/9/2011)
ARTICLE XXVIII
WATER CONSERVATION
SECTION 1: Authority
This By-Law is adopted by the Town under its police powers pursuant to the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, Article LXXXIX, to protect public health and
welfare and its powers pursuant to M.G.L. c.40, §21 et seq. and implements the Town’s authority
to regulate water use pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, §69B. This By-Law also implements the Town’s
authority under M.G.L. c. 40, §41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply emergency
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection.
SECTION 2: Purpose
The purpose of this By-Law is to protect, preserve and maintain the public health, safety and
welfare whenever there is in force a State of Water Supply Conservation or State of Water
Supply Emergency, by providing for enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions,
requirements, provisions or conditions imposed by the Town, by the Department of
Environmental Protection or by the MWRA.
SECTION 3: Definitions
“Agriculture” shall mean farming in all its branches and agriculture, as defined in M.G.L. c. 128,
§ 1A.
46
“Outdoor watering” shall mean any residential, municipal, industrial, or commercial watering of
decorative lawns, trees or shrubbery.
“Person” shall mean any individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association, agency or
authority, or other entity and any officer, employee, group or agent of such persons.
“State of Water Supply Emergency” shall mean a State of Water Supply Emergency declared by
the Department of Environmental Protection under M.G.L. c.21G, §15-17
“State of Water Supply Conservation” shall mean a State of Water Supply Conservation declared
by the Town pursuant to Section 4 of this By-Law.
“Water Users or Water Consumers” shall mean all persons using water from the Town’s public
water source irrespective of that person’s responsibility for billing purposes for use of the water.
SECTION 4: Declaration of State of Water Supply Conservation
The Town, through its Board of Selectmen authorized to act as such, may declare a State of
Water Supply Conservation upon a determination by a majority vote of the Board that the
distribution system is nearing capacity and conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an
adequate supply of water to all water consumers. Public notice of a State of Water Conservation
shall be given under section 6 of this By-Law before it may be enforced.
SECTION 5: Restricted Water Uses
A declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall include one or more of the following
restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the
water supply except as provided in Section 11. The applicable restrictions, conditions or
requirements shall be included in the public notice required under Section 6.
a) Odd/Even Day Outdoor Watering: Outdoor watering on property having an odd
numbered address is restricted to odd numbered days. Outdoor watering on
property having an even numbered address is restricted to even numbered days.
b) Outdoor Watering Method Restriction: Outdoor watering is restricted to bucket,
can or hand held hose watering with automatic shutoff nozzle.
c) Outdoor Watering Ban: Outdoor watering is prohibited.
d) Outdoor Watering Hours: Outdoor watering is permitted only during daily periods
of low demand, to be specified in the declaration of a State of Water Supply
Conservation and public notice thereof.
e) Swimming Pools: Filling and topping off of swimming pools is prohibited.
f) Automatic Sprinkler Use: The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited.
g) Car washing: Car or vehicle washing is prohibited.
SECTION 6: Public Notification of a State of Water Supply Conservation and State of
Water Supply Emergency; Notification of DEP
Notification of any provision, including any restriction, requirement or condition imposed by the
Town as part of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Town, or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and
inform users of water of the State of Water Supply Conservation. Notification of a State of Water
Supply Emergency declared by the Department or MWRA shall be provided by furnishing a
copy of the Notice to two (2) radio and up to two (2) television stations serving the area served
by the public water system as soon as possible, but no later than 48 hours after the public water
system receives notice of the Department’s declaration. Any restriction imposed under section 5
47
or in the Department declaration of emergency or order shall not be effective until such
notification is provided. Notification of the State of Water Supply Conservation shall also be
provided to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection and MWRA at the same
time that notification is given.
SECTION 7: Termination of State of Water Supply Conservation; Notice
A State of Water Supply Conservation may be terminated by a majority vote of the Board of
Selectmen upon a determination that the water supply shortage no longer exists. Public
notification of the termination of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be given in the
same manner as is required for notice of the Town’s declaration of its State of Water Supply
Conservation.
SECTION 8: State of Water Supply Emergency; Compliance with DEP US
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a State of Water Supply Emergency has been
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection or MWRA, no person shall violate any
provision, restriction, requirement, or condition of any order approved or issued by the
Department for the purpose of bringing about an end to the State of Water Supply Emergency.
The notice prescribed by this section shall be in writing and shall be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the town where it is to be effective. Such notice shall
summarize the provisions of the Declaration of Water Supply Emergency and the requirements
and conditions thereof. Notice as prescribed by this section shall be sufficient for enforcement of
the requirements of such Declaration on and after the date following newspaper publication.
SECTION 9: Penalties
The Town, through its Public Works Director, Water Superintendent, building inspector or local
police may enforce this By-Law. Any person violating this By-Law shall be liable to the Town
in the amount of $50.00 for the first violation and $ 100.00 for each subsequent violation. Fines
shall be recovered by indictment, by complaint before the District Court, or by non-criminal
disposition in accordance with section 21D of chapter 40 of the general laws.
SECTION 10: Severability
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this By-Law shall not invalidate any other portion
or provision thereof.
SECTION 11: Exemptions
The water use restrictions adopted under this By-Law shall not apply to the specific uses outlined
below provided the user meets any applicable eligibility criteria.
a) Commercial agriculture;
b) Water to sustain animal life;
c) Swimming pools used as a primary means of exercise, therapy or
Rehabilitation located at a medical or rehabilitation facility;
d) Commercial car or vehicle washing facilities.
Requests for exemptions shall be made in writing to the Department of Public Works.
(Effective: 11/12/2003)
48
ARTICLE XXIX
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
Section 1: Establishment
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Committee, consisting of nine (9) voting
members pursuant to the provisions of G.L., c. 44B, section 5. The composition of the
committee, the appointing authority and the term of office for the committee members shall be as
follows:
1) One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the Commission;
2) One member of the Historical Commission as designated by the Commission;
3) One member of the Affordable Housing Trust Board of Trustees as designated by the
Board;
4) One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board;
5) One individual with interest and/or expertise in parkland to be appointed by the Board
of Selectmen;
6) Four Weston residents to serve at large, appointed by the Moderator.
Each member of the Committee shall serve for a term of three years or until the
person no longer serves in the position or on the board or committee as set forth
above, whichever is earlier. Said term of office will commence on July 1. From
time to time the Committee shall elect a chairman from its members. Vacancies
shall be filled by the respective appointing authorities to fill the remainder of the
three-year appointment to the Community Preservation Committee. Effective with
the July 1, 2004 appointment or reappointment of at-large members, two members
shall be appointed to a one year term and two members shall be appointed to a two
year term. Subsequent appointment or reappointment of at-large members shall be
to three-year terms.
Should any of the officers and commissions, boards, or committees who have
appointing authority under this by-law be no longer in existence for whatever
reason, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a suitable person to serve in their
place.
Any member of the Committee may be removed for cause by their respective
appointing authority after hearing.
(Effective: 5/12/2004)
(Effective 5/18/2009)
(Effective/voted STM
Fall 2016)
Section 2: Duties
1) The community preservation committee shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of
the town regarding community preservation. The committee shall consult with existing
municipal boards, including the conservation commission, the historical commission, the
planning board, the department of public works, and the housing authority, or persons acting
in those capacities or performing like duties, in conducting such studies. As part of its study,
the committee shall hold one annual public informational hearing, or more at its discretion,
on the needs, possibilities and resources of the town regarding community preservation
49
possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for each of
two weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the town.
2) The community preservation committee shall make recommendations to the Town Meeting
for the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space, for the acquisition and
preservation of historic resources, for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for
recreational use, for the creation, preservation and support of community housing and for
rehabilitation or restoration of such open space, historic resources, land for recreational use
and community housing that is acquired or created as provided in this section. With respect
to community housing, the community preservation committee shall recommend, wherever
possible, the reuse of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously
developed sites.
3) The community preservation committee may include in its recommendation to the Town
Meeting a recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that are
consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then
available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose or to set
aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are consistent with community
preservation.
4) In every fiscal year, the community preservation committee must recommend either that the
legislative body spend, or set aside for later spending, not less than 10% of the annual
revenues in the Community Preservation Fund for each of (a) open space (not including land
for recreational use), (b) historic resources; and (c) community housing.
Section 3: Requirement for quorum and cost estimates
The community preservation committee shall comply with the provisions of the Open Meeting
Law, G.L. c.39, section 23B. The committee shall not meet or conduct business without the
presence of a majority of the members of the committee. The committee shall approve its actions
by majority vote. Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include the committee’s
anticipated costs.
Section 4: Exemptions
Taxpayers qualifying for the low-income exemption or the low and moderate-income senior
exemption as provided for in the Act and approved by the voters, shall submit an application for
the exemption, on a form provided by the Assessors, within three months after the bill or notice
is sent.
(Effective as of May 15, 2002)
Section 5: Amendments
This by-law may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the Town Meeting,
consistent with the provisions of G.L., c.44B.
Section 6: Severability
In case any section, paragraph or part of this by-law be for any reason declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court, every other section, paragraph or part shall continue in full
force and effect.
Section 7: Effective Date
Provided that this by-law is accepted at the 2001 Annual Town Meeting, this by-law shall
take effect upon approval by the Attorney General of the Commonwealth, and after all
requirements of G.L. c. 40, section 32 have been met.
(Effective as of May 7, 2001)
50
ARTICLE XXX
FARM PRESERVATION
Section 1 Legislative Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of this By-law is to state with emphasis the Right to Farm accorded to all
citizens of the Commonwealth under Article 97, of the Constitution, and all state statutes and
regulations thereunder including but not limited to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A,
Section 3, Paragraph 1; Chapter 90, Section 9, Chapter 111, Section 125A and Chapter 128
Section 1A. We the citizens of Weston restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town’s
authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts
Constitution, (“Home Rule Amendment”).
This General By-law encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes agriculture-based economic
opportunities, and protects farmlands within the Town of Weston by allowing agricultural uses
and related activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and Town agencies. This
By-law shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the Town.
Section 2 Definitions
“Farming” or “agriculture” shall include farming in all of its branches and the cultivation and
tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural,
aquacultural, floricultural or horticultural commodities, the growing and harvesting of forest
products upon forest land, the raising of livestock including horses, the keeping of horses as a
commercial enterprise, the keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle and other domesticated
animals used for food purposes, bees, fur-bearing animals, and any forestry or lumbering
operations, performed by a farmer, who is hereby defined as one engaged in agriculture or farming
as herein defined, or on a farm as an incident to or in conjunction with such farming operations,
including preparations for market, delivery to storage or to market or to carriers for transportation
to market.
(Amendment Effective 9.11.12)
Section 3 Right To Farm Declaration
The Right to Farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Weston. The abovedescribed
agricultural activities may occur on holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day
and shall include the attendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally
accepted agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may be caused to
others through the normal practice of agriculture is more than offset by the benefits of farming to
the neighborhood, community, and society in general. The benefits and protections of this Bylaw
are intended to apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural and farming operations
and activities conducted in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover,
nothing in this By-law shall be deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing any land
use regulation, which is properly the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning law.
Section 4 Disclosure Notification
Not later than 21 days after the purchase and sale contract is entered into, or prior to the sale or
exchange of real property if no purchase and sale agreement exists, for the purchase or exchange
of real property, or prior to the acquisition of a leasehold interest or other possessory interest in
51
real property, located in the Town of Weston, the landowner shall present the buyer or occupant
with a disclosure notification which states the following:
“It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage the
maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the production of food, and
other agricultural products, and also for its natural and ecological value. This
disclosure notification is to inform buyers or occupants that the property they are
about to acquire or occupy lies within a town where farming activities occur.
Such farming activities may include, but are not limited to, activities that cause
noise, dust and odors. Buyers or occupants are also informed that the location of
property within the Town may be impacted by commercial agricultural operations
including the ability to access water services for such property under certain
circumstances.”
A copy of the disclosure notification shall be given on a form prepared by the Town and shall be
signed by the landowner prior to the sale, purchase, exchange or occupancy of such real
property. A copy of the disclosure notification must be filed with the Board of Selectmen or its
designee prior to the sale, purchase, exchange or occupancy of such real property. In addition to
the above, a copy of this disclosure notification shall be provided by the Town to landowners
each fiscal year by mail.
Section 5 Resolution of Disputes
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may, notwithstanding pursuing
any other available remedy, file a grievance with the Board of Selectmen, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, or the Board of Health, in accordance with statute and appropriate bylaws
and regulations of the Town. The filing of the grievance does not suspend the time within which
to pursue any other available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer or Board of Selectmen shall forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and
report its recommendations to the referring Town authority within an agreed upon time frame.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public health risk, shall forward a
copy of the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall review and
facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the Board of Health
within an agreed upon time frame.
Section 6 Severability Clause
If any part of this By-law is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision
shall not affect the remainder of this By-law. The Town of Weston hereby declares the
provisions of this By-law to be severable. (Effective as of May 15, 2005)
ARTICLE XXXI
ILLICIT DISCHARGE
1. PURPOSE
Increased and contaminated stormwater runoff is a major cause of impairment of water quality
and flow in lakes, ponds, streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater; contamination of drinking
water supplies; alteration or destruction of aquatic and wildlife habitat; and flooding. Regulation
of illicit connections and discharges to the Town of Weston municipal storm drain system is
necessary for the protection of the town’s water bodies and groundwater and to safeguard the
public health, safety, welfare and the environment.
52
a) The objectives of this By-law are:
1. to prevent pollutants from entering Weston’s municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4);
2. to prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to the MS4;
3. to require the removal of all such illicit connections;
4. to comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater
discharges; and
5. to establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Bylaw
through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
2. DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this bylaw, the following shall mean:
Authorized Enforcement Agency - The Board of Selectmen or other employees or agents
designated by the Board of Selectmen.
Clean Water Act - The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) as
hereafter amended.
Discharge of Pollutants - The addition from any source of any pollutant or combination of
pollutants into the municipal storm drain system or into the waters of the United States or
Commonwealth from any source.
Groundwater - Water beneath the surface of the ground and not confined in a conduit or
container.
Illicit Connection - A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance, which allows an illicit
discharge into the municipal storm drain system, including without limitation sewage, process
wastewater, or wash water and any connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of
whether said connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the effective date
of this bylaw.
Illicit Discharge - Direct or indirect discharge to the municipal storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater, except as exempted in Section 8. The term does not include a
discharge in compliance with an NPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit or a Surface Water
Discharge Permit.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or Municipal Storm Drain System - The system
of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including any road
with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention
or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other
drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the
Town of Weston.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit For Storm Water
Discharges - A permit issued by United States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with
the State that authorizes the discharge of stormwater to waters of the United States.
Non-Stormwater Discharge - Discharge to the municipal storm drain system not composed
entirely of stormwater.
Person - Any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation, company,
business organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the
53
extent subject to Town Bylaws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or
body, the Town of Weston, and any other legal entity, its legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.
Pollutant - Any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial or commercial waste,
runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter whether originating at a point or nonpoint
source, that is or may be introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of the
Commonwealth. Pollutants shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) paints, varnishes, and solvents;
(2) oil and other automotive fluids;
(3) non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
(4) refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordnances,
accumulations and floatables;
(5) pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
(6) hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
(7) dissolved and particulate metals;
(8) animal wastes;
(9) rock, sand, salt, soils;
(10) construction wastes and residues; and
(11) noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Process Wastewater - Water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct
contact with or results from the production or use of any material, intermediate product, finished
product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes water which has increased in
temperature as a result of manufacturing or other processes.
Stormwater/Runoff - Rainwater, snowmelt and/or other water that flows off surfaces and across
or over the ground surface rather than being absorbed into the soil.
Surface Water Discharge Permit - A permit issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00 that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Toxic or Hazardous Material or Waste - Any material, which because of its quantity,
concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive
characteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes
a present or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment. Toxic or
hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical, petroleum product, heavy metal,
radioactive or infectious waste, acid and alkali, and any substance defined as Toxic or Hazardous
under G.L. Ch.21C and Ch.21E, and the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 and 310 CMR 40.0000.
Watercourse - A natural or man-made channel through which water flows or a stream of water,
including a river, brook or underground stream.
Wastewater - Any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool contents or discharge, and/or
process wastewater.
Waters of the Commonwealth - All waters within the jurisdiction of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs,
impoundments, estuaries, wetlands, coastal waters, and groundwater.
54
3. APPLICABILITY
This bylaw shall apply to flows entering the municipally owned storm drainage system.
4. AUTHORITY
This bylaw is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule Procedures Act, and pursuant to the regulations
of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34.
5. ADMINISTRATION
The Board of Selectmen is delegated hereby the responsibility and authority to administer,
implement and enforce this By-Law. The Board of Selectmen may appoint the DPW Director or
the Town Engineer or such other town employee as the Board of Selectmen may from time-totime
determine and designate in writing to aid the Board of Selectmen in the enforcement and/or
administration of the By-Law (herein referred to as Authorized Enforcement Agency).
5.1 Entry to Perform Duties Under this Bylaw. To the extent permitted by state law, or if
authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the Town Engineer, and
other employees designated by the Board of Selectmen may enter upon privately owned
property for the purpose of performing their duties under this bylaw and regulations and
may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the Town
Engineer deems reasonably necessary.
6. REGULATIONS
The Board of Selectmen shall promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this
By-law. Failure to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not have the effect of suspending
or invalidating this bylaw.
7. PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
a) Illicit Discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be discharged
any pollutant or non-stormwater discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4), into a watercourse, into a wetland resource area, or into the waters of the
Commonwealth, except as exempted in Section 8.
b) Illicit Connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any
illicit connection to the municipal storm drain system, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of
connection.
c) Obstruction of Municipal Storm Drain System. No person shall obstruct or interfere
with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the municipal storm drain system
without prior written approval from the DPW Director or the Town Engineer.
8. EXEMPTIONS
Discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting activities are exempt from the prohibition of nonstormwater
discharges.
55
The following non-stormwater discharges or flows are also exempt from the prohibition of nonstormwaters
provided that the source is not a significant contributor of a pollutant to the
municipal storm drain system, and will not damage or threaten public health and the
environment:
a) Waterline flushing and flow from potable water sources;
b) Springs, natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands, diverted stream flow and rising
groundwater;
c) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20), or
uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
d) Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, sump pumps or air conditioning condensation;
e) Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
f) Water from non commercial car washing;
g) Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool or hot tub water (less than one ppm chlorine)
provided the pool or hot tub is drained in such a way as not to cause a nuisance;
h) Discharge from street sweeping, and stormwater runoff containing sand and deicers used
for public safety purposes on public or private property;
i) Emergency repairs to the municipal storm drain system, and any stormwater management
structure or practice that poses a threat to public health or safety, or as deemed necessary by
the DPW Director or the Town Engineer;
j) Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the DPW Director or the Town
Engineer prior to the time of the test;
k) Non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or a Surface Water Discharge
Permit, waiver, or waste discharge order administered under the authority of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency or the Department of Environmental Protection,
provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of the permit,
waiver, or order and applicable laws and regulations, and
l) Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from the Authorized
Enforcement Agency as necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or the
environment.
9. EMERGENCY SUSPENSION OF STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM ACCESS
The Authorized Enforcement Agency may suspend municipal storm drain system access to any
person or property without prior written notice when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge of pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public
health, safety, welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply with an
emergency suspension order, the DPW Director or the Town Engineer may take all reasonable
steps to prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
10. NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon as a person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has
information of or suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in or which
may result in discharge of pollutants into the municipal drainage system, a wetland resource area
or the waters of the Commonwealth, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure
56
containment, and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of oil or hazardous materials,
the person shall immediately notify the Authorized Enforcement Agency. In the event of a
release of non-hazardous material, the reporting person shall notify the Authorized Enforcement
Agency no later than the next business day. The reporting person shall provide to the Authorized
Enforcement Agency written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications
within three business days thereafter. If the discharge of prohibited materials is from a
commercial or industrial facility, the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain on-site
a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records
shall be retained for at least three years.
11. ENFORCEMENT
11.1 The Board of Selectmen, the DPW Director, the Town Engineer, or other authorized
agent of the Board of Selectmen shall enforce this By-Law and any regulations, and may
pursue all civil and criminal remedies for violations.
11.2 Civil Relief. If a person violates the provisions of this By-Law or regulations, or of
any permit, notice or order issued thereunder, the Board of Selectmen may seek
injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain the person from activities
that would create further violations or to compel the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
11.3 Orders. The DPW Director or the Town Engineer or other authorized agent of the
Board of Selectmen may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this bylaw or
the regulations thereunder, which may include:
(1) elimination of illicit connections or discharges to the MS4;
(2) performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(3) that unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; and
(4) remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
a) If the enforcing person determines that abatement or remediation of contamination is
required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation
must be completed. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator or
property owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the
town may, at its option, undertake such work, and expenses thereof shall be charged
to the violator.
b) Within thirty (30) days after completing all measures necessary to abate the violation
or to perform remediation, the violator and the property owner will be notified of the
costs incurred by the town including administrative costs.
c) The violator or property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount or
basis of costs with the DPW Director or the Town Engineer within thirty (30) days of
receipt of the notification of the costs incurred.
d) If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the time in which to file a
protest or within thirty (30) days following a decision of the DPW Director or the
Town Engineer affirming or reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of
competent jurisdiction, the costs shall become a special assessment against the
property owner and shall constitute a lien on the owner’s property for the amount of
57
said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate
provided in G.L. Ch. 59, §57 after the thirty-first day at which the costs first become
due.
11.4 Criminal Penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this By-law, regulation, order or permit issued
hereunder, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300. Each day a violation exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
11.5 Non-Criminal Disposition.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the town may utilize the noncriminal
disposition procedure set forth in M.G.L. Ch. 40, §21D and Article V of the
Town By-laws, in which case any police officer of the Town of Weston, the DPW
Director, the Town Engineer, and such other persons as are authorized by the Board of
Selectmen shall be the enforcing person. If non-criminal disposition is used, any person
who violates any provision of this By-law, regulation, order or permit issued thereunder,
shall be punished as follows:
(1) First violation: Warning
(2) Second violation: $100
(3) Third violation: $200
(4) Fourth and subsequent violations: $300
(5) Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
12. APPEALS
The decisions or orders shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
12.1 Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this bylaw are not exclusive of any
other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law.
13. SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this bylaw are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, paragraph,
sentence, or clause, of this bylaw or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or
circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of
this By-law.
14. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Residential property owners shall have 180 days from the effective date of the by-law to comply
with its provisions provided good cause is shown for the failure to comply with the by-law
during that period.
(Effective May 12, 2010)
58
ARTICLE XXXII
STRETCH ENERGY CODE
Section 1. Acceptance/Adoption.
The Town of Weston has accepted and adopted the provisions of 780 CMR 120.AA (i.e.,
Appendix 120.AA of the State Building Code or the “Stretch Energy Code”), as may be
amended from time to time, in place of the provisions set forth under 780 CMR 13.00, 34.00,
61.00 and 93.00.
Section 2. Purpose.
The purpose of the Stretch Energy Code shall be to provide the Town with a more energy
efficient alternative to the base energy code otherwise set forth under the State Building Code.
(Effective 5/9/2011)
ARTICLE XXXIII
WESTON AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND
Section 1. Board of Trustees
There shall be a Board of Trustees of the Weston Affordable Housing Trust Fund, comprised of
not less than five members, at least one of which shall be a Selectman. The Board of Selectmen
shall appoint the Board of Trustees for rotating terms not to exceed two years. Vacancies shall
be filled by the Board of Selectmen for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Board of
Selectmen may remove any member of the Board of Trustees for cause after that member has
been provided an opportunity to be heard by that Board.
Section 2. Powers of Board of Trustees
The powers of the Board of Trustees, all of which shall be carried on in furtherance of the
purposes set forth in G.L. c.44, §55C, and pursuant to the provisions of a Declaration of Trust to
be approved by the Board of Selectmen, shall include the following:
(a) to accept and receive real property, personal property or money, by gift, grant,
contribution, devise or transfer from any person, firm, corporation or other public or
private entity, including but not limited to money, grants of funds or other property
tendered to the trust in connection with any ordinance or by-law or any general or special
law or any other source, including money from chapter 44B;
(b) to purchase and retain real or personal property, including without restriction
investments that yield a high rate of income or no income;
(c) to sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any personal, mixed, or real property at
public auction or by private contract for such consideration and on such terms as to credit
or otherwise, and to make such contracts and enter into such undertaking relative to trust
property as the board deems advisable notwithstanding the length of any such lease or
contract;
(d) to execute, acknowledge and deliver deeds, assignments, transfers, pledges, leases,
covenants, contracts, promissory notes, releases and other instruments sealed or unsealed,
necessary, proper or incident to any transaction in which the board engages for the
accomplishment of the purposes of the trust;
(e) to employ advisors and agents, such as accountants, appraisers and lawyers as the
board deems necessary;
59
(f) to pay reasonable compensation and expenses to all advisors and agents and to
apportion such compensation between income and principal as the board deems
advisable;
(g) to apportion receipts and charges between incomes and principal as the board deems
advisable, to amortize premiums and establish sinking funds for such purpose, and to
create reserves for depreciation depletion or otherwise;
(h) to participate in any reorganization, recapitalization, merger or similar transactions;
and to give proxies or powers of attorney with or without power of substitution to vote
any securities or certificates of interest; and to consent to any contract, lease, mortgage,
purchase or sale of property, by or between any corporation and any other corporation or
person;
(i) to deposit any security with any protective reorganization committee, and to delegate
to such committee such powers and authority with relation thereto as the board may deem
proper and to pay, out of trust property, such portion of expenses and compensation of
such committee as the board may deem necessary and appropriate;
(j) to carry property for accounting purposes other than acquisition date values;
(k) to borrow money on such terms and conditions and from such sources as the board
deems advisable, to mortgage and pledge trust assets as collateral;
(l) to make distributions or divisions of principal in kind;
(m) to comprise, attribute, defend, enforce, release, settle or otherwise adjust claims in
favor or against the trust, including claims for taxes, and to accept any property, either in
total or partial satisfaction of any indebtedness or other obligation, and subject to the
provisions of this act, to continue to hold the same for such period of time as the board
may deem appropriate;
(n) to manage or improve real property; and to abandon any property which the board
determined not to be worth retaining;
(o) to hold all or part of the trust property uninvested for such purposes and for such time
as the board may deem appropriate; and
(p) to extend the time for payment of any obligation to the trust.
And such additional powers, if any, as may be set forth in G.L. c.44, §55C, as same may
from time to time be amended.
Section 3. Audit Requirement
The Board of Trustees shall provide for an annual audit of the books and records of the Trust.
Such audit shall be performed by an independent auditor in accordance with accepted accounting
practices. Upon receipt of the audit by the Board of Trustees, a copy shall be provided forthwith
to the Board of Selectmen.
(Effective 5/9/2011)
60
ARTICLE XXXIV
DEPARTMENTAL REVOLVING FUNDS
Section 1. Purpose. This by-law, pursuant to General Laws Chapter 44, § 53E½, establishes
and authorizes revolving funds for use by certain town departments, boards, committees, and
officers in connection with the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges
or other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or activities.
Section 2. Expenditure Limitations. Each entity authorized below to expend a revolving
fund may incur liabilities against and spend monies from such revolving fund without
appropriation subject to the following limitations:
A. Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid
from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
B. No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
C. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by Town Meeting, or any increase therein as may be authorized
by the Board of Selectmen and Finance Committee in accordance with
G.L. Chapter 44, § 53E½.
Section 3. Interest. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by
this by-law shall be credited to the General Fund.
Section 4. Procedures and Reports. Except as provided in General Laws Chapter 44, §
53E½ and this by-law, all applicable state and local laws and regulations that govern the
receipt, custody, expenditure and payment of town funds shall apply to the use of revolving
funds established and authorized by this by-law.
Section 5. Authorized Revolving Funds.
Program or
Purpose
Representative
or Board
Authorized to
Spend
Revenue Source Use of Fund
Recreation
Skating Programs
Recreation
Director
Program Fees Program Costs
Historic Marker
Historical
Commission
Program Fees
Costs Related to
Purchase of Historic
Markers
Council on Aging
Special Programs
Council on Aging
Director
Program Fees Program Expenses
Town Building
Rentals
Town Manager Rental Fees Town Hall
Utilities, Cleaning,
Building Monitor
Board of Health Health Director
Insurance
Reimbursement for Flu
Clinics and Fees for
Public Health Initiatives
Public Health
Education, Outreach,
Health Initiatives,
Emergency
Preparedness
Fiske Law Office Town Manager Rental Fees
Building Repairs and
Maintenance including
Salaries and Benefits
61
Melone House
Conservation
Commission
Rental Fees
Building Repairs and
Maintenance including
Salaries and Benefits
Solar Array
Revenue
Town Manager
Payments to the Town
for the generation of
solar energy from solar
arrays on Town property
Electricity expenses
Weston Art &
Innovation Center
Library Director
Program Fees and
Grants
Program Costs and
Operations
And to set fiscal year spending limits for such revolving funds as follows:
Program or Purpose
FY2018
Spending Limit
Recreation Skating Programs $40,000
Historic Marker $1,500
Council on Aging
Special Programs
$50,000
Town Building Rentals $6,000
Board of Health $20,000
Fiske Law Office $55,000
Melone House $15,000
Solar Array Revenue $700,000
Weston Art & Innovation Center $300,000
And to transfer the balance remaining in the Affordable Housing Monitoring Revolving Fund,
which fund will not be reauthorized for FY2018, to the Affordable Housing Trust;
And to transfer the balance remaining in the Josiah Smith Tavern Revolving Fund, which fund
will not be reauthorized for FY2018, to the Josiah Smith Tavern Trust Fund – Income Account;
(Effective May 8, 2017)
(amended May 7, 2018)
62
ARTICLE XXXV. PLASTIC BAG BAN
Section 1. Findings and Purpose
Plastic check-out bags have a significant impact on the marine and terrestrial environment,
including but not limited to: 1) harming marine and terrestrial animals through ingestion and
entanglement; 2) polluting and degrading the terrestrial and marine environments; 3) clogging
storm drainage systems; 4) creating a burden for solid waste disposal and recycling facilities; 5)
and requiring the use of non-renewable fossil-fuel in their composition. Studies have shown that
even alternative “compostable” or “biodegradable” bags require very specific and controlled
conditions in order to biodegrade, and have potentially negative environmental effects similar to
conventional plastic bags. Such bags should therefore be subject to the same restrictions as
conventional plastic check-out bags.
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect the Town’s unique natural beauty and irreplaceable
natural resources by reducing the number of single-use plastic check-out bags that are distributed
in the Town of Weston and to promote the use of reusable bags.
Section 2. Definitions
The following words shall, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, have the following
meanings:
a. “Check-out bag” shall mean a bag provided by a store to a customer at the point of sale.
b. “Department” shall mean the Weston Board of Health.
c. “Health Agent” shall mean the Health Agent for the Weston Board of Health or its designee.
d. “Recyclable paper bag” shall mean a paper bag that is 100% recyclable and contains at least
40% post- consumer recycled content, and displays in a visible manner on the outside of the bag
(1) the word “recyclable” or a symbol identifying the bag as recyclable and (2) a label
identifying the bag as being made from post- consumer recycled content and the percentage of
post-consumer recycled content in the bag.
e. “Reusable Check-out bag” shall mean a bag with handles that is specifically designed for
multiple reuse and that is either (a) made of natural fibers (such as cotton or linen); or (b) made
of durable, non-toxic plastic other than polyethylene or polyvinyl chloride that is generally
considered a food-grade material that is more than 4 mils thick.
f. “Retail Establishment” shall mean any business facility that sells goods, articles, food, or
personal services directly to the consumer whether for or not for profit, including, but not limited
to, retail stores, restaurants, pharmacies, convenience and grocery stores, liquor stores, seasonal
and temporary businesses.
g. “Thin-Film, Single-Use Plastic Check-Out Bags” shall mean those bags typically with
handles, constructed of high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low density polyethylene (LDPE),
linear low density polyethylene (LLDPE), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), polyethylene terephthalate
(PET), or polypropylene (other than woven and non-woven polypropylene fabric), if said film is
less than 4.0 mils in thickness.
Section 3. Regulated Conduct
a. No Retail Establishment in the Town of Weston shall provide Thin-Film, Single-Use Plastic
Check-Out Bags to customers.
63
b. If a Retail Establishment provides or sells Check-Out Bags to customers, the bags must be one
of the following: 1. Recyclable paper bag; or 2. Reusable Check-Out bag.
Section 4. Exemptions.
Thin-film plastic bags typically without handles which are used to contain dry cleaning,
newspapers, produce, meat, bulk foods, wet items, and other similar merchandise are not
prohibited under this bylaw.
Section 5. Enforcement
This Bylaw shall be enforced by any means available in law and in equity in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 1 and 2 of Article V of the Weston Town Bylaws. The Weston Board of
Health, Health Agent, or any police officer of the Town shall be “enforcing persons” for
purposes of this Bylaw. Each day a violation exists shall be deemed a separate violation. The
fine structure set forth in Article V, Section 2(c) shall be applicable to violations of this Bylaw.
Section 6. Effective Date
This bylaw shall take effect six (6) months following approval of the bylaw by the Attorney
General or January 1, 2018, whichever is later.
Section 7. Regulations
The Board of Health is hereby authorized to adopt regulations to effectuate the purposes of this
Bylaw. Such rules and regulations shall be on file in the offices of the Board of Health and the
Town Clerk.
(Effective May 10, 2017)
ARTICLE XXXVI MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
Consistent with G.L. c.94G, § 3(a)(2), all types of non-medical “marijuana establishments” as
defined in G.L. c.94G, §1, including marijuana cultivators, independent testing laboratory,
marijuana product manufacturers, marijuana retailers or any other types of licensed marijuanarelated
businesses, shall be prohibited within the Town of Weston.
ARTICLE XXXVII WESTON HUMAN RIGHTS POLICY
It is the policy of the Town of Weston that all human beings have the right to be treated with
dignity and respect and given humane consideration regardless of age, gender, race, religion,
national origin, sexual orientation, gender identity or expression, physical or mental ability, or
other individual characteristics protected by the Constitutions and laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and the United States.
This Weston Human Rights Policy shall be publicly posted on a permanent basis on the Town
website, in Town Hall, at the central office of the Weston Public Schools, at each Weston public
school, at the Weston Public Library, and at the Weston Police Department.
Effective 5/7/18
End of the General By-laws of the Town of Weston
Appendix 1
STATUTES ACCEPTED BY THE TOWN OF WESTON
A1
DATE STATUTE NATURE
3/24/1902 R.L. 11-335 Election and duties of Town Clerk
3/24/1902 R.L. 11-339 Election of Selectmen, Assessors, and
Overseers of Poor
3/28/1904 R.L. 78-21-25 Boards of Cemetery Commissioners
3/22/1909 St. 1908-? Protection of forest lands
4/01/1912 St. 1871 Election of road commissioners, rescission of
vote of acceptance 3/02/74
3/24/1913 R.L. 28-16 Building lines on parkways
3/24/1913 R.L. 50-1-9 Assessment of betterments in laying out ways
4/16/1913 St. 1911-367 Use of school halls for other than school
purposes
4/16/1913 R.L. 101-1-5 Common nuisances
4/16/1913 St. 1912-635 Tenement houses in Towns
11/4/1913 St. 1913-807 Workmen's Compensation Act
3/30/1914 St. 1913-807 " " "
3/30/1914 R.L 48-103 (as amended by 1913-572) Building Lines
11/3/1914 St. 1914-790 Abolition of party enrollment at primary
elections
11/4/1919 St. 1919 - ? Continuation schools, etc.
3/27/1922 G.L. 41-97 Establishment of Police Department
11/17/1925 G.L. 4l-73 Selectmen to act as Board of Survey
11/17/1925 G.L. 143-3 Authorizing adoption of building laws
11/17/1925 G.L. 143-6-12 Relative to Inspector of Buildings
2/16/1926 Selectmen - regulation of common carriers of
passengers by motor vehicles
3/28/1927 G.L. 40-42A to 42F Water Liens
6/29/1927 Art. VII Section 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 13 amended
6/29/1927 Art. III Section 6 amended, not approved by Attorney
General
3/25/1929 G.L. 136-21-28 Sunday sports
12/17/1942 G.L. 41-111A Vacations for police and firemen
12/17/1942 G.L. 40-6B Appropriation for purchase of uniforms for
police and firemen
12/17/1942 G.L. 48-42 to 44 Fire Department
12/17/1942 G.L. 31-48 Police (excepting Chief) placed under Civil Service
(revoked effective 7/17/82)
3/29/1943 G.L. 129-15/2nd paragraph
Inspector of animals to be appointed by Board of
Health instead of by Selectmen
1943 G.L. 32-26 to 31H (Retirement) accepted by Selectmen
3/27/1944 G.L. " " Accepted by ballot vote 503-42
3/03/1947 G.L. 147-13a Reserve police, four (4) members
Appendix 1
STATUTES ACCEPTED BY THE TOWN OF WESTON
A2
DATE STATUTE NATURE
3/03/1947 G.L. 136-7 & 8 License of Frozen Desserts
3/15/1948 G.L. 40-6C Snow removal from private ways
(by ballot)
3/19/1951 G.L. 40- 6e Minor repairs of private ways
3/25/1957 G.L. 41-23A Executive Secretary of the Board of Selectmen
3/25/1957 Acts of 1956 Ch.401
while operating publicly owned vehicles
3/31/1958 G.L. 32B Group life, group accidental death and
dismemberment and group hospital, surgical and
medical insurance for Town employees
(Ballot 333 Yes to 33 No)
3/28/1960 G.L. 32B- 9A Pay half premium costs of retired employees
(Ballot 827 Yes to 482 No)
3/25/1963 G.L. 32B-11B Elderly governmental retirees
(Ballot 732 Yes to 278 No)
3/25/1963 G.L. 32B-11A Optional life insurance, no premium cost to
Town (Ballot 815 Yes to 187 No)
4/01/1963 G.L. 90-18A Pedestrian regulations
3/28/1964 G.L. 33-59 Pay for military training duty leave
6/10/1965 G.L. 262-53C See Op. Attorney General 67-68-46 Nov 3, 1967
3/26/1966 G.L. 32B-8A Sharing of refunds and dividends with
employees, (Ballot 802 Yes to 167 No)
3/27/1967 G.L. 54-103A Absentee voting at town elections
3/27/1967 Acts of 1966 Ch. 198
5/24/1967 G.L. 40-6J Purchase of work clothes
3/23/1968 G.L. 32B-11D Half - group accidental death
(Ballot 1,895 Yes to 214 No)
12/16/1968 G.L. 40-8D Establish Historical Commission
3/29/1971 G.L. 41-108L Police career incentive program
3/29/1971 G.L. 40-8E Youth Commission established
12/11/1972 G.L. 44-53C Payment of money to police for off-duty
details from special fund
10/16/1973 G.L. 32B-16B By vote of Selectmen - Health care plan for
Town employees
5/12/1976 G.L. 40-8G Police mutual aid
5/12/1976 G.L. 90-20C Parking regulations and fines by Selectmen
1/24/1977 G.L. 180-17B Payroll deductions for United Fund authorized
6/12/1978 Acts of 1975 Ch. 808 Accept Zoning By-Laws
12/4/1978 Acts of 1978 Ch. 582 Brook School/Elderly Housing
5/14/1979 G.L. 32B-7A Group life and health ins-authorize add rate
(Ballot 150 Yes to 88 No)
11/25/1980 Acts of 1980 Ch.416 Assessors and Asst. Assessors qualified
without meeting training requirements
(by Board of Selectmen)
Appendix 1
STATUTES ACCEPTED BY THE TOWN OF WESTON
A3
DATE STATUTE NATURE
3/09/1981 Acts of 1980 Ch.117 Purchases up to $4,000 without advertising
5/04/1981 G.L. 71-71 Revolving fund for certain school purposes
(Article 13, A.T.M.) 2-2-81
10/19/1981 Acts of 1981 Ch.351 Parking Clerk - rules, regulations, fines
Section 20A 1/2 (Article 8, S.T.M.)
5/17/1982 Acts of 1981 Ch.743 Equity allowed for certain tax
G.L. 59-5-17C exemptions 7/17/82
7/17/1982 Effective this date, 61 days after vote at
adjourned annual town meeting, acceptance
of Ch. 31, Civil Service, was rescinded
by authority of G.L. 4-4B
5/14/1984 G.L. 59-5-41B Exemption for older persons who meet certain
more liberal qualifications for eligibility
10/21/1985 Acts of 1985 Ch.188 Professional Development Grant program for
Section 13 School System of the Town
5/11/1987 G.L. 59-5-41C Eligibility of certain persons for tax
exemption - effective July 1, 1987
G.L. Ch. 258-13 Indemnify municipal officers from personal
financial loss
5/11/1988 Acts of 1987 Ch.306
G.L. 60-23B Fees for lien certificates
G.L. 40-4H Purchase of equipment, supplies and materials
from other governments
G.L. 59-5 17D Eligibility of certain persons for tax
exemption - effective July 1, 1988
11/21/1988 G.L.41-100G 1/4 Funeral expenses of firefighters and police
officers killed in line of duty to be paid
by Town up to but not exceeding $5,000
5/08/1989 G.L. 40-42J Defer water use charges where owner is
receiving deferral of real estate taxes
5/6/1991 Acts of 1990, Enhanced-911 Service
Chapter 291
5/6/1991 G.L. 41, 81U Use of bonds or deposits to complete work
specified in approved subdivision plan
Appendix 1
STATUTES ACCEPTED BY THE TOWN OF WESTON
A4
DATE STATUTE NATURE
4/14/1992 G.L. 29, 64D as May require employee not covered by retirement
Amended by Ch 494, plan to contribute to deferred compensation
Acts of 1991 plan.
5/11/1992 G.L. 59-5 37A Exempt from real estate taxes $500 due from blind
person who is legal MA resident and who occupies
property.
5/4/1994 G.L. 71-83 Early Retirement Incentive Program for teachers
5/13/1996 G.L. 40-22F Authorizes fixing of reasonable fees for license,
permit, certificates, or service, subject to approval of
elected board where applicable.
5/11/1998 G.L. 140-147A Authorizes enactment of by-laws relative to
the regulation of dogs.
5/8/2000 G.L. 127-59 Establishes property tax work-off program
Acts of 1999 under which senior citizens provide
5/10/2004 RESCINDED services to Town in exchange for reduction
in tax bills.
5/13/2002 G.L 59-57C Permits quarterly real estate tax billing.
5/13/2002 G.L. 32B-9E Allows Selectmen to set retiree health insurance
contribution at greater than 50%.
5/13/2002 G.L. 32B-18 Requires retirees with Medicare eligibility to enroll in
a medicare supplement plan.
5/13/2002 G.L. 44-53F1/2 Permits water enterprise fund.
5/13/2002 G.L. 44-53F1/2 Permits COA revolving fund.
11/25/2002 Ch. 184, Section 51, Property tax exemptions for elderly - increases
Acts of 2002 income & estate limit, exemption amount.
G.L. Ch. 59, sec. 5
(41C)
5/12/2003 G.L. 44-53F1/2 Permits recreation enterprise fund
5/12/2003 G.L. 59-2A(a) Allows Assessors to include for taxation purposes
new construction and other improvements added
between January 2 and June 30 of each fiscal year in
the next fiscal year’s tax rolls.
Appendix 1
STATUTES ACCEPTED BY THE TOWN OF WESTON
A5
DATE STATUTE NATURE
5/10/2004 G.L. 40-57 Denial, revocation or suspension of licenses and
permits if there is outstanding debt owed to the Town
5/10/2004 G.L. 71, Section71F Permits the Town to establish a revolving fund for
the purpose of nonresident or fostor care student
tuitions
5/10/2004 G.L. 44, Section 53E1/2 Permits Town Building Rentals and Board of Health
revolving fund
5/12/2004 G.L. 40, Section 57 Permits the Town to deny or revoke any local
licenses and permits for non-payment of local taxes
5/16/2005 G.L. 60-3D Creates property tax relief fund for elderly and
disabled residents
5/16/2005 G.L. 44-53F1/2 Permits Brook School Apartments enterprise fund
5/16/2005 G.L. 148-26G, 26H, 26I Requires installation of fire sprinklers in certain
buildings
5/16/2005 G.L. 44-53F1/2 Permits Affordable Housing Monitoring Revolving
fund
5/8/2007 Ch. 73, Section 4, Permits the Town to grant additional propert tax
Acts of 1986 as amended exemptions to certain tax payers.
By Ch 126 of the Acts of
1988 which amends G.L. Ch. 59
(acceptance made annually)
1/10/2009 Acts of 2008 Ch.479 An Act providing for the establishment of other post
employment benefits liability trust funds in
municipalities and certain other governmental units
5/9/2011 Ch. 44, Section 55C Permits the Town to establish a Trust to be known as
the Weston Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
5/11/2011 Ch. 39, Section 23D Allows ZBA Members to miss one session of
ajudicatory hearings.
A6
Appendix 2
SPECIAL ACTS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL COURT
Chapter
No.
Acts of
Year
Effective
Date
Title
Amended
An Act
217 1896 3/28/1896 To Incorporate The Weston Water Company
189 1951 4/2/1951 To Relocate The Natick-Weston Boundary Line
294 1964 4/21/1964 Establishing A Park And Cemetery Commission In
The Town Of Weston
198 1966 4/25/1966 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Invest Certain
Trust Funds In Certain Investments
642 1969 8/7/1969 Combining The Offices Of Treasurer And Tax
Collector Of The Town Of Weston Into The Office
Of Town Treasurer And Collector
689 1971 8/19/1971 Authorizing The City Of Waltham And The Towns
Of Watertown, Belmont And Weston To Enter Into
Agreements To Provide Psychiatric Services For The
Youth Of Said Municipalities
913 1971 10/21/1971 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Layout,
Construct And Operate A Sewer Force Main In The
City Of Waltham
349 1976 9/7/1976 Increasing The Membership Of The Conservation
Commission In The Town Of Weston
147 1977 5/5/1977 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Sell And
Convey A Certain Parcel Of Land To Weston
Community Housing, Inc. For The Purpose Of
Providing Certain Elderly Housing Facilities.
148 1977 5/5/1977 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Provide
Certain Housing For Elderly Persons
Amended
See 1978
582 1978 8/10/1978 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Provide
Certain Housing For Elderly Persons
584 1979 9/19/1979 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Pay A Sum Of
Money To Robert Selvey
684 1979 11/7/1979 Relative To The Draining Of Certain Public Outdoor
Inground Swimming Pools
708 1979 11/9/1979 Relative To The Draining Of Certain Public Outdoor
Inground Swimming Pools
471 1980 7/2/1980 Exempting Certain Positions In The Town Of Weston
From The Provisions Of The Civil Service Law
A7
Appendix 2
SPECIAL ACTS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL COURT
Chapter
No.
Acts of
Year
Effective
Date
An Act
Title
Amended
487 1985 11/13/1985 Authorizing the Town to make certain compensation
to certain inured employees.
603 1987 12/24/1987 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Pay A Certain
Unpaid Bill
538 1991 1/9/1992 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Enter Into An
Agreement For An Energy Conservation Retrofit
Program
151 1994 10/4/1994 Relative To Filling Vacancies In The Board Of Water
Commissioners Of The Town Of Weston
154 1994 10/5/1994 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Arrange For
Dental Insurance And/Or Disability Insurance For
Employees
150 1994 10/4/1994 Art. 25 5/18/94 Authorizing The Town Of Weston To
Reimburse Ruth P. Miller Of The Town Of
Westwood For Interest And Charges And Motor
Vehicle Excise Paid To Said Town Of Weston
192 1995 11/1/1995 An Act Authorizing The Town Of Weston To
Convey Certain Parcels Of Conservation Land
261 1995 11/22/1995 Establishing A Department Of Public Works In The
Town Of Weston
151 1996 Section 619 (This is referenced in Article X Section
3. It refers to Regis sewerage)
123 1996 6/18/1996 An Act Authorizing The Town Of Weston To Pay A
Certain Unpaid Bill
67 1997 8/13/1997 Relative To The Investment Of Certain Trust Funds
By The Commissioners Of Trust Funds Of The Town
Of Weston
106 1999 11/15/1999 Relative to the Conservation Commission of the
Town of Weston - Fees For Outside Consultants
80 2001 8/29/2001 An Act Establishing The Position Of Town Manager
In The Town Of Weston
5/7/2007
283 2004 8/9/2004 An Act Authorizing The Town of Weston To
Appropriate Money From the Community
Preservation Fund
421 2004 12/16/2004 An Act Authorizing the Town of Weston to Regulate
Certain Property Tax Exemption Eligibility
Requirements for the Elderly
390 2006 5/7/2007 Section 2 of chapter 80 of the acts of 2001 is hereby
amended
515 2008 5/14/2008 An act authorizing the Board of Selectmen of the
Town of Weston to grant a license for the sale of all
alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises of
9/18/2013
A8
the Josiah Smith Tavern and Barn.
Appendix 2
SPECIAL ACTS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL COURT
Chapter
No.
Acts of
Year
Effective
Date
An Act
Title
Amended
37 2008 2/21/2008 An Act authorizing the Town of Weston to grant a
license for the sale of wines at a food store.
6 2009 4/2009 An Act relative to the Town Clerk of the Town of
Weston
76 2009 8/17/2009 An Act establishing an enterprise fund for the Brook
School Apartments
27 2012 2/10/2012 An Act relative to the granting of Club and Special
Licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the
Town of Weston.
47 2012 3/9/2012 An Act reltive to the regulations of salaries of
employees of the Town of Weston serving in the
Armed Forces of the United States
82 2013 9/18/2013 An Act authorizing the Town of Weston to grant a
license for the Sale of Wines and Malt Beverages at a
food store.
34 2018 2/22/18 An Act authorizing the Board of Selectmen to
increase the required signatures for Citizens’ Petitions
submitted to the Annual town Meeting From 10 to 50.
(Approved by Town Election 5/5/18)
Appendix 3
A9
TEXT OF CERTAIN SPECIAL ACTS OF THE MASSACHUSETTS GENERAL COURT
ON BEHALF OF THE TOWN OF WESTON
Chapter 349 of the Acts of 1976
AN ACT INCREASING THE MEMBERSHIP OF THE CONSERVATION
COMMISSION IN THE TOWN OF WESTON
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. Not withstanding the provisions of section eight C of chapter forty of the General
Laws, the membership of the conservation commission of the town of Weston shall not be less
than three and not more than nine members, such members to be appointed by the board of
selectmen of said town.
SECTION 2. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved September 7, 1976
Chapter 147 of the Acts of 1977
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF WESTON TO SELL AND CONVEY A
CERTAIN PARCEL OF LAND TO WESTON COMMUNITY HOUSING, INC. FOR
THE PURPOSE OF PROVIDING CERTAIN ELDERLY HOUSING FACILITIES.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. The town of Weston is hereby authorized to sell and convey for consideration of
not less than one hundred dollars, a portion, not exceeding eighteen acres, of the parcel of land
lying to the east of Merriam Street acquired by said town from Weston College for municipal
purposes pursuant to the second vote under Article II of the warrant at the nineteen hundred and
seventy-two annual town meeting.
SECTION 2. The sale of said land shall be made to the Weston Community Housing, Inc., a
corporation organized under chapter one hundred and eighty of the General Laws provided that
said Weston Community Housing, Inc. enters into an agreement with the town of Weston, acting
through its board of selectmen, to construct, on said land, a structure or structures to be used for
housing for elderly persons of low or moderate income of the commonwealth and to operate such
structure, or structures, for such purposes, for a period of not less than twenty years, which
agreement may include terms and conditions concerning rents to be charged tenants, tenant
eligibility standards, maintenance requirements, and real estate assessment, and shall be as said
selectmen shall in their discretion determine.
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved May 5, 1977
Appendix 3
A10
Chapter 148 of the Acts of 1977
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF WESTON TO PROVIDE CERTAIN
HOUSING FOR ELDERLY PERSONS.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1. The town of Weston is herewith authorized to appropriate money and receive gifts
and grants to renovate, construct, reconstruct, equip, furnish, rent and manage, on and after
August thirty-first, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven at and on the site of the Brook school in
said town, a building or buildings for the purpose of providing housing for elderly persons of the
commonwealth of low and moderate income.
SECTION 2. At any special or annual town meeting of the town of Weston held subsequent to
the effective date of this act, such town meeting may authorize the moderator of said town to
appoint a committee, and fill vacancies occurring therein, of not more than five residents of said
town, to carry out the purposes of this act. Of the initial appointments, one shall be designated
for a one-year term and two for two-year terms and two for three-year terms; thereafter all
appointments shall be for three years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The
committee so appointed shall be known as the Weston elderly housing committee.
SECTION 3. To provide such housing, the town of Weston may authorize the appropriation of
money not in excess of two million dollars for the renovation, construction, reconstruction and
original equipping and furnishing of a building or buildings at and on the site of the said Brook
school, any appropriation therefore to be raised by taxation or the issuance of bonds or notes,
such borrowing to be for a period not exceeding twenty years and as provided in chapter fortyfour
of the General Laws but such borrowing shall not be included in the limit of indebtedness
prescribed by section ten thereof.
SECTION 4. The Weston elderly housing committee shall have the authority to employ agents,
managers and employees, enter into contracts, including construction contracts, subject to
approval of town counsel of the town of Weston, for the purposes of this act, establish rents and
make such rules and regulations concerning use, occupancy and other necessary matters relating
to the elderly housing as herein authorized and as it shall deem proper. All revenues of the
building or buildings shall be town funds and the Weston elderly housing committee shall,
except as otherwise provided by lawn, expend only such funds as are appropriated for it by said
town.
SECTION 5. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved May 5, 1977
Appendix 3
A11
Chapter 582 of the Acts of 1978
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF WESTON TO PROVIDE CERTAIN
HOUSING FOR ELDERLY PERSONS.
Be it enacted, etc., as follows:
SECTION 1: Chapter 148 of the acts of 1977 is hereby amended by striking out section 1 and
inserting in place thereof the following section:-
SECTION 1. The town of Weston is herewith authorized to appropriate money and receive gifts
and grants to renovate, construct, reconstruct, equip, furnish, rent and manage, on and after
August thirty-first, nineteen hundred and seventy-seven, at and on the site of the Brook School in
said town, a building or buildings for the purpose of providing housing for handicapped persons
and elderly persons of the commonwealth of low or moderate income.
SECTION 2. Said chapter 148 is hereby further amended by striking out sections 3 and 4 and
inserting in place thereof the following two sections: -
SECTION 3. To provide such housing, the town of Weston may authorize the appropriation of
money not in excess of two million four hundred thousand dollars for the renovation,
construction, reconstruction and original equipping and furnishing of a building or buildings at
and on the site of the said Brook school, any appropriation therefore to be raised by taxation of
the issuance of bonds or notes, such borrowing to be for a period not exceeding twenty years and
as provided in chapter forty-four of the General Laws but such borrowing shall not be included
in the limit of indebtedness prescribed by section ten thereof.
SECTION 4. The Weston elderly housing committee shall have the authority to employ agents,
managers and employees, enter into contracts including construction contracts, subject to
approval of town counsel of the town of Weston, for the purposes of this act, establish rents and
make such rules and regulations concerning use, occupancy and other necessary matters relating
to the handicapped and elderly housing as herein authorized and as it shall deem proper. All
revenues of the building or buildings shall be town funds and the Weston elderly housing
committee shall, except as otherwise provided by law, expand only such funds as are
appropriated for it by said town.
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect upon acceptance by the town of Weston at an annual or
special town meeting.
Approved August 10, 1978
Appendix 3
A12
Chapter 261 of the Acts of 1995
AN ACT ESTABLISHING A DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
IN THE TOWN OF WESTON
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. There is hereby established in the Town of Weston a department of public
works, hereinafter called the department, which shall be under the supervision and control of a
director of operations, hereinafter called the director. Said department shall be charged with
responsibility for the management of public works operations of the town including, but not
limited to, the following: highways; water supply; storm drains; solid waste and recycling;
maintenance of cemeteries, parks, public memorials, commons; engineering services;
maintenance of vehicles and equipment; and other operations and functions as may be deemed
necessary or desirable. Said department shall also perform such functions and responsibilities
as required by by-law or direction of the board of selectmen.
SECTION 2. The board of selectmen shall appoint a director of operations and all employees
of the department. The board of selectmen may remove the director when in their judgment the
public interest so requires, and shall fix the compensation of the director, subject to available
appropriations. The director shall be specially fitted by education, training and experience to
perform the duties of his/her office. His/her term of office shall be determined by the board of
selectmen and s/he shall serve at the pleasure of the board of selectmen and shall not be subject
to the provisions of section nine A of chapter thirty or chapter thirty-one of the General Laws.
During his/her tenure s/he shall hold no elective office nor shall s/he engage in any other
business or occupation. The director may appoint and remove such employees as the exercise
and performance of his/her powers, rights, and duties may require, subject to available
appropriations and the approval of the board of selectmen.
SECTION 3. The board of selectmen shall assume the powers and duties as provided hereafter
and, unless otherwise provided by this act, shall have the power to establish goals and
objectives for and to make all policy decisions related to the operation of the department of
public works.
SECTION 4. With the exception of those powers and duties specifically granted to the public
works committee in section 7 of this Act, the board of selectmen shall have all the powers and
duties now and from time to time vested by general or special law or town by-laws in the
following commissions: water commission and park and cemetery commission, which
commissions are hereby abolished.
No contracts or liabilities in force on the effective date of this act shall be affected, but the
board of selectmen shall in all respects be the lawful successor of the commissions so
abolished.
The board of selectmen shall have jurisdiction over all solid waste or recycling facilities of the
Town of Weston, and shall have such additional powers with respect to public works as the
town from time to time may by by-law provide.
SECTION 5. The director of operations of the department of public works shall be responsible
for the management of all the operations placed under the direction of the department in
accordance with section one. The powers, duties and responsibilities of said director shall
include, but not be limited to, the following: supervision of the daily operations of the
department of public works; supervision of all employees assigned to the department of public
Appendix 3
A13
works; supervision of engineering services of the town; development of departmental plans,
work programs, and projects; coordination of maintenance and other activities with the school
department; control of all records, property, facilities, offices, and vehicles assigned to the
department; organization of the department and assignment of personnel; investigation of
innovative approaches to the delivery of public works services; investigation of shared or
cooperative service arrangements with other jurisdictions and such other responsibilities as
may be assigned by the board of selectmen. The director shall give the town a bond with a
surety company authorized to transact business in the commonwealth as surety for the faithful
performance of his/her duties in such sum and upon such conditions as the board of selectmen
may require. The director shall render to the board of selectmen, as often as said board may
require, a full report of all operations under his/her control during the period reported upon,
and from time to time as required by said board, shall make a synopsis of such reports for
publication and shall keep said board fully advised as to the needs of the town within the scope
of his/her duties and shall annually furnish to said board a carefully prepared and detailed
estimate in writing of the appropriations required during the next fiscal year for the proper
exercise and performance of all said duties.
SECTION 6. (a) The department of public works shall become operational upon the
appointment and qualification of a director of operations of the department of public works.
(b) When said department is operational as provided for in paragraph (a), the staff and
employees of the following offices and departments shall be assigned to the department of
public works: town engineer, highway department, park and cemetery department, solid waste
and recycling department and water department. Every employee so assigned shall continue to
serve and shall retain all rights to holidays, sick leave, vacations and other benefits in effect on
the effective date of this act, and shall be retained in a capacity as similar to the person's former
capacity as is practical.
(c) All records, offices, property, equipment, and facilities of the highway department, solid
waste and recycling department, water department and park and cemetery department shall be
transferred to the care, custody and control of the department of public works when said
department is operational as provided for in paragraph (a).
SECTION 7. The board of selectmen shall establish and appoint a public works committee.
Said committee shall consist of not more than seven nor fewer than five members, of such term
as the selectmen may determine. The committee shall be responsible for development of
general goals and long term plans for the town's water supply and parks and cemeteries and
shall fix fees, user charges or rates associated with delivery of water services and provision of
cemetery services, including charges for cemetery lots and for perpetual care. The committee
shall be responsible for the adoption of rules and regulations with respect to the provision of
water supply and cemetery services. It shall have the authority to authorize and approve
expenditures from trust funds for park and cemetery purposes and to delegate to the director of
operations authority to execute deeds for lots in the cemeteries of the town. At the request of
the board of selectmen the committee shall advise the selectmen concerning policies and
operations of the department of public works.
SECTION 8. All special laws, special acts, by-laws, rules and regulations which are in force at
the time this act becomes effective that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this act shall
continue in full force until amended or repealed. Where a provision of this act conflicts with
any provision of any special law, special act, by-law, rule or regulation of the town, the
provisions of this act shall govern.
SECTION 9. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Appendix 3
A14
Approved November 25, 1995
Chapter 37 of the Acts of 2008
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF WESTON TO GRANT A LICENSE FOR
THE SALE OF WINES AT A FOOD STORE.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General Laws, the licensing
authority of the town of Weston may grant to a food store a license for the sale of wines not to be
drunk on the premises under section 15 of said chapter 138. Except as otherwise provided
herein, such license shall be subject to all of said chapter 138 except said section 17.
For the purposes of this act, a “food store” shall mean a grocery store or supermarket which sells
at retail, food for consumption off the seller’s premises either alone or in combination with
grocery items or other nondurable items typically found in a grocery store and sold to individuals
for personal, family or household use; provided, however, that such food store shall carry fresh
and processed meats, poultry, dairy products, eggs, fresh fruits and produce, baked goods and
baking ingredients, canned goods and dessert items. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a food store
shall not be a convenience store or specialty store; provided, however, that the board of
selectmen shall determine whether an applicant is a food store under this act. In making such
determination, the board of selectmen shall consider such factors as the volume of sales, actual
or proposed, and the extent and range of merchandise offered for sale. The holder of a license
under this act may sell wine alone or in combination with any other items offered for sale. The
amount of any initial or renewal fee for such a license shall be determined by the licensing
authority issuing or renewing that license.
Notwithstanding any general or special law or any rule or regulation to the contrary, the licensing
authority shall not approve the transfer of the license to any other location, but the license may
be granted at the same location if an applicant for the license files with the authority a letter in
writing from the department of revenue indicating that the license is in good standing with the
department and that all applicable taxes have been paid.
If the license granted under this section is cancelled, revoked or no longer in use, it shall be
returned physically, with all of the legal rights, privileges and restrictions pertaining thereto, to
the licensing authority which may then grant the license to a new applicant at the same location
and under the same conditions as specified in this section.
SECTION 2. Notwithstanding sections 11 and 11A of chapter 138 of the General Laws or any
other general or special law to the contrary, the board of selectmen of the town of Weston shall
cause to be placed on the ballot at a regular election the following question:-
“Shall an act passed by the general court in the year 2008, entitled ‘An Act Authorizing the
Town of Weston to Grant a License for the Sale of Wines at a Food Store’, be accepted?”
Below the ballot question shall appear a fair and concise summary of the ballot question
prepared by the town counsel and approved by the board of selectmen. If a majority of votes
cast in answer to the question is in the affirmative, the town shall be taken to have authorized the
Appendix 3
A15
granting of a license for the sale of wines at a food store.
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved February 21 , 2008
Appendix 3
A16
Chapter 515 of the Acts of 2008
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE BOARD OF SELECTMEN OF THE TOWN OF
WESTON TO GRANT A LICENSE FOR THE SALE OF ALL ALCOHOLIC
BEVERAGES TO BE DRUNK ON THE PREMISES OF THE JOSIAH SMITH TAVERN
AND BARN.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Notwithstanding sections 12 and 17 of chapter 138 of the General Laws or any
other general or special law to the contrary, the board of selectmen of the town of Weston, for
the purpose of preserving and operating the Josiah Smith Tavern and Barn consistent with a
preservation restriction on the property, may grant a license for the sale of all alcoholic
beverages to be drunk on the premises to a nonprofit corporation established in accordance with
section 2. The board of selectmen shall not approve the transfer of the license to any other entity
or location. The Josiah Smith Tavern and Barn is located at 358 Boston Post road in the town of
Weston and is owned by said town, subject to a 500-year historic preservation restriction held by
Historic New England and recorded at the Middlesex south district registry of deeds at Book
15086, page 081-086.
SECTION 2. There shall be a body corporate to be known as the Josiah Smith Tavern
Corporation. The corporation shall have all the rights, privileges, powers, duties and
responsibilities of a corporation established pursuant to chapter 180 of the General Laws, and
shall be deemed to be a nonprofit corporation established pursuant to said chapter 180 for all
purposes of the General Laws including, but not limited to, liability of the corporation and its
members pursuant to section 85K of chapter 231 of the General Laws. The corporation shall not
be deemed to be an agency, commission, authority or other subdivision of the commonwealth or
the town of Weston or an instrumentality of any of the foregoing for any purpose. The principal
office of the corporation shall be in the town of Weston.
The purposes of the corporation shall be to assist, promote and support the historic renovation
and reuse of the Josiah Smith Tavern and Barn in order to promote the common good and
general welfare of the town of Weston. The corporation may hold the all alcoholic beverages
license authorized in section 1 for use at the tavern and barn. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this paragraph, the corporation shall apply to the board of selectmen for the license
in accordance with section 15A of chapter 138 of the General Laws, and shall include in such
license application the name of the responsible manager. Except as otherwise provided herein,
the license shall be subject to said chapter 138. The board of selectmen may grant the license to
the corporation and may condition, modify, suspend or revoke the license as it deems
appropriate. The corporation may enter into such management and operations agreements as
may be needed for the exercise of the license at the Josiah Smith Tavern and Barn. Any such
agreement may allow the manager or operator to share in any of the profits earned as a result of
the exercise of the license; but no such agreement between the corporation and the operator or
manager shall be deemed a license transfer for purposes of said chapter 138. Any such
agreement granting the manager or operator an interest in the license shall be approved by the
board of selectmen and the alcoholic beverage control commission.
The corporation shall be governed by a board of directors, which shall have all the powers of the
corporation. The board shall consist of not less than 5 members who shall be residents of the
Appendix 3
A17
town and appointed by the moderator for staggered 3-year terms as designated by the
moderator. No member of the board of selectmen, fire or police department, or any such
member’s immediate family, shall be eligible for appointment as a director of the
corporation. For purposes of this act, the term “immediate family” shall be defined as set forth
in paragraph (e) of section 1 of chapter 268A of the General Laws. Members of the board shall
serve until their successors are appointed and qualified and may be removed after a hearing. A
vacancy in the board, however occurring, may be filled by the moderator for the remainder of the
unexpired term. The board of directors shall annually elect a president, treasurer and clerk.
Initial appointments to the board shall be made not later than 1 month after the effective date of
this act. The first meeting of the corporation shall be called not later than 2 months after the
acceptance of this act by the town at an election pursuant to section 3 by a notice signed by the
chairperson of the board of selectmen stating the time, place and purpose of the meeting, a copy
of which notice shall be mailed or delivered to each member of the board at least 5 days before
the day appointed for the meeting.
At the first meeting, the directors shall organize by the election of a temporary clerk, the
adoption of by-laws, the election of officers, the adoption of additional articles of organization,
consistent with this act, including whether the corporation will have more than 1 class of
members, indemnification of directors, officers, employees and other agents of the corporation,
the conduct and regulation of the business and affairs of the corporation, the street address of the
principal office of the corporation in the commonwealth, the name, residential street address and
post office address of each director and officer of the corporation, the fiscal year of the
corporation and the filer’s contact information and such other matters within the powers of the
corporation as the directors may see fit; provided, however, that no member of the board of
selectmen, fire or police department, or any such member’s immediate family, shall be eligible to
be a member or employee of the corporation. The temporary clerk shall be sworn and shall make
and attest a record of the proceedings until the clerk has been chosen and sworn. Within 30 days
after the final adjournment of the first meeting, the clerk shall make, sign, swear to and file in the
office of the state secretary a copy of this act, any additional articles of organization approved by
the board of directors, the by-laws, a certificate stating the date on which the meeting for
organization was held and the names of the officers elected at such meeting and any other
information or documentation required by the state secretary.
Members of the board shall not be subject to sections 23A and 23B of chapter 39 of the General
Laws, but the board shall post its meetings in the manner provided in said sections 23A and 23B
and otherwise abide by the requirements thereof. The members of the board of directors shall
not be subject to chapter 268A of the General Laws, but shall abide by the provisions thereof as
if they were special municipal employees for purposes of said chapter 268A.
The corporation shall make reports of its condition and activities not less than annually to the
board of selectmen of the town of Weston and shall make all other filings and reports as would
otherwise be required by chapter 180 of the General Laws.
The corporation shall be exempt from chapters 59 and 62 of the General Laws, and from any
other provisions concerning payment of taxes based upon or measured by property or income
imposed by the commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof.
SECTION 3. Notwithstanding sections 11 and 11A of chapter 138 of the General Laws or any
other general or special law to the contrary, the board of selectmen of the town of Weston shall
cause to be placed on the ballot at a regular or special town election the following question:-
“Shall an act passed by the general court in the year 2008, entitled `An Act Authorizing the
Appendix 3
A18
board of selectmen of the town of Weston to grant a license for the sale of all alcoholic
beverages to be drunk on the premises of the Josiah Smith Tavern and Barn,’ be accepted?”
Below the ballot question shall appear a fair and concise summary of the ballot question
prepared by the town counsel and approved by the board of selectmen. If a majority of votes
cast in answer to the question is in the affirmative, the town shall be taken to have authorized the
town to grant a license for the sale of all alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises of the
Josiah Smith Tavern and Barn.
SECTION 4. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved January 15, 2009
Appendix 3
A19
Chapter 37 of the Acts of 2008
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF WESTON TO GRANT A LICENSE FOR
THE SALE OF WINES AT A FOOD STORE.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General Laws, the licensing
authority of the town of Weston may grant to a food store a license for the sale of wines not to be
drunk on the premises under section 15 of said chapter 138. Except as otherwise provided
herein, such license shall be subject to all of said chapter 138 except said section 17.
For the purposes of this act, a “food store” shall mean a grocery store or supermarket which sells
at retail, food for consumption off the seller’s premises either alone or in combination with
grocery items or other nondurable items typically found in a grocery store and sold to individuals
for personal, family or household use; provided, however, that such food store shall carry fresh
and processed meats, poultry, dairy products, eggs, fresh fruits and produce, baked goods and
baking ingredients, canned goods and dessert items. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a food store
shall not be a convenience store or specialty store; provided, however, that the board of
selectmen shall determine whether an applicant is a food store under this act. In making such
determination, the board of selectmen shall consider such factors as the volume of sales, actual
or proposed, and the extent and range of merchandise offered for sale. The holder of a license
under this act may sell wine alone or in combination with any other items offered for sale. The
amount of any initial or renewal fee for such a license shall be determined by the licensing
authority issuing or renewing that license.
Notwithstanding any general or special law or any rule or regulation to the contrary, the licensing
authority shall not approve the transfer of the license to any other location, but the license may
be granted at the same location if an applicant for the license files with the authority a letter in
writing from the department of revenue indicating that the license is in good standing with the
department and that all applicable taxes have been paid.
If the license granted under this section is cancelled, revoked or no longer in use, it shall be
returned physically, with all of the legal rights, privileges and restrictions pertaining thereto, to
the licensing authority which may then grant the license to a new applicant at the same location
and under the same conditions as specified in this section.
SECTION 2. Notwithstanding sections 11 and 11A of chapter 138 of the General Laws or any
other general or special law to the contrary, the board of selectmen of the town of Weston shall
cause to be placed on the ballot at a regular election the following question:-
“Shall an act passed by the general court in the year 2008, entitled ‘An Act Authorizing the
Town of Weston to Grant a License for the Sale of Wines at a Food Store’, be accepted?”
Appendix 3
A20
Below the ballot question shall appear a fair and concise summary of the ballot question
prepared by the town counsel and approved by the board of selectmen. If a majority of votes
cast in answer to the question is in the affirmative, the town shall be taken to have authorized the
granting of a license for the sale of wines at a food store.
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved February 21 , 2008
Appendix 3
A21
Chapter 80 of the Acts of 2001
AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE POSITION OF TOWN MANAGER IN THE TOWN OF
WESTON.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. There shall be established in the town of Weston the office of town manager, who
shall be appointed by the board of selectmen for a term not to exceed 3 years, as the board may
determine, and may be appointed for successive terms of office. The town manager shall be a
person of demonstrated ability with administrative experience in public management or business
administration and who is qualified by reason of education and experience. The town manager
shall devote full time to the duties of said office and shall not engage in any other business or
occupation during the term of his employment by the town. The town manager shall hold no
elective office in the town during his tenure as town manager, but the board of selectmen may
appoint the town manager to any nonelective office or position consistent with the
responsibilities of the town manager. Before entering upon his duties, the town manager shall be
sworn to the faithful and impartial performance thereof by the town clerk.
The board of selectmen may from time to time establish additional qualifications for the office of
town manager. To the extent permitted by law, the terms of the town manager's employment may
be the subject of a written agreement between the parties setting forth the length of service,
compensation, vacation, sick leave, benefits, and such other matters, excluding tenure, as are
customarily included in an employment contract.
The board of selectmen shall set the compensation of the town manager, not to exceed the
amount appropriated by the town meeting.
SECTION 2. The town manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the town. The town
manager shall be responsible to the board of selectmen for the effective management of all town
affairs placed in the town manager's charge by this act, the board of selectmen, or vote of the
town meeting. The town manager shall be responsible for the implementation of town policies
established by the board of selectmen. The functions and duties of the town manager shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(a) Supervise all town departments under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen and direct the
operations of the town. The town manager may assume responsibilities falling under the
jurisdiction of other officers, or elected or appointed boards or committees as those boards and
the board of selectmen may jointly approve. This section shall not apply to employees of the
school department and to the statutory responsibilities and functions of the school committee.
(b) Transfer personnel within departments under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen,
with its approval. The town manager may transfer personnel under the jurisdiction of other
elected boards or commissions as the board of selectmen and such other boards or
commissions having jurisdiction thereof jointly approve. All personnel transfers of positions
shall be subject to chapter 31 of the General Laws.
(c) Appoint all town officers and employees whose appointments are not otherwise provided for
in this act. The town manager shall also organize and implement the hiring process, which shall
Appendix 3
A22
include the preparation of position descriptions in consultation with the relevant appointing
authority, where applicable, and shall set compensation, recruit, interview and, where required,
test.
(i) The board of selectmen shall appoint the town manager, town counsel, multimember boards
and committees under the jurisdiction of the board of selectmen, and the metropolitan area
planning council representative, and shall retain the authority to appoint individuals to, to
dismiss individuals from, and to fill vacancies in such positions without reference to the
operation of paragraphs (ii) to (vi).
(ii) The town manager shall recommend to the board of selectmen for its appointment candidates
for the positions of chief of the fire department, forest warden, police chief, and director of
public works. The board of selectmen shall approve or disapprove the recommendation by a
majority vote, and shall not appoint any individual to one of these positions who has not been
recommended for that position by the town manager.
(iii) Positions of department heads, or in the absence of department heads, chief staff employees,
for elected or appointed boards other than the board of selectmen, at Grade 6 or above in the
town's personnel classification plan, shall be appointed by their respective board by majority
vote, with the concurrence of the town manager.
(iv) The town manager may conduct interviews for positions described in paragraphs (ii) and
(iii), with the relevant board, as the town manager and such board shall mutually agree. Neither
the town manager nor the respective board shall dismiss an individual from 1 of the positions set
forth in paragraphs (ii) and (iii) without the concurrence of the other.
(v) Notwithstanding the foregoing:
(1) the town clerk shall retain the authority to appoint, dismiss, and fill vacancies in the position
of assistant town clerk;
(2) the town moderator shall retain the authority granted by town meeting vote or by by-law to
appoint and fill vacancies in such offices, committees, or boards as specified thereby; and
(3) the library board of trustees, in consultation with the town manager, shall retain the authority
to appoint and dismiss the library director, and all other library employees shall be appointed and
dismissed by the library director in consultation with the town manager.
(vi) All other employees shall be appointed and dismissed by their respective department head,
or in the absence of a department head, by the chief staff employee, in consultation and
concurrence with the town manager and in accordance with employment practices established by
the town manager.
(d) Except as to the board of selectmen, every elected or appointed town board shall directly
supervise its department head, or in the absence of a department head, its chief staff employee,
except with respect to personnel, financial and administrative technology practices in their
departments, as to which the town manager shall have supervisory authority. All other
employees shall be supervised by the town manager, his designee, or by the department head, or
the chief staff employee of their department.
Appendix 3
A23
(e) The town manager may reorganize, consolidate, establish, or abolish any department or
position under the town manager's direction or supervision, at his discretion and with the board
of selectmen's approval. With the approval of both the board of selectmen and finance
committee, the town manager may transfer all or part of any unexpended appropriation of a
discontinued department, board or office to any other town department, board or office under the
board of selectmen's jurisdiction.
(f) The town manager, may, at his discretion and with the approval of the board of selectmen,
establish a consolidated department of finance responsible for the coordination and overall
supervision of all fiscal and financial affairs of all agencies of town government and may appoint
a director of finance; but the terms of persons holding the position of accountant, auditor or
comptroller, treasurer, collector or assessor on the effective date of this act shall not be shortened
by reason of the consolidation.
(i) The department of finance may include the functions of the offices of accountant, treasurer
and collector, and assessors, and may also include the following: coordination of all financial
services and activities; maintenance of all accounting records and other financial statements;
payment of all obligations; receipt of all funds due; assistance to all other town departments and
offices in any matter related to financial affairs; monitoring of the expenditure of all funds,
including periodic reporting to appropriate agencies on the status of accounts; supervision of all
purchases of goods, materials and supplies and maintenance of inventory controls; supervision of
data processing facilities; and any other matter relating to municipal finance as the town manager
may determine necessary or desirable.
(ii) The town manager may appoint a director of finance for a term of one year. The director of
finance shall be especially fitted by education, training, and experience to perform the duties of
the office, and, may, at the discretion of the town manager, serve as the head of any division
within the department, or the town manager may designate a person to serve as head of one or
more divisions within the department. The director of finance, in consultation and concurrence
with the town manager, may hire such other personnel as necessary to staff the department.
The powers and duties of the director of finance as designated by the town manager may
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) coordinate and operate, in accordance with applicable statute, by-law, code and accepted
practice, the financial functions of all town departments and agencies, and supervise the
following functions of accounting, treasury, tax collections, assessing, budgeting and
procurement;
(2) work with the town manager and board of selectmen to develop strategic financial plans and
policies;
(3) plan, organize, and provide administrative direction for all financial functions;
(4) receive all requests made for the expenditure of town funds from every office and agency and
assemble all such requests into a complete projected budget for all town funds and activities for
the ensuing fiscal year;
(5) compile and submit an annual operating budget to the town manager, which shall show in
detail the estimated income from the proposed property tax levy and from every other source by
category; and
Appendix 3
A24
(6) provide general oversight, throughout the year, of the expenditure of all town funds pursuant
to such budgets and expenditures as authorized by town meeting.
(g) Administer, either directly or through a person appointed by him, all provisions of general
and special laws applicable to the town, and by-laws and votes of the town within the scope of
his duty, and all rules and regulations made by the board of selectmen.
(h) Establish control and data systems appropriate to monitoring expenditures by town boards
and departments to enable the town manager to make periodic reports to the board of selectmen
and the finance committee on the status of the town's finances.
(i) Develop and administer a personnel system, including, but not limited to, the development
and implementation of an ongoing training program, personnel and hiring policies, practices, and
regulations for town employees.
(j) Oversee preparation of the draft town budget and submit it with written comments and
recommendations to the board of selectmen and finance committee by such date or dates as may
be determined by the board of selectmen.
(k) Negotiate collective bargaining contracts on behalf of the board of selectmen, which
contracts shall be subject to approval, ratification and execution by the board. The board of
selectmen may authorize use of additional persons to assist the town manager in the negotiations
at its discretion.
(l) Administer and enforce collective bargaining agreements, and personnel rules and
regulations, and by-laws adopted by the town.
(m) Act as the chief procurement officer under the provisions of chapter 30B of the General
Laws, responsible for the purchasing of all supplies, materials, and equipment for the town,
including the bidding and awarding of all contracts, except for the school department.
(n) Attend all regular and special town meetings, unless excused therefrom by the board of
selectmen.
(o) Cause full and complete records of meetings of the board of selectmen to be taken and
maintained, and compile reports of the meetings as requested by the board of selectmen.
(p) Exercise general supervision over the personnel, organization, systems and practices of the
board of selectmen's office.
(q) Act as the liaison with and represent the board of selectmen before state, federal and regional
authorities.
(r) Approve all warrants or vouchers, including payroll warrants, for payment of town funds
submitted by the town accountant.
(s) Award and execute all contracts for designer services and construction of town buildings,
including school buildings, consistent with provisons of the permanent building committee bylaw
Appendix 3
A25
(t) Perform any other duties consistent with his office as may be required by by-law or vote of
the town or by vote of the board of selectmen.
The chief staff employee of each town department shall be a member of the town manager's
administrative staff for the purpose of assuring common town personnel, financial,
administrative and technology use practices, and for the purpose of fostering effective
communications among town departments.
SECTION 3. A vacancy in the office of town manager shall be filled as soon as practicable by
the board of selectmen. When a vacancy exists, the board of selectmen may appoint by a
majority vote of the entire board a suitable person as acting town manager during the period of
the vacancy.
SECTION 4. The procedure for filling a vacancy in the office of town manager shall be as
follows:
(a) The board of selectmen may reappoint an incumbent town manager without a screening
committee.
(b) The board of selectmen shall appoint a screening committee to consider applicants for the
position. The committee shall be composed of 5 registered voters of the town of Weston.
(c) The screening committee shall:
(i) receive and review all applications for the position of town manager;
(ii) select applicants for interviews;
(iii) conduct 1 or more preliminary interviews with the selected applicants;
(iv) investigate the experience, qualifications and reputation of applicants deemed eligible for
consideration as finalists;
(v) evaluate the applicants in relation to the established job description for the position and
criteria specified by the board of selectmen;
(vi) report in writing to the board of selectmen a summary of its activities; and
(vii) present to the board of selectmen in writing a list of not more than five nor, if reasonably
practicable, fewer than three applicants deemed qualified for the position of town manager.
(d) The board of selectmen shall then interview in public meeting the applicants recommended
by the screening committee. The board of selectmen may conduct such further investigation and
examination of applicants as it determines and may appoint a town manager from the screening
committee's list. If the board does not appoint a town manager from the list, it shall prepare and
file in its records a written statement of the reasons for its decision. The screening committee
shall then be requested to provide a recommendation of not more than 3 other applicants whom it
considers qualified. The board of selectmen shall consider such applicants in the same manner as
those first recommended.
Appendix 3
A26
(e) The board of selectmen shall not appoint to the position of town manager a person who has
not received a recommendation from the screening committee except by unanimous vote of the
board.
SECTION 5. The board of selectmen may remove the town manager by the majority vote of the
entire board. At least 30 days before such proposed removal shall become effective, the board of
selectmen shall file a preliminary written resolution with the town clerk setting forth the specific
reasons for such proposed removal. The town clerk shall forthwith deliver to the town manager
a copy of such resolution, or cause it to be delivered by registered mail at his last known address.
The town manager may file with the board of selectmen, within 7 days after receipt of the copy,
a written request for a public hearing to be held not earlier than 10 nor later than 20 days after the
filing of the request. After such public hearing, if any, or otherwise at the expiration of 30 days
following the filing of the preliminary resolution, and after full consideration, the board of
selectmen, by the majority vote of the entire board, may adopt a final resolution of removal. In
the preliminary resolution, the board of selectmen may suspend the manager from duty, and at its
discretion, shall determine whether the suspension will be with or without pay.
SECTION 6. Section 4 of chapter 582 of the acts of 1978 is hereby amended by inserting after
the word "employees", in line 2, the following words:- with the concurrence of the town
manager.
SECTION 7. Section 1 of chapter 261 of the acts of 1995 is hereby amended by inserting after
the word "selectmen", in line 10, the following words:- or town manager.
SECTION 8. Section 2 of said chapter 261 is hereby amended by striking out, in line 6, the
words "said board of selectmen" and inserting in place thereof the following words:- the town
manager.
SECTION 9. Section 5 of said chapter 261 is hereby amended by striking out, in lines 5 and 6,
the words "; supervision of engineering services of the town".
SECTION 10. Paragraph (b) of section 6 of said chapter 261 is hereby amended by striking out,
in line 3, the words "town engineer,".
SECTION 11. Section 7 of said chapter 261 is hereby repealed.
SECTION 12. All special acts, by-laws, rules and regulations which are in force on the effective
date of this act that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this act shall continue in full force
until amended or repealed. If any provision of this act conflicts with any provisions of any
special act, by-law, rule or regulation of the town, the provisions of this act shall govern.
SECTION 13. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved August 29, 2000
Amended and approved December 22, 2006
(section 2)
Appendix 3
A27
Chapter 283 of the Acts of 2004
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF WESTON TO APPROPRIATE MONEY
FROM THE COMMUNITY PRESERVATION FUND.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. The general court finds that the town of Weston adopted the Community
Preservation Act, in this act called the Act, chapter 44B of the General Laws, sections 3 through
7, inclusive, before November 25, 2002, and could have authorized creation of community
housing at the Brook School Apartments pursuant to the Act; however, the town approved the
creation of community housing under Article 11 at the November 25, 2002, special town meeting
to be funded using federal subsidies which the town of Weston will not receive as expected due
to unanticipated, unusual circumstances resulting from federal budget matters entirely outside the
control of the town of Weston.
SECTION 2. Notwithstanding section 6 of chapter 44B of the General Laws or of any other
general or special law to the contrary, the town of Weston may, upon recommendation by the
Weston Community Preservation Committee, and pursuant to a 2/3 vote of the Weston town
meeting, amend the vote under Article 11 of the November 25, 2002 special town meeting,
authorizing the construction of affordable housing at the Brook School Apartments, approve the
creation of community housing in accordance with the act, and provide that the portion of the
appropriation and borrowing authorization attributable to the creation of community housing at
the Brook School Apartments be funded through the town's community preservation fund,
established pursuant to section 7 of chapter 44B of the General Laws, including the affordable
housing reserve. The Weston town meeting may further, upon recommendation by the Weston
Community Preservation Committee, appropriate funds for the purpose of paying the debt
service on the portion of the bonds issued pursuant to this vote and the vote of the Weston town
meeting authorized under this act, for the purpose of creating community housing at the Brook
School Apartments. Such funds may be so appropriated and expended only if the town votes to
place a permanent deed restriction for affordable housing purposes on 13 units at the Brook
School Apartments created for community housing under this act and the vote of the Weston
town meeting authorized hereby, which restriction complies with the requirements of chapter
184 of the General Laws. The deed restriction must run to the benefit of a nonprofit, charitable
corporation or foundation selected by the town with the right to enforce the restriction.
SECTION 3. If the Weston town meeting votes as authorized herein to approve under the act the
creation of affordable housing at the Brook School Apartments, that portion of the unexpended
amount of the temporary borrowing incurred pursuant to the vote under Article 11 of the
November 25, 2002, Weston special town meeting attributable to the creation of affordable
housing at the Brook School Apartments shall be transferred without further appropriation to the
Weston community preservation fund, and that portion of any interest earned on the amounts
temporarily borrowed under Article 11 of the November 25, 2002, special town meeting, net of
interest expense, attributable to the creation of affordable housing at the Brook School
Apartments shall be similarly transferred without further appropriation.
SECTION 4. Except as otherwise provided in this act, if the town votes to approve the creation
of community housing at the Brook School Apartments under the act as so authorized herein, the
community housing created at the Brook School Apartments shall be deemed to be community
Appendix 3
A28
preservation property, subject to all requirements of the Act; further, any future expenditures
from the community preservation fund for the purposes set forth herein shall be subject to the
provisions of the Act.
SECTION 5. If this act is not in effect on May 10, 2004, any vote taken under Article 19 of the
Weston 2004 Annual Town Meeting warrant to authorize the creation of community housing at
the Brook School Apartments, as authorized by section 2 of this act, shall be ratified, validated
and confirmed as if this act had been in effect on the date of the vote.
SECTION 6. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved August 9, 2004
Appendix 3
A29
Chapter 421 of the Acts of 2004
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF WESTON TO REGULATE CERTAIN
PROPERTY TAX EXEMPTION ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS FOR THE
ELDERLY.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same, as follows:
SECTION 1. Notwithstanding clause Forty-first A of section 5 of chapter 59 of the General
Laws, or any other general or special law to the contrary, and subject to sections 2 to 5, inclusive,
the board of assessors of the town of Weston shall defer the real estate property tax payment for
property of a person 60 years of age or older and occupied by him as his domicile, or a person
who owns the same jointly with his spouse, either of whom is 60 years of age or older and
occupied as their domicile, or of a person who owns the same jointly or is a tenant in common
with a person not his spouse and occupied by him as his domicile, if the person claiming the
exemption either alone or together with his spouse had combined income during the preceding
year of an amount not to exceed the amount established by the board of selectmen and ratified by
vote of the annual town meeting, provided that such person has owned and occupied as his
domicile such real property in the town for 5 years or is a surviving spouse who inherits such real
property and has occupied such real property as his domicile in the town for 5 years and who
otherwise qualifies under this act.
SECTION 2. Any such person may, on or before December 15 of each year to which the tax
relates or within 3 months after the date on which the bill or notice is first sent, whichever is
later, apply to the board of assessors for an exemption of all or part of such real property from
taxation during such year; provided, however, that in the case of real estate owned by a person
jointly or as a tenant in common with a person not his spouse, the exemption shall not exceed
that proportion of total valuation which the amount of his interest in such property bears to the
whole tax due. The board of assessors shall grant such exemption provided that the owner or
owners of such real property have entered into a tax deferral and recovery agreement with the
board of assessors on behalf of the town.
The agreement shall provide that:-
(1) no sale or transfer of such real property may be consummated unless the taxes which would
otherwise have been assessed on such portion of the real property as is so exempt have been
paid, with interest at the rate of 4 per cent per annum for the first year and at an annual rate set
thereafter by the board of selectmen provided that the rate set by the selectmen shall never
exceed 8 per cent annum;
(2) the total amount of such taxes due, plus interest, for the current and prior years does not
exceed 50 per cent of the owner's proportional share of the full and fair cash value of such real
property;
(3) upon the demise of the owner of such real property, the heirs-at-law, assignees or devisees
shall have first priority to the real property by paying in full the total taxes which would
Appendix 3
A30
otherwise have been due, plus interest; provided, however, that if such heir-at-law, assignee or
devisee is a surviving spouse who enters into a tax deferral and recovery agreement under this
clause, payment of the taxes and interest due shall not be required during the life of such
surviving spouse. Any additional taxes deferred, plus interest, on the real property under a tax
deferral and recovery agreement signed by a surviving spouse shall be added to the taxes and
interest which would otherwise have been due, and the payment of which has been postponed
during the life of such surviving spouse, in determining the 50 per cent requirement of
subparagraph (2);
(4) if the taxes due, plus interest, are not paid by the heir-at-law, assignee or devisee or if
payment is not postponed during the life of a surviving spouse, such taxes and interest shall be
recovered from the estate of the owner; and
(5) any joint owner or mortgagee holding a mortgage on such property has given written prior
approval for such agreement, which written approval shall be made a part of such agreement.
SECTION 3. In the case of each tax deferral and recovery agreement entered into between the
board of assessors and the owner or owners of such real property, the board of assessors shall
forthwith cause to be recorded in the registry of deeds of the county or district in which the city
or town is situated a statement of their action which shall constitute a lien upon the land covered
by such agreement for such taxes as have been assessed under this act, plus interest as hereinafter
provided. A lien filed pursuant to this act shall be subsequent to any liens securing a reverse
mortgage, excepting shared appreciation instruments. The statement shall name the owner and
shall include a description of the land adequate for identification. Unless such a statement is
recorded the lien shall not be effective with respect to a bona fide purchaser or other transferee
without actual knowledge of such lien. The filing fee for such statement shall be paid by the city
or town and shall be added to and become a part of the taxes due.
SECTION 4. In addition to the remedies provided by this act, the recorded statement of the
assessors provided for in this act shall have the same force and effect as a valid taking for
nonpayment of taxes under section 53 of chapter 60 of the General Laws, except that: (1) interest
shall accrue at the rate provided in this act until the conveyance of the property or the death of
the person whose taxes have been deferred, after which time interest shall accrue at the rate
provided in section 62 of said chapter 60; (2) no assignment of the municipality's interest under
this act may be made pursuant to section 52 of said chapter 60; and (3) no petition under section
65 of said chapter 60 to foreclose the lien may be filed before the expiration of 6 months from
the conveyance of the property or the death of the person whose taxes have been deferred.
SECTION 5. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved December 16, 2004
Appendix 3
A31
Chapter 37 of the Acts of 2008
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF WESTON TO GRANT A LICENSE FOR
THE SALE OF WINES AT A FOOD STORE.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Notwithstanding section 17 of chapter 138 of the General Laws, the licensing
authority of the town of Weston may grant to a food store a license for the sale of wines not to be
drunk on the premises under section 15 of said chapter 138. Except as otherwise provided
herein, such license shall be subject to all of said chapter 138 except said section 17.
For the purposes of this act, a “food store” shall mean a grocery store or supermarket which sells
at retail, food for consumption off the seller’s premises either alone or in combination with
grocery items or other nondurable items typically found in a grocery store and sold to individuals
for personal, family or household use; provided, however, that such food store shall carry fresh
and processed meats, poultry, dairy products, eggs, fresh fruits and produce, baked goods and
baking ingredients, canned goods and dessert items. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a food store
shall not be a convenience store or specialty store; provided, however, that the board of
selectmen shall determine whether an applicant is a food store under this act. In making such
determination, the board of selectmen shall consider such factors as the volume of sales, actual
or proposed, and the extent and range of merchandise offered for sale. The holder of a license
under this act may sell wine alone or in combination with any other items offered for sale. The
amount of any initial or renewal fee for such a license shall be determined by the licensing
authority issuing or renewing that license.
Notwithstanding any general or special law or any rule or regulation to the contrary, the licensing
authority shall not approve the transfer of the license to any other location, but the license may
be granted at the same location if an applicant for the license files with the authority a letter in
writing from the department of revenue indicating that the license is in good standing with the
department and that all applicable taxes have been paid.
If the license granted under this section is cancelled, revoked or no longer in use, it shall be
returned physically, with all of the legal rights, privileges and restrictions pertaining thereto, to
the licensing authority which may then grant the license to a new applicant at the same location
and under the same conditions as specified in this section.
SECTION 2. Notwithstanding sections 11 and 11A of chapter 138 of the General Laws or any
other general or special law to the contrary, the board of selectmen of the town of Weston shall
cause to be placed on the ballot at a regular election the following question:-
“Shall an act passed by the general court in the year 2008, entitled ‘An Act Authorizing the
Town of Weston to Grant a License for the Sale of Wines at a Food Store’, be accepted?”
Appendix 3
A32
Below the ballot question shall appear a fair and concise summary of the ballot question
prepared by the town counsel and approved by the board of selectmen. If a majority of votes
cast in answer to the question is in the affirmative, the town shall be taken to have authorized the
granting of a license for the sale of wines at a food store.
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved February 21 , 2008
Appendix 3
A33
Chapter 6 of the Acts of 2009
AN ACT RELATIVE TO THE TOWN CLERK OF THE TOWN OF WESTON.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. The position of town clerk in the town of Weston shall be appointed.
SECTION 2. Paragraph (ii) of subsection (c) of section 2 of chapter 80 of the acts of 2001 is
hereby amended by striking out the first sentence and inserting in place thereof the following
sentence:- The town manager shall recommend to the board of selectmen for its appointment
candidates for the positions of town clerk, chief of the fire department, forest warden, police
chief, and director of public works.
SECTION 3. Paragraph (v) of said subsection (c) of said section 2 of said chapter 80 is hereby
amended by striking out clauses (1), (2) and (3) and inserting in place thereof the following two
clauses:-
(1) the town moderator shall retain the authority granted by town meeting vote or by by-law to
appoint and fill vacancies in such offices, committees, or boards as specified thereby; and
(2) the library board of trustees, in consultation with the town manager, shall retain the authority
to appoint and dismiss the library director, and all other library employees shall be appointed and
dismissed by the library director in consultation with the town manager.
SECTION 4. Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, upon the approval of
this act by the voters as set forth in section 5, the position of elected town clerk in the town of
Weston shall be abolished, and the term of the elected incumbent holding office, if any, shall be
terminated; provided, however, that any individual elected to the position of town clerk at the
same election at which the question set forth in section 5 appears on the ballot shall hold that
office and perform the duties thereof until the appointment to said office is otherwise made in
accordance with the provisions of chapter 80 of the acts of 2001, as amended in accordance with
section 2 of this act, or the individual’s sooner resignation.
SECTION 5. This act shall be submitted for its acceptance to the qualified voters of the town of
Weston at an annual or special election in the form of the following question:-
“Shall an act passed by the general court in the year 2009, entitled ‘An Act Relative to the Town
Clerk of the Town of Weston,’ be accepted?”
Below the ballot question shall appear a fair and concise summary of the ballot question
prepared by town counsel and approved by the board of selectmen.
If a majority of the votes cast in answer to the question is in the affirmative, sections 1 to 4,
inclusive, shall take effect in the town of Weston, but not otherwise.
SECTION 6. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved April 3, 2009
Appendix 3
A34
Chapter 47 of the Acts of 2012
IN ACT RELATIVE TO THE REGULATION OF SALARIES OF EMPLOYEES OF
THE TOWN OF WESTON SERVING IN THE ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED
STATES.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, an employee in the
service of the town of Weston, including a school department employee, who has been granted a
military leave of absence because the employee is a member of the army national guard, the air
national guard or a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
service in the armed forces of the United States after September 11, 2001, may, at the discretion
of the Weston board of selectmen and subject to appropriation, be paid at the employee’s regular
base salary as such a public employee and shall not lose any seniority or any accrued vacation
leave, sick leave, personal leave, compensatory time or earned overtime. If the board elects to
make payments under this act, an eligible employee shall be paid the regular base salary as such
a public employee for each pay period of such military leave of absence after September 11,
2001, reduced by any amount received from the United States as pay or allowance for military
service performed during the same pay period, excluding overtime pay, shift differential pay,
hazardous duty pay or any other additional compensation. For the purposes of this section, the
term "active service" shall not include active duty for training in the army national guard or air
national guard or as a reservist in the armed forces of the United States. Nothing in this act shall
limit or reduce a person's entitlement to benefits under section 59 of chapter 33 of the General
Laws and nothing in this act shall entitle a person to benefits in excess of the maximum benefit
provided under said section 59 of said chapter 33 for any period during which that person is
receiving benefits under this section.
SECTION 2. Payments made by the town of any amounts authorized pursuant to section 1 are
hereby ratified, validated and confirmed as though this act had been in full force and effect on
the date such payments were made.
SECTION 3. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved, March 9, 2012.
Appendix 3
A35
Chapter 82 of the Acts of 2013
AN ACT AUTHORIZING THE TOWN OF WESTON TO GRANT A LICENSE FOR
THE SALE OF WINES AND MALT BEVERAGES AT A FOOD STORE.
Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General Court assembled, and by
the authority of the same as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 1 of chapter 37 of the acts of 2008 is hereby amended by inserting after
the word “wines”, in line 3, the following words:- and malt beverages.
SECTION 2. Said section 1 of said chapter 37 is hereby further amended by striking out, in line
16, the word “wine” and inserting in place thereof the following words:- wines and malt
beverages.
SECTION 3. Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, the holder of the
license issued under chapter 37 of the acts of 2008 may apply for an amendment to that license in
order to authorize the sale of malt beverages in addition to wines.
SECTION 4. This act shall take effect upon its passage.
Approved, September 18, 2013.
ZONING BY-LAW
AND
MAP
TOWN OF WESTON
MASSACHUSETTS
TEXT INCLUDES AMENDMENTS THROUGH
MAY 2017
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Abbreviated)
i
SECTION I. PURPOSES AND VALIDITY ....................................................................... 1
SECTION II. DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................ 2
SECTION III. PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES & USES ............................................................................... 11
SECTION IV. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS & BOUNDARIES ......................... 12
A. DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS .............................................................................................. 12
B. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ................................................................................................. 12
SECTION V. USE REGULATIONS ................................................................................... 16
A. GENERAL… ....................................................................................................................... 16
B. SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS (A, B, C & D) ............................................ 17
C. MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICTS (A & B) ................................................................. 20
D. BUSINESS DISTRICTS (A & B) ........................................................................................ 20
E. OFFICE AND RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS .................................... 21
F. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS .............................................................................................. 21
G. WETLANDS AND FLOOD PLAIN PROTECTION DISTRICTS (A AND B) ................. 22
H. AQUIFER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS .......................................................... 26
I. GENERAL USE PROVISIONS IN ALL DISTRICTS ........................................................ 29
J. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY REGULATIONS .................................... 31
K. ACTIVE ADULT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (“AARD”)………….…………….37
L. RENEWABLE ENERGY OVERLAY DISTRICT………………………………………..44
SECTION VI. DIMENSIONAL & OTHER REQUIREMENTS ...................................... 49
A. GENERAL .......................................................................................................................... .49
B. SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS .................................................................... 49
C. MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICTS ............................................................................... 51
D. BUSINESS, OFFICE AND RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, AND
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS .............................................................................................. 53
E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS .................................................................................................. 54
F. OTHER DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS .................................................................... 55
G. ACCESSORY APARTMENT REQUIREMENTS & PROCEDURES .............................. 56
H. FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS & PROCEDURES .............................. 57
SECTION VII. SIGNS ............................................................................................................. 61
A. BUSINESS & COMMERCIAL DISTRICT SIGNS ............................................................ 61
B. RESIDENCE DISTRICT SIGNS ......................................................................................... 62
SECTION VIII. VEHICULAR REQUIREMENTS ............................................................... 64
A. OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS ....................................................................... 64
B. COMMON DRIVES ............................................................................................................ 66
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Abbreviated)
ii
SECTION IX. PERMIT & SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITIES ............. 68
A. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ....................................................................................... 68
B. PLANNING BOARD ........................................................................................................... 68
C. BOARD OF SELECTMEN………………………………………………………………..68
SECTION X. SPECIAL PERMITS .................................................................................... 69
A. SPECIAL PERMIT FOR USES ........................................................................................... 69
B. SPECIAL PERMITS IN GENERAL ................................................................................... 69
SECTION XI. SITE PLAN APPROVAL ............................................................................. 71
A. SITE PLAN APPROVAL AS A PREREQUISITE ............................................................. 71
B. PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................ 71
C. REVIEW FEES .................................................................................................................... 71
D. SITE PLAN APPROVAL APPLICATIONS ....................................................................... 71
E. REVIEW OF SITE PLAN – REASONS FOR DISAPPROVAL………………………… 72
F. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA…………………………………………………………. 72
G. WAIVER……………………………………………………………………………….…..73
H. ENFORCEMENT……………………………………………………………………….…73
I. REVISIONS AND AMENDMENTS .................................................................................. 73
J. PLANNING BOARD RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR
SITE PLAN APPROVAL .................................................................................................... 74
K. LIMITED SITE PLAN APPROVAL EXCEPTION FOR RELIGIOUS, EDUCATIONAL,
AND CHILD CARE FACILITY USES…………………………………………………...74
SECTION XII. ENFORCEMENT ......................................................................................... 76
CHRONOLOGY ......................................................................................................................... 77
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Full)
iii
SECTION I. PURPOSES AND VALIDITY ....................................................................... 1
A. PURPOSES ...................................................................................................................... 1
B. VALIDITY ....................................................................................................................... 1
SECTION II. DEFINITIONS ................................................................................................ 2
SECTION III. PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES AND USES ......................................................................... 11
A. GENERAL ..................................................................................................................... 11
B. DISCONTINUED USE .................................................................................................. 11
C. RECONSTRUCTION .................................................................................................... 11
SECTION IV. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES .................... 12
A. DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS ............................................................................................. 12
1. Single Family Residence Districts (A) ........................................................................... 12
2. Single Family Residence Districts (B) ........................................................................... 12
3. Single Family Residence Districts (C) ........................................................................... 12
4. Single Family Residence Districts (D) ........................................................................... 12
5. Multiple Dwelling Districts (A) ..................................................................................... 12
6. Multiple Dwelling Districts (B) ..................................................................................... 12
7. Business Districts (A) ..................................................................................................... 12
8. Business Districts (B) ..................................................................................................... 12
9. Office and Research and Development Districts ............................................................ 12
10. Commercial Districts ...................................................................................................... 12
11. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District (A).......................................................... 12
12. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District (B) .......................................................... 12
13. Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts .............................................................................. 12
14. Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts .................................................................. 12
B. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES ................................................................................................. 12
1. Zoning Map ................................................................................................................... 12
2. General Locations Of District Boundaries ................................................................... 12
3. Lots Divided By Zoning Districts ................................................................................. 13
4. Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts ............................................................................ 13
5. Wetlands And Flood Plain Protection Districts ............................................................ 13
a. District A................................................................................................................. 13
b. District B ................................................................................................................. 14
6. Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts ................................................................ 14
7. Renewable Energy Overlay District .............................................................................. 15
SECTION V. USE REGULATIONS ................................................................................... 16
A. GENERAL...…………………………………………………………………………….....16
1. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................ 16
2. Uses Prohibited .............................................................................................................. 16
3. Uses Allowed in All Districts ......................................................................................... 16
4. Other Uses ...................................................................................................................... 17
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Full)
iv
B. SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS (A, B, C AND D) ...................................... 17
1. By-Right Uses ................................................................................................................ 17
2. By-Right with Site Plan Approval .................................................................................. 18
3. Uses Allowed with Site Plan Approval & by Special Permit ........................................ 18
4. Uses Allowed by Special Permit .................................................................................... 19
5. Uses Allowed by Permit ................................................................................................. 19
6. Uses Allowed by Special Permit of Selectmen with Site Plan Approval ...................... 19
C. MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICTS (A AND B) ............................................................ 20
1. By-Right Uses ................................................................................................................ 20
2. By-Right with Site Plan Approval .................................................................................. 20
3. Uses Allowed with Site Plan Approval & by Special Permit ........................................ 20
D. BUSINESS DISTRICTS (A AND B) .................................................................................. 20
1. By-Right Uses ................................................................................................................ 20
2. By-Right with Site Plan Approval .................................................................................. 20
3. Uses Allowed with Site Plan Approval & by Special Permit ........................................ 20
E. OFFICE AND RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS .................................... 21
1. By-Right Uses ................................................................................................................ 21
2. By-Right with Site Plan Approval .................................................................................. 21
3. Uses Allowed with Site Plan Approval & by Special Permit ........................................ 21
F. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS .............................................................................................. 21
1. By-Right Uses ................................................................................................................ 21
2. By-Right with Site Plan Approval .................................................................................. 21
3. Uses Allowed with Site Plan Approval & by Special Permit ........................................ 21
G. WETLANDS AND FLOOD PLAIN PROTECTION DISTRICTS (A AND B) ................. 22
1. General ......................................................................................................................... 22
a. Uses ......................................................................................................................... 22
b. Procedure …………………………………………………………………………..22
c. Elevation Data .......................................................................................................... 22
2. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District A ............................................................ 22
a. Purposes ................................................................................................................... 22
b. Use Regulations ........................................................................................................ 22
c. Other Activities and Uses ......................................................................................... 23
d. Lot Area Allowance ................................................................................................. 23
e. Boundary Line Plot Plan .......................................................................................... 24
f. Determination of Flooding and Suitability ............................................................... 24
3. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District B ............................................................ 25
a. Purposes ................................................................................................................... 25
b. Use Regulations........................................................................................................ 25
H. AQUIFER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS .......................................................... 26
1. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 26
2. Uses Prohibited not Allowed in Underlying Zone ......................................................... 26
3. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................................ 26
4. Special Permit Uses ........................................................................................................ 26
5. Prohibited Uses .............................................................................................................. 27
6. Special Permit Procedures……………………………………………………………...28
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Full)
v
7. Required Findings by SPGA………………………………………………………...…29
8. Special Permit Conditions……………………………………………………………...29
I. GENERAL USE PROVISIONS IN ALL DISTRICTS ........................................................ 29
1. Unregistered Vehicles and Hazards to Public Safety ..................................................... 29
2. Exterior Lighting ............................................................................................................ 29
3. Earth Removal and Movement ....................................................................................... 30
4. Aircraft ........................................................................................................................... 31
5. Construction Trailers ...................................................................................................... 31
J. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY REGULATIONS .................................... 31
1. Purpose and Definitions ................................................................................................. 31
2. Applicability ................................................................................................................... 32
3. Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts………………………………………….. 32
4. Special Permit…………………………………………………………………………..33
5. Application……………………………………………………………………………...36
6. Term………………………………………………………………………………….…36
7. Height Allowance for Public Safety Services…………………………………………..37
8. Variances………………………………………………………………………………..37
K. ACTIVE ADULT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (“AARD”)……………………… .. 37
1. Definition and Applicability…………………………………………………………… 37
2. Purposes……………………………………………………………………………. ..... 38
3. Minimum Tract Size…………………………………………………………………… 38
4. Concept Plan………………………………………………………………………........ 38
a. General Design Guidelines………………………………………………………….39
b. Standards………………………………………………………………………….. . 40
c. Procedures…………………………………………………………………………. 41
5. Site Plan Approval-Special Permit…………………………………………………….. 42
a. Timing………………………………………………………………………… .. ….42
b. Site Plan Approval-Special Permit Submission and Findings…………………… .. 42
c. Site Plan Approval/Special Permit Rules and Regulations…………………… ... …43
d. Phasing Plan……………………………………………………………….............. 43
e. Construction Plan……………………………………………………………………43
L. RENEWABLE ENERGY OVERLAY DISTRICT………………………………………...44
1. Purpose…………………………………………………………………………………..44
2. Applicability……………………………………………………………………………..44
3. Definitions……………………………………………………………………………….44
4. General siting Requirements………………………………………………………….....44
5. Permitting Process & Requirements………………………………………………….....45
6. Design Standards……………………………………………………………………......46
7. Additional Provisions………………………………………………………………...…46
a. Maintenance……………………………………………………………………….....46
b. Modifications………………………………………………………………………...47
c. Removal Requirements………………………………………………………………47
d. Abandonment………………………………………………………………………..47
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Full)
vi
e. Financial Surety……………………………………………………………………...47
f. Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations………………………….…….48
g. Building Permit and Building Inspection…………………………………………....48
h. Operation & Maintenance Plan………………………………………………….…..48
i. Utility Notification……………………………………………………………….…..48
j. Emergency Services………………………………………………………………..…48
SECTION VI. DIMENSIONAL AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS ................................. 49
A. GENERAL ........................................................................................................................... 49
1. Conformance with Requirements ................................................................................... 49
2. Minimum frontage only on one street ............................................................................ 49
3. Minimum setback required from all street lines ............................................................. 49
4. Land within a way excluded from lot area ..................................................................... 49
5. Site work approval and permit…………………………………………………………49
B. SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS (A, B, C AND D) ...................................... 49
1. Minimum Requirements ................................................................................................. 49
2. Table of Conventional Dimensional Requirements ....................................................... 50
3. Substantial Irregularity ................................................................................................... 51
C. MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICTS (A AND B) ............................................................ 51
1. Minimum Requirements ................................................................................................. 51
2. Table of Dimensional Requirements .............................................................................. 51
3. Lot Coverage .................................................................................................................. 52
4. Garage Limitation ........................................................................................................... 52
5. Living space calculation exemptions.............................................................................. 52
6. Cooking and Bathroom requirements ............................................................................. 52
7. Roads, Driveways and Access ........................................................................................ 52
8. Utilities and Services ...................................................................................................... 52
9. Long Term Care Facility ................................................................................................ 53
D. BUSINESS, OFFICE AND RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, AND
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS .............................................................................................. 53
1. Minimum Requirements ................................................................................................. 53
2. Table of Dimensional Requirements .............................................................................. 53
E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS .................................................................................................. 54
1. Minimum Requirements……………………………………… ..................................... 54
2. Tables of Height Limitations .......................................................................................... 54
3. Exceptions…… .............................................................................................................. 55
F. OTHER DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS .................................................................... 55
1. Corner Obstructions ....................................................................................................... 55
2. Number and Location of Dwellings on One Lot ............................................................ 56
3. Gross Floor Area Limitation .......................................................................................... 56
G. ACCESSORY APARTMENT REQUIREMENTS & PROCEDURES ............................... 56
1. Conformity of lot size to requirements of district .......................................................... 56
2. Age of dwelling .............................................................................................................. 56
3. Amount of finished living space .................................................................................... 56
4. Size of accessory apartment ........................................................................................... 56
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Full)
vii
5. Rooms required .............................................................................................................. 56
6. No change in building exterior ....................................................................................... 57
7. Suitability of subsurface sewage disposal ...................................................................... 57
8. Sufficient space for off-street parking………………………………………………….57
9. One living unit must be owner occupied ........................................................................ 57
H. FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS & PROCEDURES ............................... 57
1. Applicability ................................................................................................................... 57
2. Purpose ........................................................................................................................... 58
3. Fees ................................................................................................................................. 58
4. Procedure ........................................................................................................................ 58
5. Dimensional Requirements ............................................................................................ 58
6. Other Requirements ........................................................................................................ 59
7. Allowed Uses ................................................................................................................. 59
8. Standards ........................................................................................................................ 60
SECTION VII. SIGNS ............................................................................................................... 61
A. BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICT SIGNS ...................................................... 61
1. Number ........................................................................................................................... 61
2. Location .......................................................................................................................... 61
3. Size ................................................................................................................................. 61
4. Construction ................................................................................................................... 62
5. Illumination .................................................................................................................... 62
6. Gasoline Stations ............................................................................................................ 62
7. Building Permit .............................................................................................................. 62
8. Nonconforming signs ..................................................................................................... 62
B. RESIDENCE DISTRICT SIGNS ......................................................................................... 62
1. Signs Permitted Without a Permit .................................................................................. 62
2. Signs Permitted With a Special Permit .......................................................................... 63
SECTION VIII. VEHICULAR REQUIREMENTS ............................................................... 64
A. OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS ......................................................................... 64
1. Parking Requirement by Usage ........................................................................................ 64
2. Location and Size of Parking Area .................................................................................. 65
3. Construction Standards of Parking Area.......................................................................... 65
4. Group Parking Areas........................................................................................................ 65
5. Loading and Unloading Areas ......................................................................................... 65
6. Pre-existing Uses ............................................................................................................. 65
7. Special Provisons for Office and Research and Development Districts .......................... 66
8. Use in Business Districts that require Site Plan Approval …………………………….. 66
B. COMMON DRIVES IN SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS ............................. 66
SECTION IX. PERMIT AND SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITIES ........ 68
A. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ....................................................................................... 68
1. Membership .................................................................................................................... 68
2. Powers ............................................................................................................................ 68
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Full)
viii
a. Hear and Decide Appeals ......................................................................................... 68
b. Hear and Decide Variances ...................................................................................... 68
c. Grant Permits and Special Permits .......................................................................... 68
3. Make Orders or Decisions .............................................................................................. 68
4. Time Limits for Filing Appeals ...................................................................................... 68
B. PLANNING BOARD ........................................................................................................ 68
C. BOARD OF SELECTMEN ………………………………………………………………68
SECTION X. SPECIAL PERMITS ....................................................................................... 69
A. SPECIAL PERMIT FOR USES ........................................................................................... 69
1. Findings of Proposed Uses ............................................................................................. 69
2. Site Plan Approval ......................................................................................................... 69
B. SPECIAL PERMITS IN GENERAL ................................................................................... 69
1. Security and Certification of Work ................................................................................ 69
2. Unanimous Vote Required for Special Permit ............................................................... 69
3. Time Limit of Special Permit ......................................................................................... 69
4. Procedure for Application ............................................................................................. 69
5. Work Must Be in Conformity with Approval ................................................................ 70
6. Effective Date of Special Permit .................................................................................... 70
SECTION XI. SITE PLAN APPROVAL ............................................................................... 71
A. AS A PREREQUISITE ........................................................................................................ 71
B. PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................ 71
C. REVIEW FEES .................................................................................................................... 71
D. SITE PLAN APPROVAL APPLICATIONS ....................................................................... 71
E. REVIEW OF SITE PLAN – REASONS FOR DISAPPROVAL ........................................ 72
F. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA ......................................................................................... 72
G. WAIVER ………………………………………………………………………… ............ 73
H. ENFORCEMENT………………………………………………………………………….73
I. REVISIONS AND AMENDMENTS………………………………………………….......73
1. Site Plans Under Review……………………………………………………………….73
2. Site Plans Already Approved……………………………………………………….…..73
J. PLANNING BOARD RULES & REGULATIONS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL……..74
K. LIMITED SITE PLAN APPROVAL EXCEPTION.....…………………………………….74
SECTION XII. ENFORCEMENT………………………………………………………….....76
A. INSPECTOR OF BUILDING……………………………………………………………....76
B. RIGHT TO APPEAL……………………………………………………………………….76
C. FINE FOR VIOLATION OF ZONING BY-LAW…………………………………....……76
D. OTHER CIVIL ACTION…………………………………………………………………...76
CHRONOLOG…………………………………………………………………………………..77
TABLE OF CONTENTS
(Full)
ix
1
ARTICLE VIII OF THE BY-LAWS
ZONING BY-LAW
SECTION I. PURPOSES AND VALIDITY
A. PURPOSES
The purposes of this Zoning By-law are to promote the health, safety, convenience, morals and
welfare of the inhabitants of the Town and to accomplish all other lawful objectives of zoning,
including, but not limited to, the purposes and objectives set forth in Section 2A of Chapter 808
of the Acts of 1975.
B. VALIDITY
The provisions of this Zoning By-Law are severable and if provisions, or the application of such
provision to any property, person or circumstances, shall be determined by judicial process to be
invalid, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other provision or the
application of any provision to any other property, person or circumstances.
If in a Single Family Residence District any such regulation shall be held, by judicial process to
be invalid with respect to any property, that property thereafter shall be subject to the comparable
regulation applicable in the class of single family residence district next following in the
alphabetical designation found in Section IV, Subsection a "District Designations".
(end of Section I)
2
SECTION II. DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Zoning By-Law, certain terms and words are defined as follows. Terms
or words not defined in this Section or elsewhere in this By-Law, but defined in the latest edition
of the State Building Code (780 CMR), or in the Massachusetts General Laws, shall have the
meaning given therein.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT
An apartment located in a Single Family Dwelling or a detached Accessory Building in
compliance with a Special Permit issued under Section VI.G of this By-law.
ACCESSORY BUILDING
A detached Building devoted exclusively to an Accessory Use.
ACCESSORY USE
A use of land which is customarily incidental and subordinate to, and located on the same
Lot as, the Principal Use it serves.
AQUIFER
A geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel that contains significant amounts
of potentially recoverable potable water.
ATTIC
That portion of a pitched roof building located under the roof construction between the ridge
line and the ceiling level of the uppermost story.
AVERAGE GRADE
The average of the elevations of the Natural Grades around the perimeter of a proposed
building, as determined by the formula:
?s[(e1 + e2 ) /2 x L]
P
where S is a segment of the building perimeter, e1 and e2 are the Natural Grades at the respective
ends of the segment; L is the corresponding length of the segment; and P is the length of the total
building perimeter. In the case of a rectangular building, Average Natural Grade may be
determined by taking the average of the Natural Grades of the four extreme corners of the
building.
BASE FLOOD
Base Flood shall mean the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
Base Flood Elevation shall mean the flood elevations shown on the FIRM.
3
BASEMENT
That portion of a building which is partly or completely below Finish Grade (See “Story
Above Grade”).
BUILDING
Any Structure having a Roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter of
persons, animals, or property of any nature. The word “Building” shall be construed where the
context requires as though followed by the words “or part of parts, thereof”.
BUILDING COVERAGE
The area covered by the foundation of a building together with any overhang of any part of
the building extending beyond the foundation.
CHILD CARE FACILITY
A Day Care Center or a School Age Child Care Program, but not including: (a) any
program operated by a public school system; any part of a private organized educational
system, unless the services of such system are primarily limited to either a school age day care
program, or kindergarten, nursery or related preschool services; (b) a Sunday school or classes
for religious instruction conducted by a religious organization; (c) a facility operated by a
religious organization where the children are cared for during short periods of time while
persons responsible for such children are attending religious services; (d) a Family Day Care
Home; (e) an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives; or (f) the
occasional care of children with or without compensation therefor.
CO-LOCATION
The use of a building or structure already occupied by a Personal Wireless Service Facility
by the Personal Wireless Service Facility(ies) of additional Personal Wireless Service(s).
DAY CARE CENTER
A Child Care Facility, whether known as a day nursery, nursery school, kindergarten, child
play school, progressive school, child development center, or pre-school, or any other name,
which receives children not of common parentage, under seven years of age or, if such children
have special needs, under sixteen years of age, for nonresidential custody and care during part
or all of the day separate from their parents.
DESTRUCTION/DEMOLITION
Removal without replacement of the enclosing components of a building’s exterior
envelope, including doors, windows, cladding, sheathing, and other similar elements; or the
alteration of all or a portion of a building’s exterior envelope such that existing walls, roof, or
floor cease to be part of the building’s exterior envelope. For the purpose of this By-law, the
frame supporting enclosing components need not be removed for the construction to be
considered demolition or destruction. For purposes of this definition, envelopment shall mean
the total incorporation of all or part of the building envelope. This definition shall take effect
on January 1, 2014.
4
DISPOSAL
The deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, incineration or placing of any hazardous
material into or on any land or water so that such hazardous material or any constituent thereof
may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water, including
groundwater.
DORMITORY
A Building or portion thereof used as living quarters for a group of five or more unrelated
persons, as accessory to an exempt religious or educational use located on the same Lot.
DWELLING
A permanent Building used or intended to be used exclusively for human habitation and
containing one or more Dwelling Units. Dwelling shall not include a trailer or mobile home,
however mounted, or a Dormitory, Long Term Care Facility, or other congregate living
facility.
DWELLING UNIT
A permanent Building, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used as the residence of a
single Family.
EATING PLACE
A commercial establishment in which the primary business conducted is the sale and
service of prepared food, refreshments, and/or beverages for consumption at tables or counters
on the Premises. The term Eating Place does not include a Fast Food Establishment.
EARTH
Shall include soil, loam, sand, gravel, clay, rock or other natural minerals and peat.
FAMILY
One or more persons, including domestic employees, occupying a Dwelling Unit as a single
non-profit housekeeping unit, provided that a group of five or more persons who are not
related to each other by blood or civil law, shall not be deemed to constitute a Family.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME
Any private residence which, on a regular basis, receives for temporary custody and care
during part or all of the day, children under seven years of age or children under sixteen years
of age is such children have special needs, provided that the total number of children in the
family day care home shall not exceed six, including participating children living in the
residence. The term Family Day Care Home shall not include: a private residence used for an
informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of
children with or without compensation therefor.
5
FARM, FARMING
“Farming” or “agriculture” shall include farming in all of its branches and the cultivation and
tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any
agricultural, aquacultural, floricultural or horticultural commodities, the growing and harvesting
of forest products upon forest land, the raising of livestock including horses, the keeping of
horses as a commercial enterprise, the keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle and other
domesticated animals used for food purposes, bees, fur-bearing animals, and any forestry or
lumbering operations, performed by a farmer, who is hereby defined as one engaged in
agriculture or farming as herein defined, or on a farm as an incident to or in conjunction with
such farming operations, including preparations for market, delivery to storage or to market or to
carriers for transportation to market.
FAST FOOD ESTABLISHMENT
A commercial establishment in which the primary business conducted is the sale of prepared
food, refreshments and/or beverages in disposable containers for consumption either off the
Premises or in vehicles on the premises.
FLOODWAY DATA
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated,
the best available Federal, State, local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
FRONTAGE/FRONTING
The line measured continuously along the street sideline from the point where one sideline of
the lot intersects the street sideline to the point where the second sideline of the lot intersects the
street sideline. Where the continuous street sideline is broken by a backup area, the frontage line
shall be measured across the mouth of the backup area and not around its perimeter.
GARAGES (in Multiple Dwelling Districts)
Roofed structures or carports rented to or used by residents of a multiple dwelling unit. Such
structures may be attached to or separate from the multiple dwelling buildings.
GRADE
For purposes of dimensional determinations, and based upon North American Vertical Datum of
1988 (NAVD 88).
NATURAL GRADE shall be the natural grade of the land at any point along the
perimeter of a proposed building prior to disturbance for construction. The elevation of the
natural grade prior to disturbance for construction shall be certified by a registered land
surveyor, or may be such elevation as may be determined from maps or records satisfactory
to the town.
FINISH GRADE shall be the final grade of the land at any point along the perimeter of a
building at the completion of construction. The elevation of the finish grade shall be
determined by a site plan satisfactory to the Town showing proposed contours at completion
of construction.
6
GRADE PLANE
A horizontal reference plane passing through the elevation of the Average Natural Grade of a
proposed building from which building height is determined.
GROUNDWATER
All water found beneath the surface of the ground. In this Zoning By-Law the term refers to
the slowly moving subsurface water present in aquifers and recharge areas.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Any substance or combination of substances, that, because of quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to
water supplies or to human health if disposed of into or on any land or water. Any substance
deemed a "hazardous waste" in Mass. Gen. Laws. ch. 21C shall also be deemed a hazardous
material for purposes of this Zoning By-Law.
HEIGHT
The vertical distance from the Grade Plane to the highest point of a building.
IMPERVIOUS
Impenetrable by water.
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY
An establishment for the recuperation, rehabilitation, or care of elderly, invalid, or
convalescent persons. The term does not include a hospital or diagnostic medical center.
LOT
The whole area of continuous land under one Ownership, whether there be one or more than
one owner and whatever the form of tenure.
MOVE OR MOVEMENT
To dig, excavate, remove, deposit, fill, grade, replace, level, or otherwise alter or change the
location of earth or contour of land.
MUNICIPAL PURPOSE USE
The use of land or Structures by the Town of Weston for municipal services and facilities of
any kind, including but not limited to schools, libraries, playgrounds, parks, wastewater
treatment, solid waste transfer, communications, and offices.
MULTIPLE DWELLING
A Building containing two or more Dwelling Units, such as an apartment house, town houses
or row houses, but not including a Single Family Dwelling with an Accessory Apartment.
NON-COMMERCIAL CLUB
The use of a site for provision of meeting, recreational, or social facilities by a private
nonprofit association, primarily for use by members and guests and not connected with or
engaged in commercial enterprises.
7
NON-CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE
A building, structure or portion thereof which does not conform to the height and location
regulations for the district in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING LOT
A lot which does not conform to the area, frontage, and/or dimensional regulations for the
district in which it is located.
NON-CONFORMING USE
A use of a building, structure, or land which does not conform to the use regulations of the
district in which it is located.
PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY
The Zoning Board of Appeals.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES
Shall have the same meaning as in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, 47 USC
§332(c)(7)(C), including, but not limited to, commercial mobile services, including but not
limited to, cellular services, personal communications services, advanced wireless services, and
broadband wireless services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY
Any and all materials, equipment, cabling, storage structures, monopoles, towers, satellite
dishes and/or antennas intended for transmitting or receiving Personal Wireless Services.
PREMISES
A lot, together with any structures and appurtences thereon.
PRINCIPAL USE
A primary or main use of a lot.
PROFESSIONAL
Person formally certified by a professional body or belonging to a specific profession by
virtue of having completed a required course of studies and/or practice.
RECHARGE AREAS
Areas from which precipitation or surface water can migrate into an aquifer.
REPLACEMENT SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING
The supplanting of all or a portion of a demolished or substantially demolished single-family
dwelling with a substitute single- family dwelling in the same or in a different location on the lot,
or the relocation on the lot of an existing single family dwelling.
RESIDENTIAL GROSS FLOOR AREA (“RGFA”)
The sum of the horizontal area(s) of the above-grade floors in the residential building(s) on a
lot, excluding unfinished attics but including attached or detached garages. The RGFA shall be
measured from the exterior face of the exterior walls.
8
ROOF
The outside top covering of a building with its supporting members, not including vertical
supports. For purposes of dimensional determinations, roof slopes shall be established as
follows:
Pitched Roof: A roof plane with a slope greater than 3:12 [Three (3) inches of vertical rise
for every twelve (12) inches of horizontal run].
Flat Roof: A roof plane with a slope equal to or less than 3:12 [Three (3) inches of vertical
rise for every twelve (12) inches of horizontal run].
A building shall be construed to be covered with a pitched roof when 30% or more of the area
within the total building perimeter is covered with roofs of slopes greater than 3:12.
SCENIC ROAD
Those early Town Roads and / or core transportation routes which the Planning Board has
identified as best representing the historic, rural and otherwise scenic character of the Town.
These roads are: Ash Street, Boston Post Road and Boston Post Road By-Pass (Route 20),
Brown Street, Chestnut Street, Church Street, Conant Road, Concord Road, Crescent Street,
Fiske Lane, Glen Road, Highland Street, Hilltop Road, Kingsbury Lane, Lexington Street,
Lincoln Street, Loring Road, Love Lane, Maple Road, Merriam Street, Newton Street, North
Avenue (Route 117), Oak Street, Pigeon Hill Road, Pine Street, Ridgeway Road, Ripley Lane,
School Street, Silver Hill Road, South Avenue (Route 30), Sudbury Road, Summer Street
including By-Pass, Viles Street, Ware Street, Webster Road, Wellesley Street, Winter Street.
SCHOOL AGE CHILD CARE PROGRAM
A Child Care Facility providing supervised group care, on a regular basis before or after
school and/or during school vacation and holidays, for children not of common parentage who
are enrolled in kindergarten and are of sufficient age to enter first grade the following year,
and/or older children of common parentage not more than fourteen years of age (or sixteen
years of age if such child has special needs). Such facility must include a planned daily
program of activities attended by children for specifically identified blocks of time during the
week, usually over a period of weeks or months.
SETBACK
The shortest distance from the street side line, street center line, or lot line, as the case may
be, to any part of the foundation of a building or structure.
SIGN
Any advertising symbol or device used or intended to advertise or promote the interests of
any entity when the same is placed out of doors or is visible from the exterior by reason of being
placed in or on a window or outside door.
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLING
A Dwelling used or intended to be used principally as the residence of a single Family, with
or without an Accessory Apartment authorized under Section VI.G of this Zoning By-law.
When the context indicates, the term Single Family Dwelling shall also refer to the Principal
Use of the lot for such purpose.
9
SOLID WASTES
Useless, unwanted or discarded solid materials, with insufficient liquid content to be free
flowing, including for example, rubbish, garbage, scrap materials, junk, refuse, inert fill material
and landscape refuse.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY (SPGA)
The Board of Selectmen, the Zoning Board of Appeals, or the Planning Board, as may be
designated in Zoning By-law for the issuance of a particular special permit.
STORY
That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface
of a floor or roof next above.
STORY ABOVE GRADE
Any Story having its finished floor surface entirely above finish grade, except that a
Basement shall be considered as a story above grade where the finished surface of the floor
above the Basement is:
a) More than six (6) feet above average finish grade e;
b) More than six (6) feet above Grade for more than 50% of the total building perimeter; or
c) More than twelve (12) feet above Grade at any point.
STREET
In connection with frontage regulations, a street is any constructed and paved public or
private way shown on the official map of the Town.
STREET SIDE LINE
The legal boundary between the street right of way and the abutting lot(s).
STRUCTURE
Anything constructed, assembled, erected or maintained at a fixed location above or below
ground, including, but not limited to, the following examples: antenna, bridge, building,
gazebo, mechanical equipment, pergola, platform or deck, satellite dish, shed, swimming pool,
and an apron of five (5) feet measured from water’s edge, tennis or similar court, tower, trailer
without wheels, trellis, tunnel. The word “structure” shall be construed as if followed by the
words “or part thereof, ” but shall not include underground utilities, septic systems,
underground storm water drainage systems, driveways, or landscape features such as birdbaths,
fountains, patios, flagpoles, lamp posts, planting boxes and swing sets.
A fence shall be considered a structure only if it is more than six (6) feet high, as measured
from existing natural grade.
A wall, other than a retaining wall, shall be considered a structure if it is constructed of any
masonry material including concrete and is thirty-six (36) inches or more above existing
natural grade.
A retaining wall constructed of any material (including rip-rap) shall be considered a structure
if it is thirty–six (36) inches or more above existing natural grade.
For purposes of determining the height of stepped walls or retaining walls, the thirty-six (36)
inch height shall be measured in the aggregate, vertically from existing natural grade to the
highest point of the wall.
10
SUBSTANTIALLY DEMOLISHED
Destruction of more than 50% of the exterior walls of a Building or the destruction of more
than 75% of the Roof of a Building.
SUBSTANTIAL IRREGULARITY
A lot having a coefficient lower than 0.4 is considered to be substantially irregular, as
determined by the formula r = 16A/p2 (where r = the coefficient of regularity; A = area; and p =
perimeter).
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Any and all materials, equipment, storage structures, monopoles, towers, satellite dishes
and/or antennae intended for transmitting or receiving telecommunications services including,
but not limited to radio, television and cellular telephone services, except as may be incidental to
a residential use.
ZONE II
Zone II is defined as that area of an aquifer which contributes water to a well under the most
severe recharge and pumping conditions that can be realistically anticipated. It is bounded by the
groundwater divides which result from pumping the well and by the contact of the edge of the
aquifer with less permeable materials such as till and bed rock.
(end of Section II)
11
SECTION III. PRE-EXISTING NONCONFORMING
BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES
A. GENERAL
Subject to the provisions of the zoning statutes respecting issuance of Building Permits and
construction work, this Zoning By-Law shall not apply to existing buildings or structures,
nor to the existing use of any building or structure, nor of land to the extent to which it is
used at the time of adoption of this Zoning By-Law, provided that any change of use
thereof, any alteration of a building or structure when the same would amount to extension
thereof and any alteration of a building or structure to provide for its use for a purpose or in
a manner substantially different from the use to which it was put before alteration, or for its
use for the same purpose to a substantially greater extent shall be subject upon application
to the finding of the Zoning Board of Appeals as the Special Permit Granting Authority
that such change, extension or alteration will not be substantially more detrimental to the
neighborhood than the existing nonconforming use or structure.
B. DISCONTINUED USE
A nonconforming use of any building, structure, or land protected by Subsection III,A.
above, if discontinued for a period of two years or more, shall not be resumed.
C. RECONSTRUCTION
A nonconforming building or structure protected by Subsection A above, if substantially
destroyed by fire or other casualty, may be rebuilt within one year, provided that in
rebuilding it shall be made to conform to this Zoning By-Law so far as practicable.
(end of Section III)
12
SECTION IV. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES
A. DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS
For the purpose of this Zoning By-Law the Town is hereby divided into the following
classes of districts to be known as:
1. Single Family Residence Districts (A)
2. Single Family Residence Districts (B)
3. Single Family Residence Districts (C)
4. Single Family Residence Districts (D)
5. Multiple Dwelling Districts (A)
6. Multiple Dwelling Districts (B)
7. Business Districts (A)
8. Business Districts (B)
9. Office & Research and Development Districts
10. Commercial Districts
11. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District (A)
12. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District (B)
13. Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts
14. Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts
B. DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
1. Zoning Map.
The location and boundaries of all districts except the Wetlands and Flood Plain
Protection Districts, as amended, and the Aquifer Protection Overlay District are shown
on a map on file in the office of the Town Clerk entitled "Zoning Map Town of Weston,
Massachusetts, November, 2007. The location and boundaries of all Wetlands and Flood
Plain Protection Districts are shown, as amended, on a map on file in the office of the
Town Clerk entitled "Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District, Weston, Mass.-
1980". The location and boundaries of all Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts are shown
on a map on file in the office of the Town Clerk entitled "Aquifer Protection Overlay
District, Town of Weston, 1988" all of which, together with all explanatory matter,
boundary lines and designations, are hereby made a part of this Zoning By-Law.
2. General Locations of District Boundaries.
Where the boundary lines are shown upon the map within the lines of public or private
ways, the center lines of the ways shall be the boundary lines.
Boundary lines located outside the lines of ways and shown approximately parallel
thereto shall be regarded as parallel thereto, and dimensions shown in figures placed upon
the map between the boundary lines and the lines of ways are the distance in feet of the
boundary lines from the lines of ways, such distances being measured at right angles to
the lines of ways unless otherwise indicated.
In all cases which are not covered by other provisions of this Subsection, the location of
boundary lines shall be determined by the distance in feet, if given, from other lines or
points on the map, by the use of identification as shown on the map, or by the scale of the
map.
13
3. Lots Divided By Zoning Districts.
Where boundary lines of a district, other than the boundary line of the Wetlands and
Flood Plain Protection District and Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts divide a lot, the
dwelling on such a lot shall conform to the area, frontage, setbacks and lot width
requirements of the district where the dwelling is located; and where the dwelling itself
straddles a district line, as above defined; the entire lot shall conform to the area,
frontage, setbacks and lot width requirements of the strictest applicable district.
4. Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts.
For the purposes of this Zoning By-Law there is hereby established within the Town of
Weston an overlay district consisting of certain aquifer protection areas, including aquifer
recharge areas calculated in accordance with Department of Environmental Quality
Engineering's guidelines for Zone II, which are delineated on a map entitled "Aquifer
Protection Overlay District, Town of Weston, 1988," drawn to a scale of 1"=800', and
which shall be considered as superimposed over other districts established by the Zoning
By-Laws of Weston.
5. Wetlands And Flood Plain Protection Districts.
a. Wetland and Flood Plain Protection - District A - The locations and boundaries of the
Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection Districts A are shown on a map entitled
"Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection Districts, Weston, Mass. - 1980" as designated
in blue on said map. Said District A shall include those areas identified in blue on
said Map including those areas specifically described as follows:
(i) All land bordering any natural waterbody that lies within a horizontal distance
of twenty-five (25) feet from the mean high water line except as otherwise
shown in blue on the Weston Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District Map.
The mean high water line at a water body is defined as the elevation where
vegetation changes from predominantly aquatic to predominantly terrestrial and
along a brook, river or stream the elevation on the bank of a channel at which
the annual high water has left a definite mark.
(ii) All waterbodies encircled by boundary lines of the District A in blue.
(iii) All that land along the following named brooks and their tributaries: Stony
Brook, Cherry Brook, Hobbs Brook, Hayward Brook, Bogle Brook and Seaverns
Brook and certain unnamed brooks that lie within a horizontal distance of twentyfive
(25) feet from the mean high water line along each bank thereof except as
otherwise shown on the Weston Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District
Map in blue.
(iv) All those wetlands which may be described as upland swamps or marshes which
lie at the source of the brooks or their tributaries or which lie in surface
depressions without drainage outlets, as shown on the Weston Wetlands and
Flood Plain Protection District Map in blue.
14
b. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection - District B - The location and boundaries of
the Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District B shall include all special flood hazard areas
within the Town of Weston that are designated as Zone A and AE as shown on the Middlesex
County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program effective June
4, 2010 The map panels of the Middlesex County FIRM, that are wholly or partially within the
Town of Weston, are map panel numbers 25017C0389E, 25017C0393E, 25017C0394E,
25017C0527E, 25017C0529E, 25017C0531E, 25017C0532E, 25017C0533E and
25017C0534E, all dated and effective June 4, 2010. The exact boundaries of the District B
shall be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations as shown on the FIRM and as further
defined by the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report effective June 4, 2010.
The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town
Clerk.
6. Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts.
There shall be two Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts. Personal Wireless
Service Overlay District I ("PWSOD I") shall consist of the land designated on the
Weston Assessors Maps as:
? Map # 53: Massachusetts Turnpike Authority land "ballfield," located east of Liberty
Mutual Insurance Company, Riverside Road;
? Maps # 49 & 55: 668 South Avenue, Massachusetts State Police Barracks.
? Map # 27, Parcel # 75-10: Town of Weston Police Station and
? A portion of Map # 27, Parcel #74, described as follows:
All that certain Parcel of land located on the southerly side of Boston Post Road
By-Pass (Route 20) and described as follows:
SOUTHEASTERLY by land of Town of Weston (Weston Police
Station) three hundred seventy-two and 61/100 (372.61) feet;
SOUTHERLY by land of Town of Weston (Weston Highway
Department) fifty and 00/100 (50.00) feet;
NORTHWESTERLY by land of the Town of Weston (Weston
Highway Department) three hundred thirty-three (333) feet
approximately;
NORTHERLY by land of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
(Boston Post Road By-Pass, Route 20) sixty-five (65) feet
approximately; containing 0.4 acres, more or less.
Town of Weston Highway Department
? Map # 8, Parcel # 34: Weston Market, 284 North Avenue;
? Map # 59 , Parcels # 23-20 (P/O 58): Leo J Martin Golf Course, Park Road;
? Map # 58, Parcel # 23-20: Leo J Martin Golf Course, Park Road;
? Map # 33, Parcels # 16 and 28-10: Weston Golf Club;
? Map # 34, Parcel # 16 (P/O 33): Weston Golf Club;
? Map # 46, Parcel # 4: Pine Brook Country Club;
? Map # 45, Parcel # 4 (P/O 46): Pine Brook Country Club;
15
? Map # 11: Campion Residence and Renewal Center Parking Lot, across Concord
Road from Campion Center, Concord Road;
? Map # 19, Parcel # 35 (P/O 23):Town of Weston Solid Waste Transfer Station;
? Map # 18, Parcel # 35 (P/O 23): Town of Weston Solid Waste Transfer Station;
Map # 23, Parcel # 35: Town of Weston Solid Waste Transfer Station;
? Map # 24, Parcel # 6: Weston Mobil Gas Station, 88 Boston Post Road.
Personal Wireless Service Overlay District II ("PWSOD II") shall consist of the land
designated on the Weston Assessors Maps as:
? Map # 52, Parcel # 1: 134 South Avenue;
? Map # 41, Parcels # 38 & 39: 75 Norumbega Road, 85 Norumbega Road, 99
Norumbega Road, 101 Norumbega Road;
? Map # 49, Parcel # 33: 100 Brown Street, Hazel Hotchkiss Wightman Tennis Center,
Inc.
? Map # 8, Parcel # 35: Shell Gas Station, 290 North Avenue;
? Map # 11, Parcel # 8: Campion Residence and Renewal Center, 319 Concord Road;
? Map # 51, Parcel # 52: Town of Weston Southside Fire Station, South Avenue;
? Map # 24, Parcel # 1: Weston Corporate Center, Biogen Idec, 133 Boston Post
Road;
? Map # 13, Parcel # 93: Town of Weston Water Tank, Cat Rock Tank;
? Map # 41, Parcel # 24: Office Building, 101 River Road;
? High Voltage Transmission Poles and Stanchions in the abandoned Boston &
Maine (Clinton Division) Railroad Right of Way;
? Map # 13, Parcel # 129: Town of Weston North Side Fire Station, North Avenue;
? Map # 13, Parcel # 103: Sunrise of Weston, 135 North Avenue;
? Map # 8, Parcel # 54-10: Dairy Joy Restaurant, 331 North Avenue;
? Map # 38, Parcel # 1: Regis College, 235 Wellesley Street.
7. Renewable Energy Overlay District
For the purpose of this Zoning By-law there is hereby established within the Town of Weston
a Renewable Energy Overlay District, which is delineated on a map entitled “Renewable
Energy Overlay District Town of Weston, 2011,” which shall be considered superimposed
over other districts established by the Zoning By-Laws of Weston and shall consist of the
following parcels, identified on the Weston Assessors Maps as:
Map # 23, Parcel # 035
Map # 24, Parcel #001
Map # 18, Parcel #28-10
(end of Section IV)
16
SECTION V. USE REGULATIONS
A. GENERAL
1. Except as may be permitted with respect to lawfully nonconforming uses, buildings and
structures regulated under the provisions of Section III of this Zoning By-law, no building,
structure or land may be used, and no building or structure maybe erected or altered for any
use, not expressly allowed in the district in which the building, structure or land is located.
A building, structure or use not expressly allowed by this Zoning By-law is prohibited.
2. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Zoning By-law, any building or structure,
and any use of any building or structure or premises, which is injurious, obnoxious,
offensive, dangerous, or a nuisance to the community or to the neighborhood through
noise, vibration, concussion, odors, fumes, smoke, gases, dust, harmful fluids or
substances, danger of fire or explosion, or other objectionable feature detrimental to the
community or neighborhood health, safety, convenience, morals or welfare, is prohibited.
3. Uses Allowed in All Districts
a. Buildings, structures and land in any zoning district may be used for Municipal
Purpose Use, or for any public purpose use conducted by the Federal
Government or the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any of their respective
agencies.
b. Commercial Agriculture in accordance with G.L. c.40A, §3.
c. Subject to Limited Site Plan Approval, buildings, structures and land in any
zoning district may be used for the following:
i. Religious purposes, in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §3;
ii. Educational purposes on land owned or leased by the commonwealth or any
of its agencies, subdivisions, or bodies politic or by a religious sect or
denomination, or by a nonprofit educational corporation, in accordance with
G.L. c. 40A, §3; and
iii. Child Care Facility, in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §3;
provided that:
? off-street parking is provided in accordance with Section VIII.A
“Regulations for off-Street parking” and
? height, setbacks and lot area are maintained in accordance with the
requirements for the District in which the land, buildings, or structures are
located.
d. Upon issuance of a special permit, activities necessary in connection with
scientific research or scientific development or related production, which are
accessory to activities permitted in the district as a matter of right, provided the
Special permit Granting Authority finds that the proposed accessory use does
not substantially derogate from the public good.
17
4. All other uses of buildings, structures and land shall be subject to the requirements and
limitations set forth in this Zoning By-law for the zoning district(s) in which the
particular building, structure or land is located, including, Accessory Uses in connection
with lawful Principal Uses. Accessory Uses are subject to the same special permit
and/or site plan approval requirements as the principal use(s) served.
B. SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS (A, B, C and D)
1. By-Right Uses
a. Unless located on a lot which bounds on a Scenic Road as defined in Section II, single
family detached dwelling containing one housekeeping unit only, together with
accessory buildings not containing a housekeeping unit. The number of such
dwellings with such accessory buildings on any one lot shall not exceed the number
which can be located thereon in conformity to Section VI, Subsection F.2., "Numbers
and Location of Dwellings on One Lot";
The Residential Gross Floor Area “RGFA” of any new or replacement single family
dwelling use constructed pursuant to a building permit issued on or after October 29,
1998, may not exceed the greater of 3,500 s.f. or 10% of the lot area up to a maximum
of 6,000 s.f.
b. Preservation of a lot in its natural condition; fields, pastures, woodlots, and orchards;
greenhouses for private use; farm; sale or offering for sale of farm produce by owner
or resident tenant providing a substantial portion is raised on the premises;
c. Wildlife and plant management by nonprofit organization;
d. The renting of rooms or the furnishing of table board to not more than four persons
not members of the family residing on the premises;
e. Any occupation or occupations conducted by a person residing in the dwelling,
provided:
(i) That the occupation or occupations are conducted totally within the dwelling
and not in an accessory structure;
(ii) That the occupant shall maintain at least fifty percent interest in the occupation
or occupations so conducted;
(iii) That there shall be no use of any accessory structure other than for parking one
vehicle used for the occupation or occupations;
(iv) That regardless of the number of occupations conducted in the dwelling, no
more than one vehicle related to the occupation or occupations shall be regularly
on the premises whether or not garaged;
(v) That vehicle shall be rated to carry no more than two tons:
(vi) That there is no visible exterior storage of material or equipment and no exterior
indication from the boundaries of the premises of such use or variation from the
residential character of the area;
18
(vii) That not more than three persons regularly engaged in the occupation or
occupations, whether full or part-time, in addition to the occupant shall work at
the premises at one time;
(viii) that traffic generated by such occupation is not inconsistent with traffic usually
associated with a single family residence and there is adequate parking on the lot
screened from abutting properties;
(ix) that it does not create a hazard to health, safety, or welfare;
(x) That there is no evidence of the occupation or occupations through persistent or
excessive sound, vibration, dust, heat, glare, odor, or light discernible at the
boundaries of the premises or through interference with radio or television
reception or other communications equipment.
(xi) That, where required, there is compliance with Section V, Subsection B.5.
f. Driveways with up to two curb cuts serving a single family dwelling provided:
(i) the driveway complies with Weston General By-Law Article XXVII entitled
“Storm Wter and Erosion Control By-law” and provided there is no surface funoff of
wter from the driveway onto the public or private ways upon which the driveway
abuts or onto ther abutting properites; and
(ii) there is safe vehicular and pedestrian movement onto and from adjacent ways.
2. By-Right Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval
a. Privately owned and operated park or playground;
b. New or replacement single family dwelling, together with accessory buildings not
containing a housekeeping unit, in conformity with Section VI.F.2., which is constructed
pursuant to a building permit issued on or after October 29, 1998, and which is located on
a lot bounding on a Scenic Road as defined in Section II.
c. New or replacement single-family dwelling, together with accessory buildings not
containing a housekeeping unit, in conformity with Section VI, subsection F.2, which is
constructed pursuant to a building permit issued on or after October 29,1998 and which
exceeds the RGFA limit provided in Section V.B.1.a.
3. Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval and By Special Permit
a. Private cemetery;
b. Noncommercial club;
c. Family day care;
d. Day camp;
e. Philanthropic or charitable institution, but not a correctional institution or place of
detention;
f. Accessory use by not more than one business entity of a railroad station existing as of
May 1, 1979, provided that no more than four persons are regularly engaged in the
activity, and that any Special Permit granted hereunder is conditioned on the
establishment and maintenance of a clean, safe, heated and lighted waiting room
within the station, a lighted platform, and a lighted and adequate parking area adjacent
to the station for the convenience of passengers of the railroad or other connecting
19
modes of transportation; the conditions relating to the waiting room, platform, and
parking area may be waived so long as the railroad station is not in active service.
g. Veterinarian/Animal Hospital, provided the premises was used by a veterinarian
and/or animal hospital as of May 1, 1998 and had been continuously so used for at
least the twenty-five years prior to May 1, 1998 and provided said premises abuts
Boston Post Road and/or the Boston Post Road Bypass.
4. Uses Allowed by Special Permit
a. Accessory Apartments (see Section VI.G.)
b. Division of land pursuant to the Flexible Development provisions of Section VI.H.
5. Uses Allowed By Permit
Storage for Commercial and Business Activities: In Single Family Residence Districts
the Permit Granting Authority may issue Permits for the storage of vehicles, materials,
supplies and equipment in connection with commercial or business activities principally
carried on in the Town and providing services essential to the uses of premises permitted
in the residence districts; and may in connection with a farm use, in a residence district,
permit the commercial raising, keeping, selling or other dealing with poultry or livestock.
6. Uses Allowed with Special Permit of the Board of Selectmen with Site Plan Approval
a. antique shop
b. shop or studio of an artist, potter, sculptor, silversmith, woodcarver, or similar
craftsman
c. office of a doctor, dentist, lawyer, accountant, architect, engineer, or similar
professional, provided that for the above uses, the following shall apply:
(i) all work and storage shall be conducted within the building and no more than
three full-time employees or their equivalents, shall be employed on the
premises;
(ii) the use is conducted within a building owned by the Town of Weston, which
building has a gross floor area equal to or less than 1500 s.f. and been
designated by the Weston Historical Commission as a building of historic
significance;
(iii) all proposed interior and exterior renovations of the building and the site have
been reviewed by the Historical Commission and the Historical Commission has
issued an advisory report that such renovations will not adversely affect the
historical integrity of the building and the site on which it is located;
(iv) the Board of Selectmen finds that the impacts on the neighborhood expected to
be generated by the proposed use are consistent with other uses permitted in
Single Family Residence Districts;
(v) the use may be subject to such further terms and conditions as shall be deemed
appropriate by the Board of Selectmen in order to preserve the integrity of the
historic building and to protect the surrounding neighborhood from detrimental
impacts.
20
C. MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICTS (A and B)
1. By-Right Uses
a. Single Family Residence containing one housekeeping unit only, conforming to
Single Family Residence District A requirements;
b. Preservation of a lot in its natural condition; fields, pastures, woodlots, and orchards;
greenhouses for private use; farm; sale or offering for sale of farm products by owner
or resident tenant providing substantial portion raised on the premises;
c. Wildlife and plant management by nonprofit organization;
2. By-Right Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval
a. Multiple dwellings numbering four units or fewer;
b. Privately owned and operated park or playground.
3. Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval and By Special Permit
a. Multiple dwellings numbering over four units;
b. Philanthropic or charitable institution, but not a correctional institution or place of
detention;
c. Long term care facility.
D. BUSINESS DISTRICTS (A and B)
1. By-Right Uses
a. Open space;
b. Privately owned and operated park or playground.
2. By-Right Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval
a. Office or office building with 1,000 square feet or less gross floor area;
b. Bank with 1,000 square feet or less gross floor area;
c. Store, salesroom or showroom for the conduct of retail business with 1,000 square
feet or less gross floor area;
3. Uses Allowed with Site Plan Approval and By Special Permit
a. Office or office building with over 1,000 square feet gross floor area;
b. Bank with over 1,000 square feet gross floor area;
c. Store, salesroom or showroom for the conduct of retail business with over 1,000
square feet gross floor area;
d. Eating place;
e. Ambulatory medical office;
f. Noncommercial club;
g. Personal service establishment;
h. Filling station or garage for servicing or repairing of motor vehicles;
i. Commercial greenhouse or nursery;
j. Veterinarian, animal hospital;
21
k. Exceptional uses: in special circumstances the Special Permit Granting Authority by
Special Permit for each instance may allow use thereof for any other business purpose
which the Special Permit Granting Authority determines to be consonant with a
Business District of the foregoing character.
E. OFFICE AND RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
1. By-Right Uses
a. Open space;
b. Public park and playground;
c. Wildlife and plant management by nonprofit organization.
2. By-Right Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval
a. Office or office buildings of 5,000 square feet or less gross floor area;
b. Professional and management training facility of 5,000 square feet or less gross floor
area
c. Personal service facility, such as cafeterias and banks, for the occupants of a
development but not for the general public;
3. Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval and By Special Permit
a. Office or office building of greater than 5,000 square feet gross floor area;
b. Professional and management training facility of greater than 5,000 square feet gross
floor area;
c. Research and/or laboratory facility not involving manufacturing of products for sale in
the normal course of business, and not creating a hazard to health, safety, or welfare.
d. Private cemetery.
F. COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
1. By-Right Uses
a. Open space;
b. Privately owned and operated park or playground.
2 By-Right Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval
a. Any trade or business of less than 1,000 square feet gross floor area;
b. Office or office building of less than 1,000 square feet gross floor area;
c. Bank of less than 1,000 square feet gross floor area;
d. Store, salesroom, or showroom for the conduct of retail business of less than 1,000
square feet gross floor area;
3. Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval and By Special Permit
a. Any trade or business of over 1,000 square feet gross floor area;
b. Office or trade building with over 1,000 square feet gross floor area;
c. Bank with over 1,000 square feet gross floor area;
d. Store, salesroom or showroom for the conduct of retail business with over 1,000
square feet gross floor area;
22
e. Eating place;
f. Personal service establishment;
g. Filling station or garage for servicing or repairing of motor vehicles.
G. WETLANDS AND FLOOD PLAIN PROTECTION DISTRICTS (A AND B)
1. General
a. Construction in Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection Districts A and B - Any other
Zoning By-Law or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding, no construction
requiring any utility, including electric, water, gas and telephone lines, or waste
disposal or drainage facilities shall be permitted within the Districts A and B unless
the Planning Board acting as Special Permit Granting Authority following, as
applicable, the procedures established in Sections X and XI of the Zoning By-Law
shall determine that all utilities are located, protected and constructed so as to
minimize or eliminate flood damage and that methods of disposal for sewage, refuse
and other wastes and methods of providing drainage are adequate to reduce flood
hazards and prevent pollution.
b. Procedure where Base Flood Elevation is Not Provided -Within Wetlands and Flood
Plain Protection Districts A and B, where the base flood elevation is not provided, the
applicant for a Special Permit shall obtain any existing base flood elevation data and
it shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector for its reasonable utilization towards
meeting the elevation or flood proofing requirements, as appropriate, of this Zoning
By-Law and the State Building Code.
c. Base Flood Elevation Data shall be required for the review of all definitive
subdivision proposals or other development greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A zones.
2. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District A
a. Purposes - In addition to the purposes in Section I, "Purposes", of this Zoning By-
Law, the purposes of this District are:
(i) To provide that lands in the Town of Weston subject to seasonal or periodic
flooding as described hereinafter shall not be used for residence or other
purposes in such a manner as to endanger the health or safety of the occupants
thereof or the public generally or to burden the public with costs resulting from
the unwise individual choices of land use in wetlands such as streams and other
water courses, swamps, marshes, bogs, ponds, or areas subject to flooding.
(ii) To protect, preserve, and maintain the water table and water recharge areas
within the Town so as to preserve present and potential water supplies for the
public health and safety of the Town and the Boston metropolitan area.
(iii) To assure the continuation of the natural flow pattern of the water courses
within the Town and to preserve natural floodwater storage areas so as to protect
persons and property against the hazards of flood inundation.
b. Use Regulations - The Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District A shall be
considered as overlying other districts established by the Weston Zoning By-Law. All
uses and structures otherwise authorized by said Zoning By-Law in the portion of the
23
districts so overlaid shall be permitted in the Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection
District A provided that in the Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District A:
(i) No existing building or structure shall be moved into such district, and no new
building or structure shall be erected or constructed therein except as provided
in Section V, Subsection G.2.c. (vi) and V.G.2.f.;
(ii) No existing building or structure shall be moved, altered or enlarged so as to
increase its ground coverage by more than a total of twenty (20) percent;
(iii) No dumping or filling or relocation of earth materials shall be permitted except
as may be required for the uses permitted in Section V, Subsection G.2.c. (vii),
(viii) and (ix).
(iv) No storage of manure, road salt, fertilizer, or other leachable chemicals shall be
permitted.
c. Other Activities and Uses - The following activities and uses so far as otherwise
authorized by the Weston Zoning By-Law as from time to time amended shall be
permitted in the said District A subject specifically to Section V, Subsection G.2.b., as
applicable, provided that all necessary permits, orders or approvals required by
federal, state or local laws or regulations are obtained as may be required by such
laws or regulations;
(i) Uses directly related to the conservation of water, plants and wildlife.
(ii) Outdoor recreation activities and facilities, including unpaved play areas, nature
study, boating, fishing and hunting where otherwise legally permitted.
(iii) Wildlife management areas, landings, foot, bicycle and/or horse paths and
bridges, provided such uses do not affect the natural flow pattern of any water
course.
(iv) Grazing and farming, including truck gardening and harvesting of crops.
(v) Forestry and nurseries.
(vi) Small nonresidential structures of less than 100 square feet of floor area used in
connection with recreation or the growing, harvesting, storage or sale of crops
raised on the premises.
(vii) Creation of ponds with a total water surface area at normal elevation not in
excess of 40,000 square feet.
(viii) Removal of silt and other accumulated debris from a watercourse which tends to
interfere with the natural flow patterns of the watercourse.
(ix) Construction, reconstruction or alteration of golf course areas.
d. Lot Area Allowance
(i) If any portion of a lot in a Single Family Residence District is overlaid by the
Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District A, said portion may be used to
meet the area requirement for that district otherwise provided in the Zoning By-
Law provided that no building or structure may be erected on the portion
24
remaining outside the Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District A unless
that portion has a minimum area of 20,000 square feet.
(ii) However, a lot with a dwelling existing thereon at the time of the adoption of
this Zoning By-Law may be used for all purposes otherwise permitted by the
Weston Zoning By-Law except that if a dwelling lies within the Wetlands and
Flood Plain Protection District A, the dwelling shall be subject to the provisions
of Section V, Subsection G.2.b.(ii) hereof.
(iv) If any portion of a lot in a Multiple Dwelling District is overlaid by the Wetlands
and Flood Plain Protection District A, the proportion of the lot which may be used
to meet the area requirements of the Weston Zoning By-Law shall be determined
by the Board of Appeals acting in accordance with Sections X and XI of the
Weston Zoning By-Law.
e. Boundary Line Plot Plan - Whenever an application is made for a Building Permit
which the Inspector of Buildings believes may be affected by a Wetlands and Flood
Plain Protection District A boundary, the Inspector of Buildings shall require the
applicant for such Permit to provide as part of such application a plan, certified by a
land surveyor registered in Massachusetts, of the lot on which such building is
intended to be built showing the exact location in reference to said lot of the District
A boundary as shown on the Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District Map in
blue and as described in Section IV, Subsection B.5.a. In the case of a Building
Permit for an interior improvement to a building or structure so located, the boundary
line location shall not be required.
f. Determination of Flooding and Suitability - In the event it is proposed to use land
or to construct a building or structure within the Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection
District A otherwise than is specifically permitted by this Section V, Subsection G.2.,
application may be made to the Planning Board for a Special Permit for such use,
building or structure, in accordance with the applicable procedures under Sections X
and XI of the Zoning By-Law. Before rendering its decision, the Planning Board shall
refer any such special permit application to the Conservation Commission for a written
report and recommendation, including an evaluation of and opinion concerning the
sufficiency and accuracy of the environmental information accompanying the special
permit application, an evaluation of whether the subject land is subject to flooding and,
if so, an evaluation as to the proposed use or construction’s probable effect or impact
on: (a) flood storage in the surrounding area or on other nearby areas subject to
seasonal or periodic flooding, (b) the water table and water recharge areas affecting the
Town’s present and potential water supplies, and (c) the public health, safety and/or
welfare, as well as recommendations as to whether the special permit should be
granted and whether any restrictions should be imposed upon the proposed use or
construction as conditions of a special permit. Failure of the Conservation Commission
to submit its recommendations to the Planning Board within 35 days of the date of referral
shall be deemed to be a lack of opposition to the Special Permit application.
The Planning Board may grant a special permit under this Section only if it determines:
(i) That the subject land is not subject to flooding; or
25
(ii) That the subject land is not unsuitable because of drainage conditions; and
(iii) In either instance of (i.) or (ii.) above, the Special Permit Granting Authority
determines that the use of such land for such use or structure will not interfere
with the general purposes for which District A has been established; and that the
use of such land for such use or structure will not be detrimental to the public
health, safety and/or welfare.
Such use, building or structure if permitted, shall comply in all respects with all
other provisions of the underlying District or Districts within which the land is
located; and all necessary permits, orders or approvals required by federal, state
or local law or regulations as may be required by such law or regulation shall be
obtained.
3. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District B
a. Purposes - In addition to the "Purposes" in Section I of this Zoning By-Law, the
purpose of this district is to satisfy the requirements of The National Flood Insurance
Program by limiting the uses of the lands located in such district to the uses deemed
appropriate by such program.
b. Use Regulations - The Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District B shall be
considered as overlying other districts established by the Weston Zoning By-Law. All
uses and structures otherwise authorized by said Zoning By-Law in the portion of the
districts so overlaid shall be permitted in the Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection
District B, provided that in said District B:
(i) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures
within the District B shall have all utility and sanitary facilities designed so that
below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy as determined and certified by a registered professional engineer.
(ii) No encroachments within the District B or its designated regulatory floodway,
including fill, structures, of any type, new construction, substantial improvements
and other developments shall be permitted which would result in any increase in
flood levels in said District and downstream areas during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
All development in District B, including structural and non-structural activities, whether
permitted by right or by special permit shall be in compliance with the following:
? Chapter 131, Section 40 of the Massachusetts General Laws;
? Portions of the Massachusetts State Building Code which address floodplain and
coastal high hazard areas (currently 780 CMR 120.G, "Flood Resistant Construction
and Construction in Coastal Dunes");
? Wetlands Protection Regulations, Department of Environmental Protection (DEP)
(currently 310 CMR 10.00);
? Inland Wetlands Restriction, DEP (currently 310 CMR 13.00);
26
? Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewage, DEP
(currently 310 CMR 15, Title 5);
? FEMA Mitigation Directorate Technical Bulletin 10-01 “Ensuring that Structures Built
on Fill In or Near Special Flood Hazard Areas are Reasonably Safe From Flooding in
accordance with the National Flood Insurance Program.”
Any variances from the provisions and requirements of the above referenced state regulations
may only be granted in accordance with the required variance procedures of these state
regulations.
H. AQUIFER PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICTS
1. The purpose of the Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts is to preserve and protect the
quality and quantity of present and potential drinking water supplies, both public and
private, and their recharge areas.
2. The Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts shall be considered as overlying other districts
established by this Zoning By-law. Uses and structures otherwise permitted in the
underlying districts shall be subject to the development and use regulations applicable to
such districts only to the extent they are not inconsistent with the requirements of the
Aquifer Protection Overlay Districts.
3. Permitted Uses: Within the Aquifer Protection Overlay District, no land shall be used
except for one or more of the following:
a. Any use or structure that is permitted as of right or by administrative site plan
approval in the underlying district, including all necessary excavation and grading;
b. Any use or structure that is accessory (i.e., customarily incidental to, including, but
not necessarily limited to, driveways, underground utilities, storm water systems,
landscaping, retaining walls and residential sewage disposal systems) to a structure
permitted as of right or by administrative site plan approval in the underlying district,
including all necessary excavation and grading;
c. Agricultural, horticultural, or forestry uses and structures and all necessary excavation
and grading;
d. Any use, structure or accessory use or structure that is otherwise allowed by special
permit in the underlying zoning district shall continue to be allowed in the Aquifer
Protection Overlay District upon issuance of a special permit based upon the
underlying zoning; and all necessary excavation and grading to support activity
allowed by such special permit relief shall be allowed as of right in the aquifer
Protection Overlay District, provided that the excavation and grading occurs six feet
or more above maximum high groundwater table elevation.
For the purposes of this section, the term “excavation” shall mean any digging in one
area that disturbs more than one cubic yard of material.
4. Special Permit Uses: The following uses and activities may be permitted in the Aquifer
Protection Overlay District only by Special Permit granted in accordance with the provisions
of Subsection V.H. 6 and Section X of this Zoning By-law. In addition, any uses which are
subject to a special permit requirement in the underlying district shall also be subject to the
27
Special Permit findings and conditions set out in Subsection V.H. 6 in addition to the Special
Permit provisions in Section X. For the purposes of this section, the term “excavation” shall
mean any digging in one area that disturbs more than one cubic yard of material.
a. Any use or structure otherwise allowed by special permit in the underlying zoning
district that would result in excavation or grading within 6 feet of maximum high
groundwater table elevation shall continue to be allowed in the Aquifer Protection
Overlay District, provided that a special permit issues in accordance with the zoning
in the underlying district and provided that further special permit issues under this
section for excavation and grading;
b. Sewage treatment facilities not allowed in Section V.H.3.b.;
c. Solid waste transfer station;
d. Golf courses;
e. Replacement or expansion of buried fuel or chemical storage tanks provided that the
new tanks, including underground transmission lines, are upgraded to achieve
appropriate environmental protection;
f. Storage of deicing chemicals in amounts exceeding 100 pounds;
g. Application of pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers for commercial purposes;
h. Rendering impervious more than fifteen (15) percent of the lot area by structures or
paving provided that adequate recharge measures are taken;
i. Creation of ponds;
j. Artificial turf fields not used for personal residential use.
5. Prohibited Uses: In addition to the uses not expressly permitted pursuant to Subsections
V.H. 3 and V. H. 4, the following uses and activities are specifically prohibited in the
Aquifer Protection Overlay District:
a. New installation of buried storage tanks of liquid petroleum and/or chemical products
of any kind;
b. Disposal of any hazardous materials or placement of contaminated fill;
c. Storage of hazardous materials in quantities greater than those amounts usually
associated with household uses;
d. Sanitary landfill, junkyard salvage yard, other solid or hazardous waste disposal, or
incineration;
e. Industrial or commercial uses which discharge processed wastewater on site;
f. Disposal of snow that contains deicing chemicals;
g. Use of sodium deicing chemicals in excess of one part of sodium chloride to 10 parts
of sand;
h. Any excavation or grading, within 6 feet of the maximum high groundwater table
elevation, for any purpose that is not expressly allowed either by right or by special
28
permit shall be prohibited. For the purpose of this section, the term “excavation”
shall mean any digging in one area that disturbs more than one cubic yard of material.
i. Dry cleaning and commercial laundry establishments;
j. Motor vehicle sales, service, washing, and repair establishments, and filling stations;
k. Truck terminal;
l. Commercial wood finishing;
m. Electronic component manufacturing or assembly;
n. Commercial photo processing;
o. Underground transmission lines for chemicals or liquid petroleum products;
p. Hotels, motels;
q. Motorized boats;
r. Outdoor, uncovered storage of pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and stockpiled
manure not on an impervious base.
6. Special Permit Procedures:
If the bounds of the Aquifer Protection Overlay District, as delineated on the Aquifer
Protection Overlay District Map, are challenged, the burden of proof shall be upon the
owner(s) of the land in question to show evidence supporting an alternative location of the
boundary.
a. Any person who desires to obtain a Special Permit shall submit a written application
to the SPGA. Each application, together with a filing fee, shall contain a complete
description of the proposed use, together with any supporting information and plans
which the SPGA may require. The applicant shall file ten (10) copies of the
application with the SPGA.
b. The application, where applicable, shall include:
? A complete list of the quantities and names of all chemicals, pesticides, fuels, and
other potentially toxic or hazardous materials to be used or stored on the premises
accompanied by a description of measures proposed to protect from vandalism,
corrosion, and leakage, and to provide for spill prevention and counter-measures;
? A description of quantities of potentially toxic or hazardous wastes to be
generated, indicating storage and disposal method;
? Evidence of approval by the Department of Environmental Quality Engineering of
any industrial waste treatment or disposal system and of any wastewater treatment
system over 15,000 gallons per day capacity;
? Analysis by a registered professional engineer experienced in groundwater
evaluation and/or geohydrology, with an evaluation of the proposed use including
its probable effects or impact on surface and groundwater quality and quantity, and
natural flow patterns of water courses.
29
c. The SPGA shall refer copies of the application to the Board of Health, Planning
Board, Conservation Commission, Board of Water Commissioners, Hazardous Waste
Coordinator, and Town Engineer, who shall review the application and submit
recommendations to the SPGA within thirty-five days of the referral date. Failure to
submit recommendations to the SPGA within thirty-five days shall be deemed lack of
opposition.
7. Required Findings by SPGA: The SPGA shall not issue a Special Permit unless it shall
find that the proposed use:
a. Is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Zoning By-Law and will promote
the purposes of the Aquifer Protection Overlay District;
b. Will not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood in which it is to take place;
c. Is appropriate to the natural topography, soils, and other characteristics of the site to
be developed;
d. Will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse environmental impact on
the aquifer or recharge area; and
e. Will not adversely affect an existing or potential water supply.
8. Special Permit Conditions: The Special Permit shall include sufficient conditions to
satisfy the purpose stated in Section V., Subsection H.1. The conditions may include, but
are not limited to, analysis or monitoring of ground and surface waters; hydrogeologic
evaluation; erosion, siltation, compaction and sedimentation control; drainage and
recharge provisions; and any other limitations or standards deemed necessary by the
SPGA. In making a determination regarding the issuance of a Special Permit, the SPGA
shall give consideration to the simplicity, reliability, and feasibility of the control
measures proposed and the degree of threat to water quality and quantity which would
result if the control measures were to fail. The SPGA may require a bond pursuant to
Section X, Subsection B.1.
I. GENERAL USE PROVISIONS IN ALL DISTRICTS: Not withstanding anything to the
contrary in Section V of this Zoning By-law, and in addition to the other regulations set forth
elsewhere in Section V, the following general use regulations apply in all districts:
1. Unregistered Vehicles and Hazards to Public Safety
No motor vehicle which is, and for the immediately preceding thirty-day period has been,
disabled, dismantled or inoperative, or unregistered, nor any refrigerator, mechanical
equipment or other apparatus hazardous to the public safety shall be stored or parked on
any land in the Town unless such vehicles, applicance, equipment or other apparatus is
enclosed within a building.
2. Exterior Lighting
All artificial lighting placed on a tree, structure, or installed free standing to illuminate
walks, driveways, parking areas, storage areas, tennis or paddle tennis courts, swimming
and wading pools, other private recreation areas or other portions of the exterior of a
structure or installation and its surrounding real estate in any district, shall be so installed
or shielded as to prevent direct glare from the light source from interfering with the vision
of motorists or pedestrians passing in the street or streets abutting the premises and as to
30
prevent direct glare from the light source from lighting neighboring properties,
particularly residences.
All artificial lights used to illuminate tennis or paddle tennis courts, swimming and
wading pools and other private recreation areas shall be extinguished not later than 11:00
p.m.
3. Earth Removal and Movement
The goal of this Earth Removal and Movement By-law is to minimize land disturbance
and to achieve a condition where material being imported to a site is equal to or greater
than the amount being removed from the site.
a. EARTH REMOVAL
The Removal of Earth from any land in any district shall be allowed by right provided
the removal of material from a property does not exceed the import of material
associated with the following lawful activities: 1) the construction, alteration of a way
(including a driveway); 2) the construction or installation of a residential septic
system, drainage system, underground fuel storage tank, or utility on the same
premises that the system would be served; 3) and/ or the removal of unsuitable
material. The following instances are exempt from this provision when such removal
is incidental to the lawful:
(i) Construction or alteration of a building or structure limited to the foot
print of the foundation;
(ii) Construction, operation, or work undertaken by the Town or other public
body at the location where the removal occurs;
(iii) Operation of a greenhouse or nursery; or
(iv) Farming, gardening or landscaping done on the farm premises.
(v) Removal of up to 1,000 cubic yards of material in Residential Districts A
& B and 750 cubic yards of material in Residential Districts C & D where
the removal of material is required to allow for proper drainage away from
a foundation.
In all other instances, other than those specifically enumerated above, Removal of
Earth from any land in any district shall be prohibited, except that, subject to the
provisions of Section X and XI, Removal of Earth may be authorized by the Planning
Board by Special Permit in any appropriate instance where the Board determines that
the removal will be advantageous to the premises in question or to the neighborhood
or otherwise desirable and will be of such a character and can be so accomplished that
by proper re-grading, re-loaming, reseeding or other means, which shall be re-graded
if necessary, the land involved will be left in a sightly condition and protected against
erosion, and that proper stormwater drainage measures are in place.
31
b. EARTH MOVEMENT
For non-residential uses, in any district, no Earth in excess of 1,000 cubic yards on
any parcel of land shall be moved unless the quantity of material to be moved is
certified by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor and a special permit
from the Planning Board is obtained in accordance with the procedure provided in
Section X. Special Permits, and only under such conditions as the Planning Board
may impose, except that a special permit shall not be required for such Earth
Movement if the Movement would be:
i. Incidental to farm, nursery, or gardening activities.
ii Incidental to Commercial Agricultural activities, as defined by G.L. c. 40A.
§3.
iii. Incidental to the maintenance and landscaping activities normally conducted
on a golf course (i.e. activities, including, but not necessarily limited to, tee
box and green relocation and fairway restoration).
iv. On Town-owned land or involve a transfer of Earth between or among
Town-owned parcels.
c. Nothing herein shall be interpreted to allow the movement of Earth as a primary
use.
d. Before a special permit is issued pursuant to Section V.I.3.b, the applicant shall
show to the satisfaction of the SPGA that the movement will not impair the
usability of the area for the purposes permitted in this Zoning By-law, that the
grades to be established within the area will permit vehicular access to the area and
the continuation of streets from the abutting premises, and that the area may
ultimately be developed compatibly with the neighboring land.
4. Aircraft
The use of any premises in any district for the landing or taking off of aircraft is
prohibited except for the purpose of pest or insect control or in case of emergency.
5. Construction Trailers The Inspector of Buildings may permit upon written application the
location of a construction trailer or trailers on a lot or parcel of land, which construction
trailer may be used for a period not exceeding six months as the offices and headquarters
for the contractor or contractors engaged in construction on such lot or parcel of land.
Such construction trailer shall not be used as living quarters. A permit issued by the
Inspector of Buildings may be renewed for an additional six month period or until the
project is completed.
J. PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY REGULATIONS
1. Purpose and Definitions
In order to conform to the Town’s responsibilities under the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 in a manner consistent with the protection of
health, safety and welfare of the public and the preservation of property values in
the Town, the regulations contained in this section of the By-Law shall govern the
32
establishment of any new or altered Personal Wireless Service Facilities in the
Town. The Town does not intend this By-Law to prohibit or have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of Personal Wireless Services in the Town.
2. Applicability
From the effective date of this By-Law, no building or special permit shall be issued for
the placement, construction, erection or modification of any structure to provide for
Personal Wireless Service Facilities either whether as a principal use, or as an accessory
use, except as set forth below in Section V.J.4 in excess of the height limitations
contained in Section VI.E, except in a Personal Wireless Service Overlay District as set
forth below in Section V.J.3, or as set forth in section V.J.4.b.
To the extent that dimensional or use criteria applicable to Personal Wireless Service
Facilities differ from such criteria set forth in other sections of this By-Law, the
dimensional or use criteria in this section shall apply to Personal Wireless Facilities.
3. Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts
There shall be two Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts. Personal Wireless
Service Overlay District I ("PWSOD I") shall consist of the land designated on the
Weston Assessors Maps as:
? Map # 53: Massachusetts Turnpike Authority land "ballfield," located east of Liberty
Mutual Insurance Company, Riverside Road;
? Maps # 49 & 55: 668 South Avenue, Massachusetts State Police Barracks.
? Map #27, parcel #75-10, Town of Weston Police Station and
? A portion of Map # 27, parcel #74, described as follows:
All that certain Parcel of land located on the southerly side of Boston Post Road
By-Pass (Route 20) and described as follows:
SOUTHEASTERLY by land of Town of Weston (Weston Police
Station) three hundred seventy-two and 61/100 (372.61) feet;
SOUTHERLY by land of Town of Weston (Weston Highway
Department) fifty and 00/100 (50.00) feet;
NORTHWESTERLY by land of the Town of Weston (Weston
Highway Department) three hundred thirty-three (333) feet
approximately;
NORTHERLY by land of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
(Boston Post Road By-Pass, Route 20) sixty-five (65) feet
approximately; containing 0.4 acres, more or less.
Town of Weston Highway Department
? Map # 8, Parcel # 34: Weston Market, 284 North Avenue;
? Map # 59 , Parcels # 23-20 (P/O 58): Leo J Martin Golf Course, Park Road;
? Map # 58, Parcel # 23-20: Leo J Martin Golf Course, Park Road;
? Map # 33, Parcels # 16 and 28-10: Weston Golf Club;
? Map # 34, Parcel # 16 (P/O 33): Weston Golf Club;
? Map # 46, Parcel # 4: Pine Brook Country Club;
? Map # 45, Parcel # 4 (P/O 46): Pine Brook Country Club;
33
? Map # 11: Campion Residence and Renewal Center Parking Lot, across Concord
Road from Campion Center, Concord Road;
? Map # 19, Parcel # 35 (P/O 23):Town of Weston Solid Waste Transfer Station;
? Map # 18, Parcel # 35 (P/O 23): Town of Weston Solid Waste Transfer Station;
Map # 23, Parcel # 35: Town of Weston Solid Waste Transfer Station;
? Map # 24, Parcel # 6: Weston Mobil Gas Station, 88 Boston Post Road.
Personal Wireless Service Overlay District II ("PWSOD II") shall consist of the land
designated on the Weston Assessors Maps as:
? Map # 52, Parcel # 1: 134 South Avenue;
? Map # 41, Parcels # 38 & 39: 75 Norumbega Road, 85 Norumbega Road, 99
Norumbega Road, 101 Norumbega Road;
? Map # 49, Parcel # 33: 100 Brown Street, Hazel Hotchkiss Wightman Tennis Center,
Inc.;
? Map # 8, Parcel # 35: Shell Gas Station, 290 North Avenue;
? Map # 11, Parcel # 8: Campion Residence and Renewal Center, 319 Concord Road;
? Map # 51, Parcel # 52: Town of Weston Southside Fire Station, South Avenue;
? Map # 24, Parcel # 1: Weston Corporate Center, Biogen Idec, 133 Boston Post
Road;
? Map # 13, Parcel # 93: Town of Weston Water Tank, Cat Rock Tank;
? Map # 41, Parcel # 24: Office Building, 101 River Road;
? High Voltage Transmission Poles and Stanchions in the abandoned Boston &
Maine (Clinton Division) Railroad Right of Way;
? Map # 13, Parcel # 129: Town of Weston North Side Fire Station, North Avenue;
? Map # 13, Parcel # 103: Sunrise of Weston, 135 North Avenue;
? Map # 8, Parcel # 54-10: Dairy Joy Restaurant, 331 North Avenue;
? Map # 38, Parcel # 1: Regis College, 235 Wellesley Street.
4. Special Permit
a. The Planning Board may, by special permit, authorize the placement, construction,
erection or modification of: a Personal Wireless Service Facility in PWSOD I and
PWSOD II, subject to the following limitations:
i. A free-standing ground-mounted tower is eligible for a Special Permit in
PWSOD I only; and
ii An antenna mount attached to a building or structure other than a free-standing
Personal Wireless Service tower, (except for an antenna mount attached to a
utility pole located within the layout of a public right of way, which sahall be
governed by Section V.J.9 below) is eligible for a Special Permit up to 20 feet in
height above the height of the building or other structure on which it is mounted
in PWSOD I and or II; and
iii. An antenna mount attached to a utility pole in the public way that does not
extend more than ten feet above the utility pole is eligible for a Special Permit; or
b. A Personal Wireless Service Facility The Planning Board may also, by special permit,
authorize in any zoning district the placement, consruction, erection, or modification
of a Personal Wireless Service Facility that is totally enclosed in a barn, or an office,
34
commercial, industrial, religious or municipal building; so long as the barn or other
building is not a Dwelling.
c. The foregoing clauses a. and b. are subject to findings by the Planning Board, in its
judgement, after soliciting and reviewing comments from residents, other Town
boards, departments, agencies, and their staff and consultants, that reasonable
measures shall be or already have been taken to:
i. Mitigate against negative impacts on visual quality affecting neighboring
properties and streets by incorporating reasonable design, siting and screening
methods; and
ii. Protect against potential damage to neighboring properties and streets from
structural failure or collapse or from falling ice.
d. In making such findings in c. above, the Planning Board shall consider the extent to
which the proposed Personal Wireless Service Facility, including its antenna mount
on
e. a building or other structure or its free-standing ground-mounted tower, if any, meets
the following criteria:
i. A ground-mounted Personal Wireless Service tower shall be located such that
if it were to fall or collapse, it would fall or collapse entirely within the
boundaries of the parcel on which it is to be located;
ii. The Personal Wireless Service Facility shall be sited, designed and
constructed in such a manner that existing vegetation is preserved to the
maximum extent practicable;
iii. Any fencing proposed shall be screened by a landscape buffer of evergreen
shrubs or trees planted along the exterior side of the fence, with a mature
height at least equivalent to the fence height, and no such fencing shall be of
razor wire or barbed wire;
iv. Lighting shall be limited to that needed for emergencies and/or as required by
the FAA;
v. To the extent technologically feasible, all network interconnections from the
Personal Wireless Service Facility shall be via land lines or by wireless means
that do not detract from the appearance of the Personal Wireless Service
Facility;
vi. Ground mounted Lattice-style towers and Personal Wireless Services
structures requiring three or more legs and/or guy wires for support are
prohibited; To approve a ground mounted, freestanding Personal Wireless
Services tower, the Planning Board must find that it is of an architectural
design that is compatible with the site and its surroundings. Examples of such
designs include, but are not limited to, “unipole,” “slick stick,” or “flagpole
style” monopoles.
vii. In PWSOD I, the total height of a free-standing Personal Wireless Service
tower, including attached accessories, shall not exceed 100 feet in height as
measured from the existing natural grade at the base of the tower. In PWSOD
I and PWSOD II, the height of a Personal Wireless Service antenna mount,
35
mounted on a building or structure, other than a free-standing Personal
Wireless Service tower, shall not exceed 20 feet in height above the highest
point of the building roof on which it is mounted, or 20 feet in height above
the top of the structure on which it is mounted if other than a building. In no
event, however, shall the height of a Personal Wireless Service antenna mount
in PWSOD I and PWSOD II exceed 100 feet as measured from the ground
level at the base of the building or other structure on which it is mounted. The
Planning Board may limit a proposed free-standing tower or antenna mount to
a building or other structure that is not a tower to a lesser height than proposed
by an applicant, if the Planning Board finds that the lesser height better
satisfies the intent of the By-Law.
viii. The Personal Wireless Service Facility shall be designed to accommodate colocation
of multiple users to the maximum extent technologically practicable
in order to reduce the number of Personal Wireless Service Facilities which
will be required to be located in the Town.
ix. New Personal Wireless Service Facilities will be considered only if existing or
already approved Personal Wireless Service Facilities cannot accommodate
the equipment planned for the new facility and/or such approved Personal
Wireless Service Facilities are otherwise impracticable for the applicant to
utilize for the provision of Personal Wireless Services. At its discretion, the
Planning Board may deny Co-location if the Board finds that co-location
would have a detrimental impact, including a detrimental visual impact, on the
neighborhood and the detrimental impact outweighs the benefits of colocation.
x. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed technology is the safest and
least obtrusive to the landscape currently available.
xi. A Personal Wireless Service Facility which is proposed to be totally enclosed
in a building or other structure pursuant to V.J.4.b. above, shall be concealed
from view and shall not significantly alter the exterior of the existing structure
within which the Personal Wireless Services structure is to be enclosed. The
Planning Board may permit an extension to such building, if the Planning
Board finds: A) the building is in a non-residential zoning district; B) the
Personal Wireless Service Facility will be totally enclosed in the extension; C)
the extension is consistent with the existing architecture of the building and
character of the building’s surroundings; and D) the extension does not exceed
20 feet above the highest point of the roof of the building on which it is
mounted.
xii. For example, a new cupola, spire, or faux chimney could be employed to
enclose wireless equipment in accordance with this provision, if the Planning
Board finds that the above criteria are satisfied.
xiii. The Personal Wireless Service Facility shall be sited and designed in a manner
which minimizes its visibility from neighboring residences and streets. The
Planning Board may limit a proposed facility to a lesser height than proposed
by an applicant, if the Planning Board finds that the lesser height better
satisfies the intent of the By-Laws.
36
The Planning Board may waive strict compliance with any of the above-listed criteria,
except the height limitations, provided it determines that such would not derogate from the
intent of these Regulations.
5. Application
a. The Special Permit Application shall include a site plan submission meeting the
requirements of Section XI of this By-Law, the Planning Board Rules and Regulations
for Site Plan Approval, to the extent applicable. In addition, the application shall
include:
(i) A rendering, model or similar, to-scale representation, accurately depicting the
proposed facility within the context of the site on which it is to be located and the
surrounding area;
(ii) A report or reports prepared by professional engineers describing:
(a) the technical, economic and other reasons for the facility height, location and
design;
(b) the capacity of the facility, including the number and type of transmitters and
receivers it can accommodate and the basis for the calculation of the capacity;
(c) how the proposed facility complies with all applicable Federal and State
standards;
(iii) Written official statements of compliance with, or exemption from, the
regulations of all federal and state agencies governing Personal Wireless Service
Facilities or uses, including but not limited to: the FAA, FCC, Massachusetts
Aeronautics Commission, and Massachusetts Department of Public Health;
b. The applicant shall pay the reasonable costs for the Planning Board to have
independent consultants review the application materials.
c. The applicant seeking a special permit for a Personal Wireless Services facility shall
provide a demonstration of the visual impact of the proposed Personal Wireless
Services structure by raising a balloon, or a temporary structure, on the proposed site
to the height of the proposed structure for such period of time as the Planning Board
determines to be necessary.
6. Term
a. Special Permits authorized under this section shall be limited to an initial term of two
years and shall be renewed every two years thereafter provided the special permit
holder has filed with the Board annual certification demonstrating continuing
compliance with the special permit and with applicable federal and state regulatory
requirements.
b. Any parts of the Personal Wireless Service Facility which have not been used for one
year shall be dismantled and removed at the owner’s expense, except, extensions to
buildings or structures that were permitted for enclosing a Personal Wireless Service
Facility may be left intact at the discretion of the landowner for potential future use by
other Personal Wireless Service providers, unless explicitly provided otherwise as a
condition of the special permit. The Planning Board may, as a condition of any special
permit or renewal granted under this section, require the applicant or special permit
holder to post a bond or other financial security with the Town Treasurer in an
37
amount deemed sufficient to cover demolition and removal of the facilities in the
event of discontinuance of use.
7. Height Allowance for Public Safety Services
The Planning Board may waive strict compliance with the 100 ft. height
limitations for a free-standing in the PWSOD I and allow up to 20 ft. of additional
height only if it determines that the additional height is necessary for the
provision of public safety services in the Town; that due to the location, elevation,
and topography of the site on which the proposed structure is to be located, the
additional height will not create an undue impact on nearby residential
neighborhoods; and that the existing tree canopy on or surrounding the site is
such that it would interfere with effective public safety communications if a lesser
height were required.
8. Variances
If an applicant seeks a variance under the Telecommunications Act of 1996 for a Personal
Wireless Services Facility, the application shall comply with Section V.J. of this By-Law,
and the applicants shall also apply to the Planning Board for Site Plan Approval. . In
considering an application for a variance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the
factors and criteria described above in Sections V.J.4c and V.J.4d and apply the
requirements of Section V.J. of this By-Law. If a variance is sought from the Zoning
Board of Appeals, the applicants shall also apply to the Planning Board for Site Plan
Approval.
9. Antenna Mounts on Certain Utility Poles
Requests to mount Personal Wireless Services equipment on utility poles located within
the layout of a public right of way shall require only a “grant of location” from the Board
of Selectmen in accordance with the grant of location process described in Chapter 166,
Section 22 of the Massachusetts General Laws (or any related or successor provisions
thereto).
K. ACTIVE ADULT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (“AARD”)
1. Definition And Applicability
An Active Adult Residential Development (“AARD”) is an alternative type of residential
development in which, except as hereinafter provided, permanent occupancy of the
dwelling units shall be restricted to persons 55 years of age or older, and in which at least
10% of the total number of dwelling units shall be affordable for purchase or lease by
persons of low income, as defined in 760 CMR 45.02, provided however, that some or all
of the affordable units may not be age -restricted. Customary, non-commercial accessory
uses shall also be allowed as part of an AARD. However, no accessory retail or other
commercial use or nursing care facilities shall be allowed in an AARD.
An AARD is an allowable use in the Single Family Residence District (A), Single Family
Residence District (B), and Business District (B), with Concept Plan approval by two38
thirds vote of the Town Meeting and subsequent Special Permit with Site Plan Approval
issued by the Planning Board.
2. Purposes
The purposes of an AARD are to:
a. Provide alternative housing for a maturing population;
b. Provide a type of housing which reduces residents’ burdens of property
maintenance and which reduces demands on municipal services;
c. Encourage the development of affordable housing for active adults with low
and moderate income, as defined in 760 CMR 45.02; and
d. Promote flexibility in site planning while protecting natural features, scenic
views into property, protect existing vegetation and land forms and utilization
of land in harmony with neighboring properties.
3. Minimum Tract Size
No tract of land may be used for an AARD unless it contains at least 40 acres of
contiguous land, exclusive of (a) the wetlands resource areas listed in 310 CMR 10.02, 1, a
through e, (b) the first (inner) 100 feet of the Riverfront Area as defined in 310 CMR
10.58, and (c) land included in the Town’s Wetland and Flood Plain Protection District
(collectively, the “Exclusions”).
4. Concept Plan
The purpose of the Concept Plan is to present the proposed project to Town Meeting in
such a way so that the Town can compare the impacts from a proposed AARD to the
impacts from a by-right use development and decide whether this is a suitable use for the
tract. The Concept Plan shall include: (1) Preliminary Site Plan which provides a
conceptual layout for the AARD, including tree survey, trees required for removal,
roadway, driveway and walkway locations, location of utilities, grading plans for
dwellings, roads, driveways, walkways, location of waste water treatment structure(s),
storm water management structures and associated grading, general landscaping, and
exterior lighting; (2) Preliminary Architectural Plans and Elevations; (3) Traffic Analysis
of the AARD; (4) A Municipal Impact Analysis of the AARD; (5) Site Impact Analysis of
the AARD; (6) In addition, in order to compare the impact of the AARD to the impact of
the by-right use in the zoning district(s), the Concept Plan shall also include: Preliminary
Site Plan/Site Impact Analysis, Traffic Analysis, and Municipal Impact Analysis for the
“By-Right” Plan. An element of the Concept Plan review shall be a comparison of the
proposed AARD with the by-right residential use in the underlying Zoning District(s)in
which the development tract is located.
The plans and supporting material submitted to the Planning Board and Town Meeting
shall be sufficiently detailed to enable the Planning Board and Town Meeting to evaluate
and compare the impacts of the AARD and a By-Right project. The submission
39
requirements for the Concept Plan shall be specified in rules and regulations to be adopted
by the Planning Board.
The AARD By-law provides some design flexibility in order to encourage developers to
work with the land; however, the Concept Plan for an AARD development shall be
evaluated according to the following General Design Guidelines and Standards:
a. General Design Guidelines
(i) Site Design
The development shall be sensitive to the land and take into consideration existing
natural resources including but not limited to the following: land forms, woodlands,
wetlands, vernal pools, and geological features. Tree and soil removal shall be
minimized.
The development shall be sensitive to man-made architectural and historical resources
including but not limited to the following: historic buildings, trails, stone walls, and
scenic views into the property from the public way.
The development shall take into account Low Impact Development techniques for storm
water management and shall incorporate “green” principals in building materials,
systems, and site design. Where possible, buildings shall be located to take advantage of
solar and wind orientation.
(ii) Relationship to Neighboring Properties
The tract shall be developed in consideration of neighboring properties in regard to
scale, character, impact, drainage and storm water runoff.
Awareness of the development, particularly a higher density development, shall be
minimized by screening views of the development from nearby streets, adjacent
neighborhoods, conservation land and Town properties by the effective use of existing
landforms, alterations thereto, berms and by existing vegetation and supplemental
plantings.
Open space shall be located and designed so as to increase the visual amenities of the
abutting neighborhoods as well as for occupants of the development.
The number of access points to the Town’s system of primary and secondary streets
shall be minimized and the location of intersections with primary and secondary streets
shall be such to minimize traffic congestion.
(iii) Landscape Design
The natural character and appearance of the Town shall be maintained or enhanced
insofar as practical. Landscape design for the AARD shall reflect the desire of Weston
residents to preserve the Town’s rural character by avoiding formal manicured
40
landscape treatments, especially where visible from the roadways, public trails and
abutting properties.
A dense vegetative buffer around the entire perimeter of the tract shall be required to
screen the AARD from existing roads and adjacent properties. The buffer shall contain
existing trees and vegetation. The depth of the buffer may vary but it must provide
substantial visual screening and will be classified as a no-cut zone.
In projects where the vegetative perimeter buffer does not screen portions of the
development from existing roads and adjacent properties due to topography, additional
screen plantings in the interior of the tract will be required.
(iv) Architecture
Buildings shall be located harmoniously with the landforms, trees and other natural
features of the site. They shall be located advantageously for views from a building
while minimizing intrusion on views from other buildings.
Architecture within the AARD shall reflect or complement the historic architectural
fabric of Weston. Preferred building materials include wood clapboard, shingle, and
fieldstone.
Without specifying any particular architectural style, the scale, massing and detailing of
buildings shall be compatible with those prevalent in the neighborhood. Where a
multifamily development is located adjacent to a neighborhood of single family
dwellings, the massing scheme and the selection of exterior materials for buildings
shall be complementary to a single family neighborhood.
Buildings of historic or architectural significance shall be preserved and readapted
wherever possible. New buildings shall be compatible with existing historic structures.
b. Standards
(i) The developer shall make adequate, but not excessive, provisions for parking. There
shall be provided at least two parking spaces per dwelling unit (counting garage space)
plus additional parking for recreational amenities and provisions of guest spaces. All
parking lots must be landscaped to the satisfaction of the Planning Board.
(ii) The frontage and setback requirements in the underlying Zoning District(s) where
the tract is located shall be the minimum for an AARD.
(iii) An AARD shall provide at least 45% undisturbed, restored and created open space.
Undisturbed open space shall be preferred, especially along the perimeter of the tract.
Open space is defined as land not covered by buildings, above ground structures and
paving or any other type of impervious surface.
(iv) The maximum AARD floor area ratio (Residential Gross Floor Area, “RGFA” of
all buildings minus total gross floor area of affordable units) divided by the total
41
buildable area of the tract (minus the Exclusions) of an AARD shall not exceed 11%,
however, there may be, at the Planning Board’s discretion, provision for the addition of
bonus gross floor area, up to a maximum floor area of 5%, upon the provision of
additional open space, other public benefits and/or additional affordable housing
(whether low or moderate income as defined in760 CMR 45.02), as the Planning Board
may determine.
(v) The maximum number of dwelling units per acre shall be 1.5, excluding affordable
units. In making such computation, the Exclusions shall be deducted from the total
land area.
(vi) Buildings in an AARD shall be arranged efficiently and clustered in order to
maximize provision of open space on a site. There shall be no more than four dwelling
units in a single building.
(vii) Prior to Town Meeting approval of a Concept Plan, the applicant shall execute a
Development Agreement with the Board of Selectmen, after review and approval by
the Planning Board. Such Development Agreement shall memorialize any additional
obligations which the applicant has agreed to undertake in addition to those obligations
which are expressly required by the Concept Plan or the Zoning By-law including, but
not limited to, obligations relating to off-site improvements, traffic mitigation,
construction timing and truck routes, historic preservation, architectural standards, and
reimbursement of Town costs for consulting or other services related to review of the
AARD development proposal and monitoring of the project construction.
(viii) All roads within an AARD are intended to remain private.
c. Procedures
i. Approval of an AARD Concept Plan shall be by a two-thirds vote of the Town
Meeting, following a recommendation and report to Town Meeting by the Planning
Board as to whether and how the proposed Concept Plan meets the purposes of the
AARD and the General Design Guidelines and Standards for Concept Plans as set forth
in this By-law. It shall be the obligation of the applicant to timely submit an article to
the Board of Selectmen for inclusion of the AARD Concept Plan proposal on the
warrant for the Town Meeting at which the applicant will be seeking concept approval.
ii. The AARD Concept Plan approval process commences with the filing of the
proposed Concept Plan with the Planning Board. Before filing the Concept Plan, the
applicant shall meet informally with the Planning Board to discuss the project,
including scope, timing of public hearing and Town Meeting and program. A filing fee
and a review fee shall be deposited with the Planning Board at the time of submission
of the Concept Plan to the Board. The filing and review fees shall be specified in a
separate document to be adopted by the Planning Board. In addition to filing the
Concept Plan with the Planning Board, the Plan shall be filed with the Selectmen,
Town Engineer, Board of Health, Conservation Commission, Fire and Police
Department. The Planning Board will determine whether the Concept Plan is complete
42
and schedule a public hearing within a reasonable time from receiving a complete
submission.
5. Site Plan Approval-Special Permit
a. Timing
Not more than twelve (12) months after the Concept Plan has been approved by Town
Meeting, and prior to applying for any other permits or commencing any work on the site,
including but not limited to demolition, tree or vegetation removal, earth removal, or grading,
application may be made to the Planning Board for an AARD Special Permit with Site Plan
Approval.
b. Site Plan Approval-Special Permit Submission and Findings
The submissions required of an applicant for a Special Permit with Site Plan Approval for an
AARD shall be set forth in rules and regulations to be adopted by the Planning Board. Such
submissions shall include the documentation that will govern the use, occupancy and other
matters related to the AARD, such as, but not limited to, the master deed, declaration of trust
and rules and regulations, if the AARD will be a condominium (collectively, the “AARD
Governance Documents”). The Planning Board shall issue a Special Permit and Site Plan
Approval for an AARD only if it finds that the AARD presented in the application is not
substantially different from the Concept Plan approved at Town Meeting, and if it specifically
finds that:
(i) The Site Plan provides for no reduction in setbacks and no increase in number of
dwelling units and, no substantial change, in the sole opinion of the Planning Board, in
location of the units, gross floor area, height, and amount of open space, as provided
for in the approved Concept Plan. However, in the Special Permit, the Planning Board
may require additional plantings beyond those shown on the Concept Plan and specify
an increase in size of plantings if it furthers the goals of this By-Law.
(ii) The Site Plan provides for no uses which are not permitted by the approved
Concept Plan.
(iii) The applicant makes provision that any land shown in the approved Concept Plan
as permanent open space be subject to a permanent conservation easement, according
to MGL S.31 of Chapter 184, simultaneously with the issuance of a building permit for
any dwelling units on the AARD tract. Proof of execution and recordation of this
easement shall be delivered to the Planning Board. The restriction shall be held by the
Town of Weston or its designee, and the open land may be used for limited recreation
by the residents of the Town.
(iv) Walking trails are established within the AARD parcel and connected to the
Weston Forest and Trail Association, Inc. network and/or Town of Weston land. The
trails shall be established by permanent easement and located in upland areas. If there
are not WFTA trails or Town land in the vicinity of the AARD parcel, as determined by
the Planning Board, then walking trails shall be established within the AARD tract for
the residents.
43
(v) Buildings and surrounding grounds are located so that fire, police and other
emergency personnel have reasonable access to all structures.
(vi) All utilities, other lines and equipment, including but not limited to electric,
telephone, cable TV, are located underground.
(vii) The Site Plan locates and screens refuse disposal area, utility buildings, storage
areas and other support facilities to make them less visible from sites external and
internal to the AARD parcel.
(viii) The provisions of the AARD Governance Documents are satisfactory to the
Planning Board and approved as to form by Town Counsel, including restrictions
limiting permanent occupancy of the aged restricted units to persons aged 55 or older.
Such restrictions may include provisions allowing limited, temporary occupancy by
persons under the age of 55 such as guests or necessary health aides.
(ix) The Development is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Town
of Weston Zoning By-law.
c. Site Plan Approval/Special Permit Rules and Regulations
The Planning Board shall adopt rules and regulations in a separate document that are consistent
with this By-law specifying design standards for site development features, including, but not
limited to: exterior lighting; storm water management; landscaping; erosion control;
architectural design; design and construction standards for streets; street and parcel
monumentation.
d. Phasing Plan
A Phasing Plan shall be submitted by the applicant and approved by the Planning Board as part
of the Special Permit process. Surety may be required, at the Planning Board’s discretion, for
different phases of the construction, to guarantee performance and implementation of the
Concept Plan and Special Permit Plan(s). The Planning Board shall determine the type and
amount of the surety and the timing for deposit of surety with the Town. This phasing plan
shall be endorsed by the Board prior to any work done on site, including tree removal,
grubbing, excavation of any sort, and, prior to application for a Building or Demolition Permit.
e. Construction Plan
A detailed Construction Plan for the proposed development shall be submitted by the applicant
and approved by the Planning Board as part of the Special Permit process. A list of submission
items shall be listed in a separate document approved by the Planning Board and may include,
but not be limited to the following items: hours of operation, truck routes, material safety data
sheets, erosion and storm water control.
44
L. RENEWABLE ENERGY OVERLAY DISTRICT
1. Purpose
The purpose of this by-law is to promote the creation of new large-scale ground-mounted
solar photovoltaic installations by providing standards for the placement, design,
construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such installations that
address public safety, minimize impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and to
provide adequate financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such
installations.
The provisions set forth in this section shall apply to the construction, operation, and/or
repair of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations.
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations shall be subject to site plan
review as specified in Section XI of the Town of Weston Zoning By-law, and in
accordance with the additional requirements specified herein.
2. Applicability
This by-law applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations
proposed to be constructed after the effective date of this section. This section also applies
to physical modifications that materially alter the type, configuration, or size of any such
installations or related equipment.
3. Definitions
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installation: A solar photovoltaic system
that is structurally mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a minimum
rated nameplate capacity of 250 kW DC.
Rated Nameplate Capacity: The maximum rated output of electric power production of the
Photovoltaic system in Direct Current (DC).
Solar Photovoltaic Array: an arrangement of solar photovoltaic panels.
4. General Siting Requirements
a. Lot Requirements
Large-Scale Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations shall be permitted on
parcels located within the Renewable Energy Overlay District as established in Section
IV.7.
b. Site Control
The applicant shall submit documentation of actual or prospective access and control of
the project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of the proposed solar
photovoltaic installation.
c. Setbacks
For large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations, the setbacks shall be
the same as the underlying district per Section VI of the Town of Weston’s Zoning Bylaw.
45
5. Permitting Process & Requirements
a. Site Plan Review
Ground-mounted large-scale solar photovoltaic installations with 250 kW or larger
rated nameplate capacity shall undergo site plan review by the Planning Board prior to
construction, installation or modification as provided in this section.
b. General
All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a Professional Engineer
licensed to practice in Massachusetts.
c. Required Documents
Pursuant to the site plan review process, the applicant shall provide the following
documents:
(i) A site plan showing:
(a) Property lines and physical features, including roads, for the project
site;
(b) Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading, vegetation
clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening vegetation or
structures;
(c) Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation signed
by a Professional Engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of
the system and any potential shading from nearby structures;
(d) One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar photovoltaic
installation, associated components, and electrical interconnection
methods, with all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects
and overcurrent devices;
(e) Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter;
(f) Name, address, and contact information for proposed system
installer;
(g) Name, address, phone number and signature of the applicant, as well
as all co-proponents or property owners, if any; and
(h) The name, contact information and signature of any agents
representing the applicant; and
(ii) Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the project site
(see also Section 6.e);
(iii) An operation and maintenance plan (see also Section 7.h);
(iv) Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising the project
site;
(v) Proof of liability insurance; and
(vi) Description of financial surety that satisfies Section 7.e.
All material modifications to a solar photovoltaic installation made after final
approval shall require approval by the Planning Board.
46
Any portion of this Section 5 may be waived, if in the opinion of the Planning Board
the materials submitted are sufficient for the Board to make a decision.
6. Design Standards
a. Lighting
Lighting of solar photovoltaic installations shall be consistent with local, state and
federal law. Lighting of other parts of the installation, such as appurtenant
structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and operational purposes, and
shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Where feasible, lighting of
the solar photovoltaic installation shall be directed downward and shall incorporate
full cut-off fixtures to reduce light pollution.
b. Signage
Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations shall comply
with Section VII of the Town of Weston Zoning By-laws. Solar photovoltaic
installations shall not be used for displaying any advertising. Advertising shall not
include reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the solar
photovoltaic installation. The solar photovoltaic installation shall identify the owner
and provide a 24-hour emergency contact phone number.
c. Utility Connections
Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Site Plan Review Authority, shall be made
to place all utility connections from the solar photovoltaic installation underground,
depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and topography of the site and any
requirements of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility
interconnections may be above ground if required by the utility provider.
d. Land Clearing, Soil Erosion and Habitat Impacts
Clearing of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale ground-mounted solar
photovoltaic installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws, regulations,
and by-laws.
e. Appurtenant Structures
All such appurtenant structures, including but not limited to, equipment shelters,
storage facilities, transformers, and substations, shall be architecturally compatible with
each other. Whenever reasonable, structures should be shaded from view by vegetation
and/or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts.
7. Additional Provisions
a. Maintenance
The large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall
maintain the facility in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited
to, painting, structural repairs, and integrity of security measures. Site access shall be
maintained to a level acceptable to the Weston Fire Chief. The owner or operator shall
be responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar photovoltaic installation and any
access road(s), unless accepted as a public way.
47
b. Modifications
All material modifications to a solar photovoltaic installation made after issuance of the
required building permit shall require approval by the Planning Board.
c. Removal Requirements
Any large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation which has reached the
end of its useful life or has been abandoned consistent with Section 7.d of this by-law
shall be removed. The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no
more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator
shall notify the Planning Board by certified mail of the proposed date of discontinued
operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
(i) Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic
installations, structures, equipment, security barriers and transmission lines
from the site.
(ii) Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with local, state,
and federal waste disposal regulations.
(iii) Stabilization or re-vegetation of the site as necessary to minimize erosion.
The Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to leave landscaping
or designated below-grade foundations in order to minimize erosion and
disruption to vegetation.
d. Abandonment
Absent notice to the Planning Board, as provided above, of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice to the Planning Board requesting an extension due
to extenuating circumstances, the solar photovoltaic installation shall be considered
abandoned when it fails to operate or its operations are discontinued for more than one
year without the written consent of the Planning Board. If the owner or operator of the
large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation fails to remove the
installation in accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days of
abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the town may enter the
property and physically remove the installation. As a condition of approval, an
applicant shall agree to grant the necessary license or easement to the Town to allow
entry to remove an abandoned installation. All solar photovoltaic installations removal
and associated costs will be charged to the property owner in accordance with the
provisions of M.G.L. 139, Section 3A as a tax lien on the property.
e. Financial Surety
Proponents of large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic projects shall provide a
form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or otherwise, to cover the cost of
removal in the event the town must remove the installation and remediate the
landscape, in an amount and form determined to be reasonable by the Planning Board,
but in no event to exceed more than 125 percent of the cost of removal and compliance
with the additional requirements set forth herein, as determined by the applicant. Such
surety will not be required for municipally- or state-owned facilities. The applicant
shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal, prepared by
48
a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased
removal costs due to inflation.
f. Compliance with Laws, Ordinances and Regulations
The construction and operation of all large-scale solar photovoltaic installations shall
be consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements, including but not
limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and communications
requirements. All buildings and fixtures forming part of a solar photovoltaic
installation shall be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code.
g. Building Permit and Building Inspection
No large scale solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed, installed or modified
as provided in this section without first obtaining a building permit.
h. Operation & Maintenance Plan
The applicant shall submit a plan for the operation and maintenance of the large- scale
ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation, which shall include measures for
maintaining safe access to the installation, storm water controls, as well as general
procedures for operational maintenance of the installation.
i. Utility Notification
No large-scale, ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation shall be constructed
until evidence has been given to the Planning Board that the utility company that
operates the electrical grid where the installation is to be located has been informed of
the solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator’s intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
j. Emergency Services
The large scale solar photovoltaic installation owner or operator shall provide a copy of
the project summary, electrical schematic, and site plan to the Weston Fire Chief. Upon
request the owner or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in
developing an emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the solar
photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify a
responsible person for public inquiries throughout the life of the installation.
(end of Section V.)
49
SECTION VI. DIMENSIONAL AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS
A. GENERAL
1. The regulations governing the minimum area, frontage, and width of lots, and the height
and location of buildings and structures on lots, in the various districts are hereinafter set
forth in this Section. Every lot as established shall be, and shall continue to be, in
conformity itself with said regulations such that any building or structure thereon will be
in conformity thereto. No building or structure or part thereof shall be constructed,
altered, enlarged, reconstructed, extended or moved except in conformity thereto.
2. In the case of a lot fronting on more than one street, the lot must have the entire required
minimum frontage on one of the streets but need not have it on more than one.
3. In the case of premises abutting more than one street, the regulations as to setbacks from
the street side line and from the street center line shall be applicable with respect to each
street.
4. Land located within a way, whether public or private, shall be excluded in computing any
lot area.
5. No site alteration work which requires or will require a storm water permit or any
zoning or other land development permit or approval shall be performed on any
property until such permit or approval is obtained, including any one of the following:
a. Approval by the Planning Board of a site plan where such approval is or will be
required under the provisions of this Zoning By-law.
b. Issuance of a permit by the Storm Water Permitting Authority where such
permit is required by the Storm Water By-law, Article XXVII of the By-laws of
the Town of Weston.
c. Issuance of a permit for building, demolition, or any other permit required by
the Massachusetts Building Code or this Zoning By-Law.
B. SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS (A, B, C AND D)
1. Minimum Requirements.
Except in the case of a Flexible Development pursuant to VI.H., every lot in the Single
Family Residence Districts shall contain at least the area, shall have frontage on a
constructed and paved street of at least the distance, and shall have at least the width at
the street setback line, specified in the following table. Every building or structure shall
be so situated as to have at least the setbacks from street side line and street center line
and all lot lines specified in such table.
50
2. Table of Conventional Dimensional Requirements.
District
A B C D
Minimum lot area in sq. ft.(b) 60,000 40,000 30,000 20,000
Minimum street frontage, and
minimum lot width at street
setback line (c)
250 ft
200 ft
175 ft
150 ft
Minimum setback from street
side line (a) (e) (f)
60 ft.
50 ft.
40 ft..
30 ft
Minimum setback from street
center line (a) (e) (f)
85 ft.
75 ft.
65 ft.
55 ft.
Minimum setback from lot line
(e) (f)
45 ft. 35 ft. 25 ft. 20 ft.
Notes
(a) The governing minimum street setback shall be the greater of the street sideline setback
and the street center line setback.
(b) If any portion of a lot in a Single Family Residence District is overlaid by the Wetlands
and Flood Plain Protection District A said portion may be used to meet the area
requirement for that district otherwise provided in the Zoning By-Law provided that no
building or structure may be erected on the portion remaining outside the Wetlands and
Flood Plain Protection District A unless that portion has a minimum area of 20,000
square feet.
(c ) A lot shown on a Plan endorsed by the Planning Board before May 13, 1997 or a lot for
which a separate deed has been recorded before said date, and which was otherwise in
compliance with this Bylaw when so endorsed or recorded, shall be deemed to comply
with the minimum street frontage and lot width requirements of this Bylaw, if it has a
street frontage and lot width of at least 200 Ft. in the Single Family Residence District A,
150 ft. in the Single Family Residence District B, 125 ft. in the Single Family Residence
District C, or 100 ft. in the Single Family Residence District D.
(d) For the limited purposes of determining density under Section VI.H.6.d., the applicable
minimum frontage and lot width requirements shall be 200 ft. on the Single Family
Residence District A, 150 ft. in the Single Family Residence District B, 125 ft. in the
Single Family Residence District C, or 100 ft. in the Single Family Residence District D.
(e) Eaves, overhangs, cantilevers, chimneys, bay windows and similar building parts, and
uncovered porches, decks, steps and landings, may project up to three feet into the
minimum setback.
(f) Eaves, overhangs, cantilevers, chimneys, bay windows, and/or similar building parts
projecting more than three feet into the minimum setback, but no more than four feet
beyond the building foundation, shall be deemed to conform to the minimum setback in
the Table, not withstanding that the distance from the Street Line, Street Centerline or
Lot Line, as the case may be, is less than the minimum setback distance specified in the
Table for the Single Family district in which the building is located, provided such
building was constructed pursuant to a building permit issued prior to April 16, 2009.
51
3. Substantial Irregularity.
Unless contained in a Flexible Development pursuant to Section VI.H, no building lot
shall be created after the effective date of this By-Law which is substantially irregular
in shape. For purposes of this provision, “substantially irregular” shall have the
meaning set forth in Section II, Definitions, as applied to the entire lot. In addition,
except as contained in Flexible Development pursuant to Section VI.H, no building lot
shall be created unless it is capable of containing a quadrangle which contacts the
street frontage at least at one point along a side at least equal in length to the
applicable minimum frontage distance required for the district in which the lot is
located, (b) includes 90% of the lot area required for the district in which the lot is
located, and (c) has no included angle of less than seventy-five degrees (75°), within
which quadrangle all principal buildings, accessory buildings and structures and their
above-ground and underground appurtenances shall be located, excepting only signs,
driveways, utility service connections, drainage, fences and light standards.
C. MULTIPLE DWELLING DISTRICTS (A AND B)
1. Minimum Requirements.
Lots and structures used for multiple dwellings shall conform to the following
requirements as to square footage, frontage, set-backs, square feet of land per unit, number
of units per building, buffers, number of bedrooms per unit, and area of living space.
2. Table of Dimensional Requirements.
District
A B
Minimum lot area in square feet 240,000 600,000
Minimum street frontage on existing public way 200 ft. 100 ft.
Minimum setback from street side line of existing public way 100 ft. 65 ft.
Minimum setback from street centerline of existing public way 125 ft. N/A
Minimum setback from lot line 100 ft.(a) 65 ft.
Square feet of land per unit (b) 30,000 10,000
Number of units per building 2 to 8 4 to 8
Buffer maintained in natural state, or landscaped, around
perimeter of lot.
50 ft
25 ft.
Minimum garage distance from lot line 65 ft.. 45 ft
Minimum setback from side line of road located within the lot 20 ft. 20 ft.
Minimum setback from center line of road located within the lot 45 ft.. 45 ft
Maximum average number of bedrooms per unit 2 N/A
Minimum floor area of living space in square feet 750 750
Notes
(a) In cases where a lot line is adjacent to permanent conservation land, a railroad, or
certain other types of municipal open land which in themselves serve as buffers,
the minimum setback from lot line may be 65 feet.
(b) The number of square feet of land per unit shall consist entirely of land outside the
Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District.
52
*****
3. The aggregate of all dwelling structures in Multiple Dwelling Districts shall not cover
more than 20% of the lot upon which they are built. The aggregate of all structures and
off-street parking areas, whether or not covered, in Multiple Dwelling Districts shall not
cover more than 30% of the lot upon which they are built or located.
4. No garage structure shall measure more than 100 feet in length and no other building
shall measure more than 250 feet in length. No garage structure shall exceed a height
from the ground of one story. All buildings shall be separated from other buildings by a
distance of at least 25 feet, and a garage shall be considered as part of such building if
attached.
5. Utility space and other space not used for living purposes, roofs, balconies and porches
shall not be used in determining living space but balconies and porches shall be used in
determining building coverage.
6. Each multiple dwelling unit shall contain cooking and bathroom facilities.
7. Roads, Driveways and Access.
a. All roads (as opposed to driveways serving multiple dwellings) providing access to or
constructed in a Multiple Dwelling District shall be at least 50 feet in width of which
at least 24 feet shall be paved, shall provide for a sidewalk at least 5 feet wide within
such width on one side of such road and shall be constructed in such a manner as will
permit its acceptance as a public way.
b. The grading, surfacing and drainage of such roads shall be approved by the Weston
Planning Board. All such roads, or their exterior lines, shall be entered on the official
Town of Weston Map, duly certified to by the Town Clerk and filed at Middlesex
Registry of Deeds, before any multiple dwellings may be permitted to be built having
access to such roads.
c. The location of the access roads servicing the multiple dwelling units shall, upon
approval by the Special Permit Granting Authority, be entered upon the Official Town
Map as if for a subdivision approved by the Planning Board in accordance with
M.G.L. Chapter 41, "Municipal Planning", Section 81-E "Official Map".
d. The main access road or roads to a Multiple Dwelling District shall enter and exit
from a public way and shall be at least 25 feet from the property lines of any adjacent
lot or lots of a district other than a Multiple Dwelling District. Each such buffer strip
shall be either landscaped or left in its natural state.
8. Utilities And Services.
a. All utilities to be utilized in connection with the multiple units shall be installed under
the surface of the ground.
b. The lot upon which multiple dwellings are constructed shall be supplied with a septic
or sewage system or systems acceptable to the Board of Health and with Town water
and adequate street lighting. Suitable fire alarms and police call boxes in sufficient
numbers to afford health, fire, and police protection for the residents of the multiple
dwelling units shall be provided.
53
9. Long Term Care Facility.
Where a Long Term Care Facility is allowed with Site Plan Approval and by Special
Permit, the Dimensional Requirements for Multiple Dwelling Districts shall be modified
in the following respects:
a. Buffer to be maintained in natural state a minimum of 100 feet from street side lines
and lot lines. Driveways and underground utility lines may cross the buffer area.
b. Number of units per Building: Not Applicable.
c. Minimum floor area of living space in square feet: Not Applicable.
d. Section VI.C.4.: Not Applicable.
D. BUSINESS, OFFICE & RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT, AND COMMERCIAL
DISTRICTS
1. Minimum Requirements.
Every lot in the Business, Office and Research and Development and Commercial
Districts shall have the lot size, frontage and access on a street of at least the distance, and
the width at the street setback line as specified in the following table. Every building or
structure in such districts shall be so situated as to have at least the buffer setback from
the street sideline and from all lot lines specified in such table. The ratio of the total area
of the floor space of all buildings on any lot to the total area of such lot shall not exceed
the ratio specified in such table. The total portion of a lot in such district covered by
parking areas shall not exceed the percentage specified in such table.
2. Table of Dimensional Requirements.
District
Business
A
Business
B
Office &
Research and
Development
District
Commercial
Min. Street Frontage 50 ft. 50 ft. 400 ft. (a) 50 ft.
Min. Street Setback 15 ft. 25 ft. 150 ft. 25 ft.
Min. Lot line Setback 10 ft. 10 ft. 200 ft. (b) 20 ft.
Max. Bldg. Coverage 25% 25% 15% 25%
Max. Floor to Lot Ratio 1:2 1:2 1:2.5 1:2
Max. Parking Coverage 50% 50% 25% 50%
Min. Lot Size - - 600,00 SF (a) -
Natural or Landscaped Buffer - - 65 ft. (c) -
Notes for Office & R & D Districts Only
(a) In reference only to applications for a Site Plan Approval for an Office and
Research and Development District involving sites partly within the Town of
Weston and partly in an abutting municipality the Special Permit Granting
Authority for Site Plan Approval may vary the requirements for such projects in the
following particulars only:
54
(i) Frontage and access requirements may be satisfied in another abutting
municipality in accordance with the requirements and standards of that
municipality for Office and Research and Development districts when the area
in the Town to be used for the project is with without frontage in the Town of
Weston.
(ii) The requirement of a minimum lot area of 600,000 square feet may be met if
the area of the total lot is equal to or exceeds 600,000 square feet of which not
less than 300,000 square feet is located in the Town of Weston.
(iii) Parking requirements - see Section VIII "Vehicular Requirements.”
(b) The Special Permit Granting Authority for Site Plan Approval may reduce the
minimum lot line setback to not less than 100 feet if topography and other natural
features effectively screen the development from neighboring residential property,
and shall reduce the minimum lot line setback to not less than 65 feet if the lot line
is adjacent to permanently open land, a railroad or limited-access highway.
(c) No buildings, structures, parking areas or recreation facilities shall be located
within the 65-foot buffer around the perimeter of the site except for access roads
crossing the buffer.
E. HEIGHT REGULATIONS
1. On all land located within the Town of Weston, no building shall exceed the height
limitations set forth in the table below. In all cases, height shall be determined by measuring
the vertical distance from the Grade Plane to the highest point of a building.
2. Table of Height Limitations
DISTRICT HEIGHT LIMITATION NOTES
Business A Lots of less than 35 Feet or 2 ½ Stories (a),
thirty-five acres whichever is less
Lots of thirty-five 52 Feet or 4 Stories
acres or more whichever is less
Business B Lots of less than five
acres
35 Feet or 2 ½ stories
whichever is less
(a)
Lots having at least
five acres but less
than thirty-five acres
45 Feet or 3 Stories whichever
is less
Office & Research and Development 40 Feet (b)
Commercial, Single Pitched Roofs 37 feet or 2-1/2 stories
Family Residential
(A, B, C, D), and
Multiple Dwelling
Districts (A & B)
whichever is less (a)
Flat Roofs 32 Feet or 3 Stories (a)
55
Notes:
a) The height of all buildings located within this District shall be measured to the highest point
of the entire building. Stories shall be measured from the floor level of the lowest story above
grade. Attics in pitched roof construction shall constitute ½ story.
b) In Office & Research and Development Districts ONLY, in the situation where a building
used exclusively for office or research and development purposes is built with differing roof
heights, each portion having a different roof height shall be considered as a separate building
for purposes of height determination. For all other uses within an Office & Research and
Development District, the entire building shall be considered a single entity for purposes of
height determination.
3. Exceptions
a) Except as provided in Section V.J. on any building located within any District, domes,
cupolas and other ornamental features, solar collectors, chimneys, ventilators, skylights,
tanks, bulkheads, machinery, antennas, transceivers, and other accessory features which
are required above roofs may not exceed twenty (20) feet measured vertically from the
highest point of the entire building.
b) Parapets, and penthouses for stairs and elevators shall not be considered accessory
features. In a situation where a parapet, staircase, elevator penthouse, or other element
not considered an accessory feature extends above the level of the highest point of the
roof, the highest of such elements shall be considered the highest point of the building.
c) Freestanding antenna constructions not attached to a building including antenna for use
by federally licensed amateur radio operator and not otherwise regulated, shall not exceed
fifty (50) feet in height measured from the ground.
d) On any building located within Business B and Office and Research and Development
Districts only, rooftop screens or fences erected to conceal equipment shall not exceed
twelve (12) feet in height.
F. OTHER DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS
1. Corner Obstructions
No building, fence or other structure shall be erected or installed, and no tree, shrub, or
other growth shall be planted or permitted to grow or exist, which will dangerously
obstruct the view of traffic by operators of vehicles at street intersections or otherwise
constitute a hazard to public safety; nor shall any fence or other structure be erected or
installed, nor shall any tree, shrub, or other growth be planted or permitted to grow or
exist higher than 24 inches above the ground in the area formed by the intersecting
sidelines of any street or way, whether public or private, and a line joining each sideline
at points 35 feet distant from the point of intersection of the sidelines: in the case of
rounded corners the distance shall be measured from the point of intersection of the side
lines when projected. The provisions of this Subsection shall not require the removal of
any existing tree whose entire foliage is not less than 10 feet above its base and whose
trunk is not of a size or shape to obstruct the view of traffic for operators of motor
vehicles.
56
2. Number and Location of Single Family Dwellings on One Lot
Except as may be permitted in an AARD, the number and location of single family
dwellings on any one lot shall be such that every dwelling (and its accessory structures)
can be provided sufficient land to form a separate lot which will itself be in full
conformity to the regulations of this Section VI, and on which every dwelling (and its
accessory structures) will be in full conformity thereto; and upon alienation of any such
dwelling it shall be provided with such a lot and every dwelling remaining on the original
lot shall be left capable of being provided with the same.
3. Gross floor Area Limitation
In all Single Family Residence Districts, for any use other than single family detached
dwelling, church, or other religious purpose, educational purpose if conducted by a
religious or non profit entity, or municipal purpose, the gross floor area (as defined in the
State Building Code) of any buildings and parking structures divided by the total lot area
shall be no greater than 0.10; and all lots and structures relating to any such use shall
conform to the dimensional requirements of the residential district where they are located.
Any project granted Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board before April 18, 1991 is
not subject to the provisions of the paragraph provided that such project obtains any
required Special Permit by May 6, 1992.
G. ACCESSORY APARTMENT
The Special Permit Granting Authority may authorize, in any Residential District, the
alteration of a Single Family Dwelling to include an Accessory Apartment, or the conversion
of a detached Accessory Building such as a garage, barn or gate house to an Accessory
Apartment, provided that the following criteria have been met:
1. The Single Family Dwelling to be altered or the Accessory Building to be converted, is
on a lot which conforms to the lot area requirements for the residential district in which
it is located.
2. Construction of the Single Family Dwelling to be altered, or the Accessory Building to
be converted, was completed, including any additions or enlargements thereto, at least
ten years prior to the date of the special permit application.
3. The Single Family Dwelling to be altered contains at least 3,000 square feet of habitable
area, not including unfinished attic or basement area.
4. The proposed Accessory Apartment will have at least 600 square feet of gross floor area
but, if to be located within a Single Family Dwelling, will not also have a gross floor
area exceeding 25% of the habitable area of the Single Family Dwelling (excluding
unfinished attic and basement area).
5. The Accessory Apartment will contain separate cooking facilities and one or more
bathrooms, but not more than two bedrooms.
57
6. The alteration or conversion for Accessory Apartment purposes will not result in any
increase in building coverage, other than a fire exit, fire escape or other safety feature
required by the State Building Code. In any event, the alteration or conversion will not
result in substantial changes to the exterior of the building which would be inconsistent
with the exterior appearance of the building immediately prior to date of the special
permit application.
7. The Board of Health has issued a favorable recommendation as to the suitability of the
subsurface disposal system for the proposed Accessory Apartment. Such
recommendation may include conditions which, in the opinion of the Board of Health,
are necessary to ensure standards in keeping with public heath interests.
8. Sufficient and appropriate space exists on the lot for at least one additional off-street
parking space to serve the Accessory Apartment in addition to the off-street parking
spaces required to serve the Single Family Dwelling. Said additional parking space,
whether already existing or to be constructed, shall have a gravel or paved surface, and
shall be accessed from the driveway serving the Single Family Dwelling to be altered
or the Accessory Building to be converted.
9. The owner or owners of the property shall live either in the Single Family Dwelling or
in the Accessory Apartment.
In granting a Special Permit for an Accessory Apartment, the Special Permit Granting
Authority may impose reasonable conditions, including a requirement that the applicant post
security in the form of a bond or cash deposit for the performance of representations and
agreements made by the applicant in connection with the special permit application.
A Special Permit for an Accessory Apartment shall provide that the Special Permit shall lapse
upon transfer of title to the subject property unless the transferee applies for a renewal of the
Special Permit within six months of the date of transfer and the renewal is subsequently
granted.
H. FLEXIBLE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
1. Applicability An owner or owners of land in a Single Family Residence District may
apply to the Planning Board for a Special Permit for Flexible Development under this
Section VI.H. This will exempt such land from the lot area, frontage, setback and other
applicable dimensional requirements set forth in the Table of Conventional Dimensional
Requirements of this Zoning By-Law in order to fulfill the purposes of Flexible
Development. The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for
any Special Permit for Flexible Development issued under this Section.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as conflicting with the right of a landowner to
proceed under the Subdivision Control Law with an application for a preliminary or
definitive subdivision plan pursuant to G.L. c.41, Sections 81S and 81T, or with an
application for endorsement of a plan of land division as "approval not required" pursuant
to G.L. c.41, Section 81P.
58
2. Purpose
The general purpose of Flexible Development is to allow greater flexibility and creativity
in the design and layout of single family residential development, without any increase in
permitted density, in order to:
a. minimize alteration of or damage to the natural and cultural features and topography
of the land;
b. avoid undue adverse impacts of new development on existing homes and
neighborhoods;
c. preserve wooded areas and other undeveloped open land particularly along Town
roads;
d. preserve the existing semi-rural appearance of the Town.
3. Fees
An Applicant for a Special Permit for Flexible Development shall pay a filing fee and
review fees as the Planning Board shall deem reasonably necessary, which fees shall be
set forth in the Planning Board Special Permit Rules for Flexible Development.
4. Procedure
A landowner seeking to create a Flexible Development of land may file with the Planning
Board an Application for a Special Permit for Flexible Development. The Application
shall conform to the applicable requirements for a Definitive Subdivision Plan as set forth
in the Planning Board's Rules and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land, as well as the
Flexible Development requirements contained herein and all other requirements in the
Special Permit Rules for Flexible Development.
The Planning Board shall give notice, hold a public hearing and file its decision regarding
a Flexible Development Application, in accordance with the procedures governing special
permits contained in Sections 9, 11 and 15 of M.G.L. c.40A, the Zoning Act.
5. Dimensional Requirements
A Special Permit for Flexible Development may authorize the creation and use of lots
meeting the following dimensional requirements in lieu of the conventional dimensional
requirements contained in Section VI.B.2. and VI.B.3.
a. Lot Area Each lot shall be at least of a size capable of supporting the cobstruction of
a single-family dwelling and its accessory structures in accordance with all applicable
state and local regulatory requirements and the purposes of Flexible Development.
b. Frontage The frontage of each lot for a building site created in a Flexible
Development shall be that necessary, in the opinion of the Planning Board, to provide
for adequate access to the lot. Where shared driveways or other circumstances
provide adequate access to an individual lot, frontage may not be required.
c. Setbacks All structures shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all lot
lines, provided, however, that with respect to lot lines which abut an existing street or
which otherwise abut land outside the Flexible Development, setbacks from said lot
lines shall conform to the Section VI.B.2. setback requirements applicable to
conventional development in the underlying zoning district.
59
d. Building Height The height of all buildings or other structures within a Flexible
Development shall conform to the requirements of Section VI.E.
6. Other Requirements
a. Buildable Lot Buildable lot shall be defined for purposes of determining the density
of a Flexible Development as an area of contiguous land, having sufficient area and
dimensions to meet the applicable requirements of this Zoning By-Law for use as the
site of one single family detached dwelling, and conforming to all relevant state and
local laws and regulations.
b. Developed Areas The boundaries of the area(s) within each lot that will contain all
principal and accessory structures shall be shown on the plan and designated as the
"Developed Areas." The areas so designated shall be of a size and location to satisfy
the stated purposes and standards set forth herein.
c. Single Dwelling Not more than one single family dwelling and its accessory
structures and uses may be located on a lot created under Flexible Development
pursuant to Section VI.F.2.
d. Density The maximum number of lots for building sites in a Flexible Development
shall not exceed the number of buildable lots which could be created through
conventional development of the site. The allowable maximum density shall be based
upon the maximum number of buildable lots which may be created through
conventional development of the land without substantial waivers from the Planning
Board's Rules and Regulations for the Subdivision of Land and in conformance with
the conventional dimensional requirements for the underlying zoning district. The
Planning Board shall make the final determination of density, provided, however,
that for the limited purpose of showing conformance with said conventional
dimensional requirements, the applicable minimum frontage and lot width
requirements shall be 200 ft. in the Single family Residence District A , 150 ft in the
Single Family Residence District B, 125 ft. in the Single Family Residence District C,
and 100 ft. in the Single Family Residence District D.
e. Restrictions Against Further Development No Flexible Development for which a
Special Permit has been issued under this Section may be further subdivided. A
notation to that effect shall be made on the Lotting Plan as defined in the Planning
Board Rules and Regulations to be endorsed by the Planning Board and recorded in
the Registry of Deeds or the Land Court.
In addition, a perpetual restriction, running with the land, and enforceable by the
Town of Weston, shall be recorded with respect to the land within the Flexible
Development. Such restriction shall provide that no lot in the Flexible Development
may be further subdivided into additional building lots. Said restriction shall be in
such form and substance as the Planning Board shall prescribe and may contain such
additional restrictions on development and use of the lots as the Planning Board may
deem appropriate.
60
7. Allowed Uses
The land in a Flexible Development may be used for any use otherwise allowable in the
Single Family Residence District in which it is located, pursuant to the provisions of
Section V. Use Regulations.
8. Standards
In reviewing an Application for a Special Permit for Flexible Development, the Planning
Board shall consider the extent to which the Application meets the purposes of Flexible
Development by satisfying the following standards:
a. The laying out of Developed Areas, roads, storm drains, sewage disposal systems, and
utilities shall be in conformance with the natural features of the parcel, minimizing
changes to the topography and maximizing the amount of preserved wooded areas and
other open space.
b. The amount of land to be disturbed for the construction of buildings, driveways, septi
c systems, utilities, storm drainage systems and roads shall be minimized.
c. Important natural and historic features of the land, as determined by the Planning
Board, shall be protected.
d. The Flexible Development shall be in keeping with and enhance the overall semirural
appearance of Weston by:
(i) preserving views from existing roads;
(ii) avoiding undue adverse impacts on neighborhoods;
(iii) conserving natural and historic resources, including but not limited to those
linked to off-site protected resource areas.
e. The impacts of road and utility installations for each dwelling unit served shall be less
than those generated by a conventional development of the same land.
f. The design, number and location of curb cuts shall be such that any conflict with
existing traffic flow is minimized, and the semi-rural appearance of existing streets is
maintained or enhanced.
g. Provision, satisfactory to the Planning Board, shall be made with regard to the
ownership and maintenance of any and all private roads, common driveways,
common land, or other common facilities within the Flexible Development.
h. The design shall minimize the size of Developed Areas.
The Planning Board shall not grant a Special Permit for Flexible Development unless the
Application is consistent with the above standards and conforms to the dimensional and use
requirements for Flexible Development set forth herein and in the Planning Board Special
Permit Rules for Flexible Development.
(end of Section VI)
61
SECTION VII. SIGNS
A. BUSINESS AND COMMERCIAL DISTRICT SIGNS
In any Business or Commercial District, no sign shall be allowed except as hereinafter
specifically permitted. All signs shall be limited to the purpose of advertising or indicating
only the person(s) occupying the premises on which it is located, the merchandise for sale, or
the activity conducted thereon, except that temporary signs are permitted during periods of
construction on the premises or offering the property for sale or rent, which signs shall be
promptly removed when such construction, rental, or sale has been concluded.
1. Number:
There shall be not more than one primary sign for each occupant of a building which shall
be either affixed to the building or standing, except that if there are walls with direct
public entrance into the building or which face upon a street or parking area other than
the front wall, there may be a secondary sign affixed to each of such walls; provided,
however, that no building shall have more than three secondary signs for each occupant.
In addition to the foregoing sign or signs, there may be one directory of the tenants of the
building affixed to the exterior wall of the building at each entrance to the building. Such
directory shall not exceed an area determined on the basis of one square foot for each
tenant of the building.
2. Location:
a. An affixed sign shall be securely attached to a vertical wall or parapet of the building,
shall be parallel with and not more than twelve (12) inches away from the face of such
wall or parapet nor project beyond the face of any other wall or parapet of the
building and shall not at any point extend above the wall or parapet to which it is
attached, except that if the building to which the sign is to be attached is a one-story
building with a slanting roof an affixed sign may be attached securely to such roof but
the top of such sign shall be at least eighteen (18) inches below the level of the top of
such roof and the bottom of such sign shall not project more than six (6) inches away
from the roof and shall be placed not more than two (2) feet above the level of the
lower edge of such roof.
b. A standing sign shall be subject to the provisions of this Zoning By-Law relating to
setbacks of structures from lot lines.
3. Size:
a. The total area of a primary affixed sign or signs shall not exceed more than one and
one-half (1 1/2) square feet for each lineal foot or major fraction thereof of front
width of the building to which such sign or signs is attached. In cases of multiple
occupancy, such total area may be allocated among the occupants. The cumulative
area of secondary sign or signs shall not exceed fifty per cent (50%) of the area
permitted for the primary sign or signs as above provided. The area covered by the
lettering or symbols of any sign shall not exceed 33 and 1/3% of the total area of such
sign.
62
b. A standing sign shall not exceed 20 square feet in surface area (exclusive of support),
or 10 feet in any dimension, or 10 feet above ground level, except that a standing sign
on premises used as gasoline filling station and lubritorium shall not exceed 14 feet
above ground level.
4. Construction:
All signs shall be painted, applied, or attached to an intermediate frame or support which
shall in turn be affixed to the wall or roof of the building or supporting post as the case
may be, except that a sign composed of individual letters or devices cut into or securely
affixed to the exterior wall of a building is permitted, provided that such letters or devices
have a minimum depth or thickness of one-fourth (1/4) of an inch and a maximum of four
(4) inches. The material of which the sign is constructed and the intermediate structure
and the manner of affixation to the wall or roof of the building or post shall be subject to
the approval of the Building Inspector from the standpoint of public safety.
5. Illumination:
No sign shall be illuminated except by a white, steady, stationary light or lights shielded
and directed solely at the sign. Flashing, moving, and animated signs and signs
illuminated from within or from the rear of such sign are prohibited.
6. Gasoline Filling Stations and Garages:
Gasoline filling stations and garages may, if they elect to do so, divide the one exterior
primary sign permitted each occupant under this Section VII into separate departments of
the business, provided, however, that the total of the area of the separate signs shall not
exceed the maximum area permitted under paragraph 3 hereof. In addition, one standing
sign in conformity with the provisions of paragraph 3, b, hereof indicating the company
whose gasoline is being sold may be erected upon the premises being used by such filling
station or garage. The dimensions of standard type of gasoline pump, bearing thereon in
usual size and form, the name or type of gasoline and the price thereof, shall not be
included in the dimensions of signs permitted under this Section VII.
7. Permits:
No sign shall be erected on the exterior of any building or on any land unless and until
application for the erection of such sign, together with a scale drawing and a colored
rendering of such sign and such other information and drawings as the Inspector of
Buildings may require, have been filed with him, and a Building Permit for the erection
of such sign has been issued. If the requirements and limitations of this Subsection A
shall have been satisfied, the Inspector of Buildings shall issue such permit.
8. Nonconforming signs:
The provisions of Section III, "Pre-Existing Nonconforming Buildings, Structures and
Uses", shall apply to this Section VII.
B. RESIDENCE DISTRICT SIGNS
1. Signs Permitted Without a Permit:
a. One temporary nonilluminated sign with a maximum area of nine square feet
advertising the premises on which the sign is located as for sale or rent and containing
no other advertising matter.
b. A nonilluminated sign or name plate not more than two square feet in area indicating
the persons occupying the premises or the activity conducted thereon.
63
2. Activities permitted by Site Plan Approval and/or a Special Permit to be maintained in
residence districts shall be limited to the type of sign authorized for residence districts,
except the Special Permit Granting Authority for Special Permits may permit a larger
sign, if necessary or appropriate, but not larger than 20 sq. ft. in area and 10 feet in any
dimension.
(end of Section VII)
64
SECTION VIII. VEHICULAR REQUIREMENTS
A. OFF-STREET PARKING REGULATIONS
1. Parking Requirement by Usage:
In order to provide sufficient off-street vehicular parking in the Town, no Building Permit
for the new construction, erection or alteration (as defined in Section III, Subsection A) of
a building or structure shall be issued and no use or change of use of any building,
structure or premises shall be made unless off-street parking facilities have been provided
in accordance with the applicable requirements of this Subsection. The minimum number
of off-street parking spaces shall be as follows:
a. Store, salesroom or showroom for the conduct of retail business: at least two spaces
for each establishment or one space for each two hundred square feet of gross floor
area, whichever is larger, plus two spaces for each three employees or nearest multiple
thereof.
b. Office or office building: one space for each two hundred and fifty square feet of
gross rentable floor area plus one space for each three employees or nearest multiple
thereof, except in Business District B when the lot contains five acres or more.
In Business District B when the lot contains five acres or more: one space for each
two hundred eighty-five square feet of gross floor area, provided that additional land
is available for up to a total of one space for each two hundred fifty square feet of
gross floor area.
c. Eating places: one space for each four seats plus two spaces for each three employees
or nearest multiple thereof employed in the largest shift.
d. Other commercial uses: all other types of commercial and industrial uses not
specifically mentioned shall have at least one space for each 250 square feet of gross
rentable floor area plus one space for each three employees or nearest multiple thereof
employed in the largest shift.
e. Industrial and manufacturing establishments: one space for each two employees based
on the maximum number of employees the plant is designed to employ in any one
shift plus one space for each three hundred square feet of gross floor area.
f. Places of assembly including churches but not schools: one space for each four seats.
g. Occupations permitted under Section V, "Use Regulations": four spaces plus one
space for each two nonresident employees. If more than one such occupation shall be
conducted in the structure, then the above requirement shall apply to each such
occupation.
h. Nursing homes, long-term care facilities, medical offices: two spaces for each three
employees or nearest multiple thereof employed in the largest shift and one space for
each four patients based on the maximum capacity of the facility.
i. Multiple dwelling units: two spaces for each dwelling unit, which requirement may be
reduced by the Special Permit Granting Authority where not required (as elderly
persons without automobiles) as part of the Site Plan Approval procedure.
65
j. Non-Commercial clubs: as may be required by the Special Permit Granting Authority
in the Special Permit authorizing such use.
k. Schools and other educational uses subject to Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter
40A, Section 3: sufficient spaces, in the judgment of the Inspector of Buildings, to
ensure that no parking for vehicles for employees or regular attendants will take
place on a public or off-site private way, except that in cases where Limited Site
Plan Approval or Special Permit issued by the Planning Board is required, the
Planning Board shall make such determination.
l. All other non-residential uses not specifically mentioned above: sufficient spaces,
in the judgment of the Inspector of Buildings, to ensure that no parking for vehicles
for employees or regular attendants will take place on a public or private way.
2. Location and Size of Parking Area:
Required parking areas shall be located on the same lot as the building, structure or
premises with respect to which such areas are provided or may be on adjoining or nearby
land when all of the required parking area lies within 200 feet of the principal premises.
All parking areas shall be entirely located within a district where the activity carried on in
the principal premises is permitted under Section V "Use Regulations". Each parking
space shall include space for maneuvering and for access to and from the parking area,
shall be continually available and shall be not less than 350 square feet in area. The
percentage of the lot utilized for such parking area shall not exceed the percentage
specified in Section VI "Dimensional and Other Requirements", Subsection D.
3. Construction Standards of Parking Area:
The surface of all required parking areas shall be so constructed and be of such material
as to avoid undue dust, erosion, and flow of water onto public ways or adjacent property
and such areas shall be reasonably landscaped and maintained.
4. Group Parking Areas:
Owners of buildings, structures or premises required to provide off-street parking
facilities under this Subsection may join in establishing a group parking area to be owned
in common by them (in fee or with rights of easement) having the required parking area
for all the buildings, structures or premises participating therein.
5. Loading and Unloading Areas:
Facilities for loading and unloading stock, merchandise, equipment, material, and
supplies sufficient to serve the use conducted on the premises in question shall be
provided and properly screened. In the business districts adequate maneuvering areas and
loading facilities for trucks shall be provided on the lot of each building.
6. Pre-existing Uses:
Use of buildings, structures and premises in existence at the time that this Section was
adopted shall not be subject to the requirements set forth herein provided that any existing
parking facilities which do not meet the requirements hereof shall not thereafter be
reduced in size, or otherwise rendered further nonconforming.
66
7. Special Provisions for Office and Research and Development Districts:
(a.) One parking space for each 300 square feet of building space or one parking space
for each employee, whichever is greater; however, the Special Permit Granting
Authority for Site Plan Approval may reduce the required number of parking spaces
to a number equal to the maximum number of people employed at and using the
facility during its largest shift or at any one time, whichever is greater.
(b.) In reference only to applications for Site Plan Approval for an Office and Research
and Development District involving sites partly within the Town of Weston and
partly in an abutting municipality the Special Permit Granting Authority for Site Plan
Approval may vary the parking requirements for such projects set out in Section VI,
"Dimensional and Other Requirements", Subsection D in the following particular:
The parking requirements of this Zoning By-Law may be satisfied by the location of
all or some of the parking space requirements in the abutting municipality; provided
that the Special Permit Granting Authority finds that the applicant also satisfies the
Zoning By-Law or Ordinance requirements for parking of the abutting municipality.
Parking spaces serving structures in the abutting municipality may be permitted in
the Town of Weston, but the total number of spaces shall not exceed 150% of the
number of parking spaces required for the structures in the Town of Weston.
8. Use in Business Districts that require Site Plan Approval:
With respect to any use in the Business Districts, the Office and Research and
Development Districts, or the Commercial Districts which requires Site Plan Approval,
the Planning Board may, as part of the Site Plan Approval, allow a reduction of the
number of parking spaces otherwise required in this Section VIII by up to twenty
percent where it determines that the reduction is reasonable in the circumstances and
would not derogate from the intent of the By-law.
. B. COMMON DRIVES IN SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
Not more than three (3) lots in a Single-Family Residence District may have their principal
vehicular access over a common driveway to a constructed and paved public or private way
shown on the official map of the Town. All lots sharing such principal vehicular access shall
conform in all respects to the requirements of Section VI.B. unless said lots have been
approved either as Cluster Development lots prior to January 17, 1994 or as Flexible
Development lots pursuant to Section VI.H. A common driveway serving two or three lots
shall be contained in a recorded easement to the perpetual benefit of the lots served by the
common driveway and shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of "Standards
for Common Driveways, Rules and Regulations of the Town of Weston Planning Board." At
the time application is made for a Building Permit for the construction of a residence on a lot
served or to be served by a common driveway, it shall be the responsibility of the Inspector of
Buildings to ascertain whether the said lot is one of the two or three lots served or to be
served by a common driveway and, if so, to require compliance with this paragraph. The
Inspector of Buildings shall not issue an Occupancy Permit for any dwelling erected on a lot
served by such a common driveway until he is satisfied that the common driveway meets the
requirements of this Subsection B. Provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to lots shown
on plans recorded before May 5, 1980 insofar as such lots so shown and which do not
67
conform to this paragraph shall not be considered to be non-conforming for other purposes of
this Zoning By-Law.
(end of Section VIII)
68
SECTION IX. PERMIT AND SPECIAL PERMIT
GRANTING AUTHORITIES
A. ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
1. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of three members to be appointed
by the Board of Selectmen. The Board of Selectmen shall also appoint up to three
associate members. Appointments shall be in accordance with G.L. c. 40A, §12. The
Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect annually a chairman and a clerk. The Chairman
may designate any associate member to sit on the Board in the case of absence, inability
to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any Board member, or in the event of a
vacancy on the Board, until such vacancy is filled.
2. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following powers:
a. to hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved by reason of his inability to
obtain a Permit or enforcement action from the Inspector of Buildings or any
administrative officer under the provisions of G. L.c. 40A, by the Regional Planning
Agency or by any person including an officer or board of the Town of Weston, or of
an abutting city or town aggrieved by an order or decision of the inspector of
buildings, or other administrative official, in violation of any provision of G.L.c.
40A or of this Zoning By-Law.
b. to hear and decide petitions for variances from particular terms of this Zoning By-
Law, pursuant to G.L.c. 40A, §10, provided however that no variance may authorize
a use or activity not otherwise allowed in the district in which the subject land or
structure is located.
c. to grant permits and Special Permits as provided in this Zoning By-Law.
3. In exercising the powers granted by this Section, the Zoning Board of Appeals may, in
conformity with law, make orders or decisions, revoke, reverse or affirm in whole or in
part, or modify any order or decision, and to that end shall have all powers of the officer
from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit.
4. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals taken by any person (as above defined)
aggrieved by reason of his inability to obtain a Permit or obtain enforcement from the
Inspector of Buildings or any administrative official under the provisions of the Zoning
By-Law or applicable statutes, shall be taken within thirty days from the date of the order
or decision appealed from, by filing a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof,
with the Town Clerk.
B. PLANNING BOARD
The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for Flexible
Developments, construction and determination of flooding and suitability in the Wetlands
and Floodplain Protection Districts, Personal Wireless Services Facilities, Earth Movement,
Day Camps, and Active Adult Residential Developments.
C. BOARD OF SELECTMEN
The Board of Selectmen shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for the uses set forth
in Section V.6 of this Zoning By-law.
(end of Section IX)
69
SECTION X. SPECIAL PERMITS
A. SPECIAL PERMIT FOR USES
The Zoning Board of Appeals and the Planning Board may, as the appropriate designated
Special Permit Granting Authorities, grant Special Permits for the construction, structural
alteration or extension of buildings, structures and premises, establishment of a use or a
change of use as set forth in the Zoning By-Law, and may revoke and amend the same for
appropriate causes. No Special Permit shall be granted by the Special Permit Granting
Authority unless it determines, in addition to factors specified in Section V "Use
Regulations", to be determined by it, that driveways with two curb cuts are permitted in
Weston and may be prohibited or denied by the special permit granting authority when a
project is otherwise before the special permit granting authority only if the SPGA determines
that either curb cut will be injurious to the community or neighborhood safety or tht either
curb cut fails to satisfy factors specified in Section V “Use Regulations.”
1. The proposed use will not be injurious, obnoxious, offensive, dangerous, or a nuisance to
the community or the neighborhood through noise, vibration, concussion, odors, fumes,
smoke, gases, dust, harmful fluids or substances, danger of fire or explosion or other
objectionable feature detrimental to the community or neighborhood health, safety,
convenience, morals or welfare;
2. If required under Section V, the Planning Board has approved the Site Plan as provided in
Section XI "Site Plan Approval."
B. SPECIAL PERMITS IN GENERAL
1. In the event the Special Permit Granting Authority approves a Special Permit under these
provisions, it may require security in the form of a bond or cash or bank book deposited
with the Treasurer of the Town for the timely performance of the site work proposed by
the applicant and for any conditions, modifications and restrictions imposed by the said
Board in connection with the Special Permit. The Zoning Board of Appeals, as Special
Permit Granting Authority, may also require, where it deems necessary, that the person to
which a Special Permit is granted shall submit periodically certified plans showing the
location and elevation of installations and structures placed in or upon the premises of the
project or development for which the Special Permit is granted.
2. Special Permits issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals as Special Permit Granting
Authority shall require the unanimous vote of the three members of the Zoning Board of
Appeals who hear the Special Permit application. Special Permits issued by the Planning
Board shall require at least four affirmative votes of the Planning Board.
3. A Special Permit shall lapse if substantial use of the permit, including any construction
authorized, has not commenced within two years from the grant of the Special Permit
except for good cause. Said two years shall not include the time required to pursue or
await a determination of an appeal from such grant.
4. The Special Permit granting Authority shall hold a public hearing within 65 days after the
filing of the application and, shall take final action on the application within ninety days
after the public hearing. In approving a Special Permit, the Special Permit Granting
Authority may impose such reasonable conditions, modifications and restrictions as the
Special Permit Granting Authority may deem necessary to insure that the proposed
70
construction, reconstruction, substantial exterior alteration, or addition will constitute a
suitable development and will not result in a substantial detriment to the neighborhood or
the environment.
5. In the event that the Special Permit Granting Authority issues or amends a Special Permit
under the provisions of this Section, any construction, reconstruction, substantial exterior
alteration, addition, use or substantial change in use or activity shall be carried on only in
conformity with any conditions, modifications and restrictions to which the Board shall
have made its finding and determination subject, and only in substantial conformity with
the application and the Site Plan on the basis of which the finding and determination are
made.
6. Effective Date of Special Permit: No Special Permit shall take effect until a copy of the
decision has been recorded in the Middlesex Registry of Deeds, or for registered land, in
the Land Court. Such decision shall bear the certification of the Town Clerk that twenty
days has elapsed after the decision has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk and no
appeal has been filed or that if such an appeal has been filed, it has been dismissed or
denied.
(end of Section X)
71
SECTION XI. SITE PLAN APPROVAL
A. SITE PLAN APPROVAL AS A PREREQUISITE
In all instances where Site Plan Approval is required under this Zoning By-law for the
construction, alteration or use of structures or premises, or for the establishment or change
in use of a structure or premises, such construction, extension, alteration, establishment or
change may not commence, and no building permit or occupancy permit may be issued for
the subject structure or premises, until Site Plan Approval has been issued by the Planning
Board. In all instances where both Site Plan Approval and a Special Permit are required
under this Zoning By-law, no Special Permit may be granted until Site Plan Approval has
been issued by the Planning Board.
B. PURPOSE
The purpose of Site Plan Approval is to further the purposes of this Zoning By-Law and the
purposes set forth in Section 2A of Chapter 808 of the Acts and Resolves of 1975.
C. REVIEW FEES
The Applicant shall make available to the Planning Board funds sufficient to cover any
expenses connected with a public hearing and review of plans, including but not limited to
the costs of any engineering or planning consulting services necessary for technical review
purposes.
D. SITE PLAN APPROVAL APPLICATIONS
1. For uses and developments requiring Site Plan Approval, application may be made
to the Planning Board in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Planning
Board’s Site Plan Approval Regulations.
2. The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on a Site Plan Approval
Application within 60 (sixty)days following the date of receipt of a complete
Application submission as determined by the Town Planner. The Planning Board
shall cause notice of the hearing to be mailed, at least two weeks prior to the date of
said hearing, to the Applicant and to all abutters, owners of land directly across any
public or private street or way, and abutters to abutters within three-hundred feet of
the property line of the subject land, as they appear on the most recent applicable
tax list.
3. In those instances where Site Plan Approval is a prerequisite to the grant of a Special
Permit for which the Planning Board is the designated Special Permit Granting
Authority, the Site Plan Approval Application may be heard and considered in
conjunction with the Special Permit Application and, if so, the Planning Board shall
incorporate its decision on the Site Plan Application into the Special Permit Decision.
In all other instances, the Planning Board shall issue its written decision on the
Application within 45(forty-five)days after the close of the public hearing, and mail a
copy of such decision to the Applicant.
72
E. REVIEW OF SITE PLAN - REASONS FOR DISAPPROVAL
The Planning Board shall approve an Application in the form submitted or with
reasonable conditions which shall pertain to the Standards and Criteria set forth
in Subsection F unless the Planning Board finds that:
1. The Application is incomplete;
or
2. The imposition of reasonable conditions would not ensure that the proposed project
would conform to the Standards and Criteria set forth in Subsection F;
or
3. The project does not comply with the requirements of the Zoning By-Law.
F. STANDARDS AND CRITERIA
The Planning Board shall review and evaluate the Application and make a determination as
to whether it is consistent with the Standards and Criteria listed below. If the Planning Board
finds that these Standards and Criteria have been met and the Planning Board does not make
any of the findings set forth in Subsection E, it shall approve the Application with or without
conditions. The Standards and Criteria are as follows:
1. The development shall be integrated into the existing terrain and surrounding landscape.
Building sites shall, to the extent feasible:
a. Minimize use of wetlands, steep slopes, flood plains, hilltops;
b. Preserve natural or historic features;
c. Maximize retention of open space;
d. Preserve scenic views from publicly accessible locations;
e. Minimize tree, vegetation and soil removal, blasting and grade changes;
f. Screen objectionable features from neighboring properties and roadways.
2. The development shall be served with adequate water supply and sewage disposal
systems. For structures to be served by sewage disposal systems, the applicant shall
submit a complete design prepared and stamped by a registered professional engineer and
containing all information required by the Board of Health to approve sewage disposal
systems.
3. The development shall incorporate measures that are adequate to prevent pollution of
surface or groundwater, to minimize erosion and sedimentation, and to prevent changes in
groundwater levels, increased rates of runoff, and minimize potential for flooding.
Drainage shall be designed so that groundwater recharge is maximized, and at the project
boundaries the rate of runoff shall not be increased.
4. To the extent feasible, development shall minimize demands placed on Town services
and infrastructure.
5. The development shall provide for safe vehicular and pedestrian movement within the
site and to adjacent ways, including sidewalks, crosswalks and the like.
73
6. Building design and landscaping shall be in harmony with the prevailing character and
scale of buildings in the neighborhood and the Town including the use of appropriate
building materials, screening, and other architectural techniques.
7. Electric, telephone, cable TV and other such utilities shall be underground except where
this cannot be accomplished because it is physically or environmentally infeasible, in
which case such utilities shall be screened.
8. Exposed storage areas, machinery, service areas, truck loading areas, utility buildings and
structures and other unsightly uses shall be set back and/or screened to protect neighbors
from objectionable features.
9. To the extent feasible, proposed projects shall be designed in such a way as to minimize
shadows on neighboring properties.
10. There shall be no unreasonable glare onto public roads and other public ways, into the
night sky, or onto neighboring properties from lighting or reflection.
11. The site plan shall comply with all zoning requirements.
12. Driveways with two curb cuts are permitted in Weston. Ad development may have a
driveway with two curb cuts. A second curb cut may be prohibited or denied by the
Planning Board when a project is otherwise before the Planning Board for site plan
approval only if the Planning Board finds curb cut fails to satisfy the standards set forth in
paragraphs 3 or 5 directly above.
G. WAIVER
The Planning Board may waive compliance with the public hearing requirements and/or
some or all of the submission requirements set forth herein for those projects that require a
less comprehensive review because they have minor impacts on land use.
H. ENFORCEMENT
The Planning Board may require the posting of a bond or other performance guarantee to
assure compliance with the approved site plan and conditions.
I. REVISIONS AND AMENDMENTS
1. Site Plans under Review
Any revision or new information relating to a proposed site plan that is before the
Planning Board for review shall be accepted by the Planning Board as part of the original
Application with the following exception. If the Planning Board determines that a
proposed revision or new information is so significant that it requires substantial
reconsideration or reanalysis by the Planning Board of the original Application and/or
renotification to the parties in interest and Town Boards and officials, then the Planning
Board may require the applicant to file a new Application.
2. Site Plans Already Approved
All revisions to a site plan that has already been approved must be submitted to the Town
Planner who shall make a determination as to whether the revisions are significant or
insignificant. If the revisions are insignificant, the Town Planner shall approve or deny
them. If the Town Planner determines the revisions are significant, or denies an
74
insignificant revision, he shall so advise the applicant and the Planning Board in writing
within five (5) business days of the applicant's presentation to him/her of the revisions.
The applicant may then submit the proposed revisions to the Planning Board who shall
either accept or reject the proposed revisions as part of the approved site plan.
J. PLANNING BOARD RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL
The Planning Board shall promulgate or amend Rules and Regulations which pertain to the
Site Plan Approval process so long as the Rules and Regulations conform to this Section of
the Zoning By-Law. The adoption or amendment of Rules and Regulations shall be after a
public hearing to receive comments on the proposed or amended Rules and Regulations. The
public hearings shall be advertised once in a newspaper of general local circulation, at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the public hearing.
K. LIMITED SITE PLAN APPROVAL EXCEPTION FOR RELIGIOUS, EDUCATIONAL,
AND CHILD CARE FACILITY USES IN ACCORDANCE WITH G.L. c. 40A, §3.
1. For uses listed under Section V.A.3.c., Limited Site Plan Approval is required for
the construction, alteration or use of structures or premises or for the establishment,
intensification, or change of use of a structure or premises. Construction, extension,
alteration, establishment or change may not commence, and no building permit or
occupancy permit may be issued, until Limited Site Plan Approval has been issued by
the Planning Board.
2. Applications for Limited Site Plan Approval shall be administered consistent with
Sections XI.C though XI.J, with the exception of Sections XI.E and XI.F entitled
Review of Site Plan – Reasons for Disapproval and Standards and Criteria respectively.
3. The Planning Board’s review and evaluation of an application for Limited Site Plan
Approval shall be limited to the following criteria:
a. Adequate parking shall be provided, meeting the applicable requirements of
Section VIII of the Zoning By-law as to minimum number of off-street parking
spaces, the location and size of the parking area(s), and construction standards, in a
manner which allows for safe vehicular maneuvering and pedestrian movement
within the site. Where applicable, adequate facilities for loading and unloading of
stock, merchandise, material, and supplies shall be provided and screened in
accordance with Section VIII.
b. The site drainage shall be designed in accordance with the Town of Weston Storm
Water By-laws in effect at the time.
c. The design and adequacy of the sewage disposal system(s) to serve the proposed
development shall be in accordance with Board of Health requirements.
75
d. Electric, telephone, cable TV and other such utilities shall be installed
underground, except where this cannot be accomplished because it is physically or
environmentally infeasible.
e. Parking areas adjacent to residential uses shall be adequately screened year-round
from view from said residence by trees, vegetation, and/or fence.
f. There shall be no unreasonable glare onto public roads and other public ways, into
the night sky, or onto neighboring properties from lighting or reflection.
g. The site plan shall demonstrate conformance with applicable lot area, setback and
height regulations for the zoning district in which the premises are located.
h. All site improvements shall be designed to limit the amount of earth movement on
and earth removal from the site. In the event that the amount of earth removal
and/or earth movement associated with the proposed site modifications triggers the
provisions of Section V. I. 3 of the Weston Zoning Bylaw (Earth Removal and
Movement), additional zoning relief shall be required under Section V.I. 3.
4. The Planning Board shall approve an Application in the form submitted or with reasonable
conditions which shall pertain to the Standards and Criteria set for in Subsection K.3 unless the
Planning Board finds that the Application is incomplete.
(end of Section XI)
76
SECTION XII. ENFORCEMENT
A. The Inspector of Buildings shall enforce the provisions of this Zoning By-Law and shall
withhold a Building Permit for the construction, alteration or moving of any building or
structure as constructed, if such construction, alteration or moving of such building or
structure would be in violation of this Zoning By-Law; and no Building or Occupancy Permit
or license shall be granted by the Inspector of Buildings for a new use or extended use of a
structure, building or land which use would be in violation of this Zoning By-Law.
B. Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Inspector of Buildings, or the failure of
such Inspector to act upon written request for enforcement, shall have the right to appeal to
the Permit Granting Authority. The word "person" as used herein shall include the owner of
the property involved, any abutter to such property, (including properties across the street),
the appropriate area planning agency, any officer, committee, board or commission of the
Town, or any abutting city or town.
C. If a violation of this Zoning By-Law is found by a court of competent jurisdiction, the fine for
violation of any section of this Zoning By-Law shall not be more than THREE HUNDRED
DOLLARS ($300.00) per day (each day constituting a separate offense) for each day such
violation continues after written notice has been given by the Inspector of Buildings to the
owner or owners of the property in violation by posting in a prominent place on the largest
structure on the property, and delivery in hand or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
to such owner or owners. If delivery by certified mail is not made by reason of the actions of
the said owner or owners, the date for the commencement of violation shall be the date of
posting on the property as above specified.
D. Violation of this Zoning By-Law may also rise to civil action by the Town acting through the
Inspector of Buildings or other appropriate officer.
(end of Section XII)
77
CHRONOLOGY
1928 Zoning By-Law adopted. Residence Districts: 10,000 sq. ft.
1934 Zoning By-Law amendments. Residence Districts: 15,000 sq. ft.
1937 Zoning By-Law amendments. Residence Districts: 20,000; 30,000; or 40,000 sq. ft.
First frontage requirements.
1946 Zoning By-Law amendments. Board of Appeals established to hear appeals in place of
Selectmen.
1950 Zoning By-Law amendments. Business Districts along Boston Post Road.
1952 Zoning By-Law amendments. Church or other religious purpose exemption.
1954 (June 21) Zoning By-Law revised. Complete revision. Residence Districts: 20,000,
30,000, 40,000, or 60,000 square feet. Street frontage and setback increases.
1963 Zoning By-Law revised to require a permit for certain storage in residential districts.
1965 Zoning By-Law amended to provide appeal to Board of Appeals.
1967 Zoning By-Law amended to provide for regulation of signs, for stricter requirements for
lots in a business district, and for no unregistered vehicles remaining outside a building.
1970 Zoning By-Law amended to provide for multiple dwellings and districts therefor.
1974 Zoning By-Law amended to provide Site Plan Review procedures.
1975 Zoning By-Law amended, Board of Appeals may require security for performance
under Site Plan Review.
1975 Zoning By-Law amended. Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection District adopted.
1978 New Zoning By-Law adopted to conform to provisions of Chapter 808 of the Acts of
1975. New multiple-dwelling district, cluster development, accessory apartments
added. Wetlands and Flood Plain protection district amended. Corner obstruction
provision revised and exterior lighting provisions added.
1979 Zoning By-Law amended to provide for certain accessory uses of railroad stations.
1980 Zoning By-Law amended to provide for Research and Development District, regulation
of irregular lots and common driveways, and Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection
Districts A and B.
1981 Zoning By-Law amended to add and delete wetland areas from the Wetlands and Flood
Plain Protection Map.
1982 Zoning By-Law amended to amend the provision for certain accessory uses of railroad
stations.
1985 Zoning By-Law amended to modify the flood plain area near Warren Avenue on the
Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection Map.
1987 Zoning By-Law amended to change: certain requirements of the accessory apartment
provision; rezone land behind Ogilvies from Residential to Limited Industrial.
78
CHRONOLOGY (Continued)
1988 Zoning By-Law amended to: modify certain requirements for height and parking in a
Business B District, and rezone 70 acres from Limited Industrial to Business B and 3
acres from Residence A to Business B near the MBS quarry site; add a provision for
Aquifer Protection Overlay District and creation of a map for said District.
1989 Zoning By-Law text completely rearranged and reorganized; then amended to revise
all Use Categories to provide for By-right Uses, and substitution of Site Plan Approval
for Site Plan Review; professional accessory uses in a residence district deleted and
provision for "occupation(s)" added; Long Term Care moved to Multiple Dwelling
Districts.
1990 Zoning By-Law amended to clarify Site Plan Approval procedures.
1991 Deleted Medical Office use in Residential Zone, added gross floor area limitation for
non-residential uses in a residential zone, and amended Site Plan Approval procedures.
1992 Zoning By-Law reorganized and amended to add exemptions for churches, educational
institutions and child care facilities.
1994 Zoning By-Law amended to replace cluster zoning with flexible development provision.
1997 Zoning By-Law amended to increase minimum street frontage, minimum lot width at
street setback line and at building line in all single family residence districts; to
regulate Residential Gross Floor Area in single family residence districts; to impose a
six month moratorium on wireless communications facilities and to allow limited nonresidential
uses of certain Town-owned Historic Buildings with Site Plan Approval.
1997 Zoning By-Law amended to add Interim Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts
and related regulations and procedures.
1998 Zoning By-Law amended to further regulate irregular lots, amend height regulations,
amend Residential Gross Floor Area provision and allow for a Veterinarian/Animal
Hospital.
1999 Regulate new or replacement construction along designated scenic roads, amend the
residential gross floor area provision to include replacement dwellings. Personal
Wireless Service Overlay Districts regulations and procedures converted from
temporary to permanent.
2000 Amend Table of Height Regulations and Parking regulations in Business, Commercial
and Research and Development Districts requiring Site Plan Approval.
2001 Amend Personal Wireless Service Overlay Districts regulation. Amend definition of
“Replacement Single Family Dwelling.”
2002 Kingsbury Lane added as a designated Scenic Road. Amend Personal Wireless Service
Facility Regulations.
2002 Zoning By-Law amendment renumbered from Section V.B.7.a to Section V.B.2.d By-
Right Uses Allowed With Site Plan Approval.
2003 Amend the description of the Personal Wireless Services Overlay District I boundary.
2005 Zoning By-Law Amendment: Active Adult Residential Development (“AARD”)
79
2008 Zoning By-Law Amendment: Section II, Definitions, by adding the definition of
“Structure”
2009 Zoning By-Law Recodification, reorganization and clarification changes with
Amendments
2010 Zoning By-Law Amended with changes to - Aquifer Protection Overlay District;
Personal Wireless Service Facility Regulations; Wetlands and Floodplain Protection
Districts A&B including changes to the Wetland and Floodplain Protection District
Map, Weston, MA 1980 with amendments through October 19, 1981
2010 Zoning By-Law Amendment: Section II, Definitions, by changing the definition of
“grade” to be based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88)
2011 Amend Zoning By-Law Section II, Definitions, by adding the definition of “Earth” and
“Move or Movement”; amend Section IX.B inserting Earth Movement and “Day
Camps” in text; amend and replace the text in Section V.I.3. by inserting the text
“Material Removal and Earth Movement”; amend Zoning By-Law by adopting a new
Renewable Energy Overlay District
2012 Amend Zoning By-Law, Section II, by changing the definition of “Farm”; amend
Zoning By-Law by inserting Section IV.B. 7. “Renewable Energy Overlay District”;
Amend Zoning By-Law, Section XI.K. “Limited Site Plan Approval”
2012 Amend Zoning By-Law, Section V., I.3, Earth Removal and Movement
2013 Zoning By-Law Amendment: Section II, Definitions, by adding the definitions of
“Destruction/Demolition”, “Non-Commercial Club”, and “Professional”.
2014 Amend Zoning By-Law, Section VIII.A.1 by replacing Paragraph k. with new text and
adding a new Paragraph l.; amend Section XI.K.by inserting in Section 3, a new
subsection “h” to follow “g”.
2015 Amend Zoning By-Law, IV.B.7. by adding a third parcel: Map #18, Parcel #28-10.
Renewable Energy Overlay District.
Amend Zoning By-Law Section VI, “Dimensional & Other Requirements”, Section A,
“General” add new subsection 5., “site alteration approval process”.
2017 Amend Zoning By-Law Section V.J. of Article VIII Personal Wireless Service Facility
Regulations (Article 23 ATM 5.8.17) and Section V use Regulations, Section X Special
Permits and Section XI Site Plan Approval ( Article 24 ATM 5.8.17 Citizen Petition)
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
RULES AND REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL INFORMATION
1.00 Purpose of the Subdivision Control Law (Section 81-M of M.G. L. Chp. 41)
The Subdivision Control Law has been enacted for the purpose of protecting the safety,
convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants of the cities and towns in which it is, or may hereafter be, put
in effect by regulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing access to the
several lots therein, but which have not become public ways, and ensuring sanitary conditions in
subdivisions and in proper cases parks and open areas. The powers of a Planning Board and of a Board of
Appeal under the subdivision control law shall be exercised with due regard for the provision of adequate
access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for lessening
congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways; for reducing danger to life and limb in the
operation of motor vehicles; for securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic, and other emergencies;
for ensuring compliance with the applicable zoning ordinances or bylaws; for securing adequate
provisions for water, sewage, drainage, underground utility services, fire, police, and other similar
municipal equipment, street lighting, and other requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and for
coordinating the ways in neighboring subdivisions. Such powers may also be exercised with due regard
for the policy of the commonwealth to encourage the use of solar energy and protect the access to direct
sunlight of solar energy systems. It is the intent of the subdivision control law that any subdivision plan
filed with the Planning Board shall receive the approval of such Board if said plan conforms to the
recommendation of the Board of Health and to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Planning Board
pertaining to subdivision of land; provided, however, that such Board may, when appropriate, waive, as
provided for in Section 81R, such portions of the rules and regulations as is deemed advisable.
Added by st. 1953, c. 674, s. 7; amended by St. 1957, c. 265 and St. 1969, c. 884, s. 3, St.
1985, c. 637, s. 8
1.01 General
The Subdivision Control Law provides guidelines for the exercise of the powers of the
Weston Planning Board. Thereunder, the Town of Weston Planning Board has adopted an Official Map,
and has made studies of the location of streets and other ways in the Town. Copies of the Official Map
and of such studies may be examined at the office of the Town Engineer. Subdivision plans filed with the
Board shall comply with statutory standards, the Zoning Bylaw, and the Board’s Rules and Regulations.
1.02 Definitions
Unless the context clearly requires some other meaning, the following words or phrases,
and their equivalents, shall have the respective meanings. The word “shall” is intended to be mandatory,
the word “may” is merely permissive, the singular includes the plural, and the present tense includes the
future, and other words and phrases have the following meanings.
2
“Abutters”: owners of land sharing a common property line, owners of land directly
opposite on any public or private street or way, and abutters to the abutters within 300 feet of the property
lot line of the applicant as they appear on the most recent tax list, notwithstanding that the land of any
such owner may be located in another municipality.
“Applicant”: the person who applies for the approval of a plan. The Applicant must be the
owner or owners of all the land being divided. An agent, representative or other entity may act for an
owner, provided written evidence of such fact is submitted.
“Board”: the Planning Board of the Town of Weston.
“Lot”: a contiguous area of land in one ownership with definite boundaries shown on a plan
or deed (such plan being approved by the Planning Board and on file with the Town Engineer or such
deed(s) and plan having being recorded in the Registry of Deeds).
“Municipal Services”: public utilities furnished by the Town.
“Nonresidential Subdivision”: A subdivision of land: (1) of which a part or all of the land is
in a zoning district other than single family Residence A, B, C or D, or (2) on which a development,
(other than conventional, single family detached residences), including but not limited to, clusters,
townhouses, multifamily, congregate apartments, and all commercial, retail office, municipal and
religious purposes.
“Owner”: Any individual or entity having 1% or more beneficial interest in the property
under consideration.
“Residential Subdivisions”: A subdivision of land that is entirely in Residence District A, B,
C, and/or D which is to be developed as conventional, single family detached homes.
“Streets”: a way, either public or private, that provides access to land so as to satisfy the
purposes of MGL C. 41, Section 8l-M.
“Subdivider”: the Applicant for the land being subdivided.
“Subdivision”: subdivision as defined in said Chapter 41, the Subdivision Control Law,
section 81K through 81GG inclusive, and any amendments thereof, additions thereto, or substitutions
thereof.
“Subdivision Control Law”: Chapter 41, Section 81K through 81GG inclusive of the
Massachusetts General Laws, as amended from time to time.
1.03 Compliance with Zoning Bylaw
The location of buildings and other structures on land involved in subdivision or other plans
submitted to the Board, and the subdivision of such land into lots, shall comply with the Town Zoning
Bylaw then in effect or with a variance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
3
1.04 No Expense to Town
a) All streets, sidewalks, water mains and pipes, hydrants, fire-alarm systems,
drains, drain manholes, catch basins, culverts and other related facilities and municipal
services shall be installed in subdivisions completed in accordance with these Rules and
Regulations and without expense to the Town.
b) Water mains and pipes (other than service pipes), hydrants and fire-alarm
systems will be installed by the Town at the expense of the subdivider.
c) In the event that the Planning Board determines that outside consultants are
necessary to assist the Planning Board in evaluating the impact of the proposal, these costs
will be borne by the Applicant.
1.05 Additional Requirements and Waivers
The Board may, in a particular case where such action is in the interest of good planning, in
the public interest, and not inconsistent with the intent and purpose of the Subdivision Control Law:
a) require information and impose requirements and conditions in addition to
those set forth in these Rules and Regulations.
and/or
b) waive strict compliance with these Rules and Regulations.
1.06 Severability
If for any reason any part or parts of these Rules and Regulations should be held to be
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remainder.
1.07 Plan Format
Unless otherwise specified, all originals shall be on mylar or linen of size 24” x 36” and
clear and legible throughout. Plans that do not meet these standards will not be recognized as a proper
filing
1.08 Fees
(1) Approval Not Required
(2) Pre-submission Review
(3) Preliminary Subdivision
(4) Definitive Subdivisions
(5) Others
4
1.09 Development Impact Report
No Applicant may file a Definitive Subdivision Plan for any subdivision of more than 10
acres or anticipated to generate 200 or more average daily vehicle trips (ADT) per weekday at buildout or
in ten years whichever is sooner, without submitting a Development Impact Report (DIR). The required
scope of the DIR will be established by the Planning Board within 14 days of the receipt of the filing, and
may include the project’s impact on the factors listed below, mitigating measures that can be taken for all
adverse impacts, and alternative land uses considered, including the “No build” option. Data used to
evaluate the impact of development must be local or regional where applicable. The Planning Board must
approve the data base before accepting submission of the DIR.
a) Traffic & parking
b) Air quality
c) Water quality & supply (surface and ground, public and private)
d) Noise
e) Dust/odors
f) Light & shadow
g) Erosion & sedimentation control
h) Drainage
i) Wildlife
j) Public safety
k) Public or community services, including but not limited to school, library,
police, fire & infrastructure
l) Historical or archaeological sites
m) Hazardous materials
n) Neighborhood & town characters
o) Fiscal
The Planning Board, at its discretion, and based on a preliminary assessment of the scale and
type of development proposed, may waive or modify the requirements for submission.
In addition, the Planning Board will require a description of the long range anticipated
use of all portions of the property on which the project is proposed which will not be developed currently
as part of the project, as well as the anticipated long range use of all property owned or controlled by the
Applicant which is contiguous to the property on which the project is proposed. For proposals subject to
MEPA for which an EIR is required, the EIR may replace the DIR in whole or in part as directed by the
Planning Board.
1.10 Metrowest Notification
If the project is covered under 1 or more of the following categories, or if the Planning
Board determines the project to be of more than local significance, then the Subdivider must file a
Development Notification Form (DNF), copy in the Appendix, with the Metrowest Growth Management
5
Committee office within 5 days of filing a Preliminary and Definitive Subdivision Plan(s). Proof of
receipt will be required.
Projects in the following categories will require the filing of the DNF.
a) Institutional, commercial or industrial developments in excess of 50,000
square feet of total floor area or which add 100 or more parking spaces.
b) Residential developments in excess of 10 one- or two- family dwellings, or 50
multifamily dwe1ling units.
c) Developments of any size that have access directly through another
community.
d) Any development, other than a one-or two-family residence, or any way or
parking lot within 400 feet of the border of another community or of a numbered state or county
highway.
6
ARTICLE II. .
PLANS NOT REQUIRING APPROVAL UNDER SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW. (SECTION 81-P)
2.00 General
Any person who wishes to cause to be, recorded in the Registry of Deeds or to be filed with
the Land Court a plan of land who believes that the plan does not require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law may submit the plan, completed application (Form A) and the filing fee to the Board under
this Section for consideration for endorsement by the Planning Board.
2.01 Form of Plan
Each plan shall be prepared by a surveyor registered in Massachusetts, shall conform to the
Rules and Regulations of the Registry of Deeds of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and when
applicable, with the Manual of Instructions of the Massachusetts Land Court. The plan shall be drawn to a
scale which, in the opinion of the Board, shows all details clearly. The plans shall be 24” x 36” only.
2.02 Content of the Plan
Each plan shall show the name of the owner of the land, address or location of the land, the
name and address of the registered land surveyor who has prepared the plan, original seal and signature,
and the scale and date of the plan. Each plan shall bear the legend “Subdivision approval not required”
and the legend “Signing of this plan by the Weston Planning Board does not presume the creation of lots
conforming to the Zoning Bylaws of Weston”. Each plan shall show the entire lot being affected, street
frontage in feet, a locus map at a scale of 1” = 500’, all easements of record, buildings, deed references,
notice of any decisions by the Zoning Board of Appeals concerning this property, and shall contain other
information as is necessary, in the opinion of the Board, to identify the land involved and to enable the
Board to determine to its satisfaction that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not required.
Each plan shall show the name of all abutters as determined by the Town’s latest tax list.
Each plan shall show the zoning district or districts, including Overlay Districts in which the
property is located. In the event that the property is within two zoning districts, the zoning district line
shall be shown to the boundary lines of the property.
Each parcel on the plan shall show the coefficient of irregularity as defined by the Zoning
Bylaw.
2.03 Filing Procedure
Each plan shall be filed with the appropriate filing fee in the Town Planner’s office, and
shall be accompanied by a completed and signed application form substantially in the form of Form A
attached to these Rules and without a copy of the plan) shall also be filed with the Town Clerk by the
Applicant. Proof of receipt by the Town Clerk shall be attached to the Form A delivered to the Town
Planner.
7
2.04 Number of Copies
In addition to the linen or mylar original submitted to the Board for signature, one
reproducible and one print of the plan shall be filed with the Board at the time of filing the application.
The signed original will be returned to the Applicant.
2.05 Plans Not Requiring Action by Planning Board
A person may file a plan in the Registry of Deeds or the Land Court without application to the
Board, provided that the following certificate appears on said plan: (two prints shall be delivered to the
Planning Board for the Town files.)
“I hereby certify that the property lines shown on this plan are the lines dividing existing
ownership, and the lines of the streets and ways shown are those of public or private streets or
ways already established, and that no new lines for division of existing ownership or for new
ways are shown.”
Signed_______________________________
Registered Land Surveyor
8
ARTICLE III.
SUBDIVISIONS
3.00 General
Article III details the procedure for submission and approvals of Preliminary and Definitive
subdivision plans. The Board endeavors to follow a standard procedure in the processing of an
application, but recognizes that it can be modified on a case by case basis. The general procedure is set
forth as follows, but the Board reserves the right to depart from these guidelines in any lawful way it
deems appropriate and necessary.
3.01 Pre-submission Review
Prior to undertaking extensive design efforts, it often proves useful to review a conceptual
plan of the proposed development with the Planning Board before a Preliminary or Definitive Subdivision
application is filed. The Board is open to such initial informal conferences where general approaches and
potential problems can be freely explored. The applicant is, however, cautioned that no commitments or
approvals of a subdivision are inferred or granted by the Board at any point other than those issued by the
Board in the formal decision on an Application for a Definitive Subdivision.
3.02 Preliminary Subdivision Application
A. Submission Procedure An applicant, before submitting a Definitive Subdivision
application may, for a residential project, and shall, for a nonresidential project, submit a Preliminary plan
together with the Filing and Review fee. Within five business days of submission of a Preliminary plan
the applicant shall contact the Town Planner to verify that the application is complete, and to schedule an
appointment with the Planning Board.
B. Content of Preliminarv Subdivision Plans A Preliminary Subdivision plan shall be
shown on sheets of size 24” x 36”, consecutively numbered, submitted to the Town Planner and Planning
Board’s Consulting Engineer and be drawn at a scale of one inch to fifty feet (l”—50’). Such plan shall
contain, in addition to other information that may be requested by the Board, the following:
a) the subdivision name (if any), boundaries, north arrow, date, scale, legend, and
title “Preliminary Plan”;
b) the names of all Owners, the Applicant (if different from the Owner) and the
name of the designer, engineer or surveyor;
c) the names of all abutters, and their entire property lines;
d) the existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements and any public areas
within the subdivision, including street connections and extensions to adjoining land:
e) the proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing natural
waterways, and information on the proposed sewage disposal system for each lot;
f) the approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate areas and
dimensions and coefficient of irregularity.
9
g) the names, approximate location and widths of adjacent streets;
h) the topography of the land in a general manner, including
(1) land within 100 feet of the property boundary;
(2) contour lines shown at two (2) foot intervals on the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum;
(3) existing buildings;
(4) major site features such as rock ridges, ledge outcroppings, swamps and
bodies of water;
(5) limits of wetland vegetation and flood elevations;
(6) location of existing utilities.
i) profiles of proposed streets at an horizontal scale of one inch to each fifty feet
(l”=50’) and a vertical scale of one inch to each five feet (l”=5’) and, when requested by the
Board, cross-sections of the proposed streets, at specified locations drawn at a scale of l”5’
horizontal and vertical, i.e., no distortion of scale.
j) zoning classification of land to be subdivided, and zoning district boundaries
where applicable, including any Overlay Districts.
k) Any easements, covenants or restrictions applying to the area proposed to be
subdivided, prior variances and special permits.
l) An area-wide plan showing information required by B(c) and B(d) together
with C.
C. Overall Development Plan In the case of only part of any contiguous property in one
ownership being subdivided, the Preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a separate plan showing
schematically the proposed development including all the contiguous land in one ownership and
indicating the section for which approval is sought.
D. Projections of Streets Streets within the subdivision shall be projected to connect with
existing, planned, or potential streets.
In order for the Board to determine appropriate street projections, the subdivider shall provide
a 24” x 26” Area wide Property and Street Reference Map which shall show, at a scale of l”=300’, lot
lines, easements therein for trails, drainage or other purposes, all public lands, wetlands and water bodies
minor and major roads, land parcels and developments. This map may be compiled from the Town
Assessors maps, wetland maps, USGS Quadrangle sheets, etc.
If adjoining property is, in the opinion of the Board, suitable for eventual development,
provision shall be made for proper projection of streets into such property by continuing appropriate
streets within the subdivision to the perimeter thereof.
Streets with temporary dead ends, laid out to allow future projection, shall conform to the
provisions of alignment, width, and grade that would be applicable to such streets if extended.
E. Adequacv of Streets Submission must include information on the adequacy as to design
and capacity of existing external and internal streets to handle the expected traffic from the subdivision.
No subdivision shall be approved unless the Planning Board, following its public hearing and consultation
10
with the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Highway supervisor, determines that access will be adequate in
light of the expected traffic.
In order to properly evaluate existing traffic under “worst case” conditions, recorded traffic
volumes must be adjusted to represent the heaviest traveled period of the year.
F. Site Walk After the meeting with the Planning Board where the Preliminary filing is
discussed, the Planning Board may schedule a field walk of the proposed subdivision. In order to
optimize the usefulness of a field walk, the Board shall be accompanied on the visit by the Applicant or
his representative, and the Engineer of record who prepared the Plans. The locus shall be further
physically identified as to the location of perimeter boundaries, abutting properties, proposed right of
way, centerline stationing, wetlands, and other physical features all of which shall be shown on a half
scale plan furnished to each Planning Board member and shall be identified on the property in accordance
with the flagging specifications set forth in an Appendix to these Rules and Regulations.
G. Action by the Board on a Preliminary Plan Within 45 days of submission of a
complete Preliminary Plan application, the Board may approve, approve with modifications, or
disapprove the plan. No such decision by the Board constitutes a waiver of the Board’s right to take any
action it deems appropriate on the Definitive Subdivision submission independent of any prior action.
3.03 Definitive Subdivision Application
A. Submission Procedure
a) To Planning Board A Definitive Subdivision Plan shall be submitted to
the Planning Board through the Town Planner with 1) the Filing and Review Fee; 2) a
completed Application Form B; and 3) all the information required for a Definitive
Subdivision Plan as set forth below including lotting plan(s), topographic plans,
plan/profile(s) of each proposed street, detail sheets and studies and reports as may be
necessary and 4) an area—wide plan showing information required under 3.02 B (c) - (h)
and C.
The Applicant shall also give written notice of such filing to the Town Clerk either
by delivery or by registered mail, postage prepaid, and shall also provide the Town Clerk
with a duplicate Application Form B.
b) Submission to Other Agencies Simultaneous with the submission to the
Board, a complete set of definitive subdivision plans shall be submitted to the Police Chief,
Fire Chief, Highway Department, Water Department, Town Engineer and Planning Board’s
Consulting Engineer, and the Board of Health by the applicant for such action as they deem
appropriate under the governing statutes or circumstances. The applicant shall obtain a
receipt acknowledging submission of the plan, and submit such receipt or a copy thereof to
the Board. A filing shall not be complete until the Town Planner has received such receipts.
c) 3. Effective Date of Filing An Application shall not be deemed filed until 1)
all information required for a Definitive Subdivision Plan herein has been furnished to the
Town Planner, 2) the Filing and Review fee has been paid; and 3) the Town Planner has
provided Applicant with a written receipt which shall include a statement by the Town
Planner that the Application is complete. The Town Planner has five (5) business days from
the date of submission to certify that the application is complete. The date of submission of
11
the Definitive Plan shall be the date of mailing or delivery, or if the Application was
incomplete at that time, then the date such Application was made complete.
d) Form of Plans The plans of each Definitive Subdivision Submission shall be
prepared by a surveyor or engineer registered in Massachusetts and shall be clearly and
legibly drawn on mylar in ink. Sheet size shall be 24” x 26” only and consecutively
numbered, and at a scale of 1” = 50’ unless otherwise specified.
In addition to other information as may be required by the Board, all
Applications for Definitive Subdivisions shall include the following:
e) Number of Copies One duplicate tracing transparency and two prints of each
plan sheet shall be filed with the board.
f) Content of Definitive Subdivision Plans
(1) Lotting Plans Each lotting plan shall contain the following information:
(2) Subdivision name, if any, perimeter boundary lines showing all metes and
bounds, legend, north point, date, scale and legend;
(3) Name of the owner(s) and the Applicant;
(4) Name and address of the person preparing the plan together with his or her
Massachusetts registration certificate number as land surveyor or engineer;
(5) Names of all abutters, and approximate lot lines;
(6) Zoning classification of land to be subdivided and zoning district boundaries
where applicable, including Overlay Districts;
(7) Any easements, covenants or restrictions applying to the area proposed to be
subdivided, notes as to prior variances and special permits;
(8) Location, width and name of all existing and proposed streets and ways;
location and width of all existing and proposed easements and rights of way on or
within 100 feet of the subdivision; and location, area and all metes and bounds of all
proposed lots and public and common areas within the subdivision;
(9) Location and outline of all existing buildings, structures, utilities, cesspools
and septic tanks within the subdivision and within 100 feet of the subdivision;
(10) Location and size of all existing arid proposed wells, streams, brooks,
drains, catch basins, culverts, drainage facilities, water mains and appurtenances and
sidewalks not otherwise shown on the plans and profiles of streets;
(11) Bearings and distances or radii and arcs shall be shown on all pertinent
lines, as shall the location of existing and proposed monuments;
(12) Location, widths and names of all streets bounding on, or otherwise in the
opinion of the Board pertinent to the subdivision;
(13) Wetlands and Flood Plain district boundaries; Aquifer Protection Overlay
District boundaries; Coefficient of Irregularity for each lot, and zoning district
boundaries;
(14) Further define locus i.e. extent of surrounding property to be included. An
accurate area wide plan of the entire subdivision drawn at a scale of one inch to each
12
five hundred feet (1” = 500’) on the first sheet of the lotting plans together with
items required under B(b);
(15) A statement that an individual sewage disposal permit for each lot must be
obtained from the Weston Board of Health.
(16) Each lotting plan to be recorded in the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds
shall contain appropriate space for signatures, date of endorsement and a form of
endorsement for approval by the Board. Normally such endorsement shall read:
“Approved___________________, 20___, subject to terms and conditions of an
agreement dated ________________, 20___, between the Weston Planning Board on
behalf of the Town of Weston and , a copy of which
agreement is recorded herewith and subject also to recording of this plan and, said
agreement in the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds on or before 20___.”
(17) Each lotting plan to be recorded in the land Court shall bear the
following endorsement:
“Approved__________________, 20___, subject to terms and conditions of a
covenant dated________________, 20___.”
___________________, 20___ Weston Planning Board
(18) Each lotting plan shall bear the fol1owing endorsements of the Town Clerk:
“Notice of Approval received and filed _________________, 20___, No Notice of
Appeal was received during the 20 days next after the above receipt filing.
__________________, 20___ Town Clerk
(19) Each lotting plan shall contain appropriate space to list all waivers granted
by the Board and Signature block for the Board.
2. Topographic/Site Plan Each topographic/site plan shall contain the following
information.
a) All those requirements listed in paragraph D.1 (a) through (k) above.
l) Topography of the land to include an area at least 100’ around and outside the
subdivision boundary, as directed by the Planning Board, including contour lines at two—
foot intervals based on the National Geodetic Vertical Datum. Reference must be made to
an established Town Benchmark. The Plan shall indicate existing and proposed grades;
m) Location, size and species of any trees having a caliper of 6” at 12” above
ground or greater and major site features such as rock outcroppings, swamps, and bodies of
water and stonewalls. Trees that are proposed to be removed as part of the development
shall have an “X” shown on the Plan;
n) Spot elevations of centerline of watercourse 200’ up and down stream from
boundaries;
o) Limit of 100’ buffer around wetlands boundary as defined under the Wetlands
Protection Act and limit of 200’ buffer as defined under the Rivers Protection Act;
p) Location and logs of all soil borings, test pits, observation holes;
q) Boundaries of Wetlands and Flood Plain Protection Districts A and B with their
elevations based on National Geodetic Vertical Datum, and Aquifer Protection Overlay
District;
13
r) For each lot, locations of sufficient percolation and groundwater tests to define
at least one area capable of accepting the septic tank effluent from a four bedroom house with
a garbage disposal unit under the currently existing Board of Health requirements, which tests
were witnessed by an agent of the Board of Health;
s) The potential septic field area, defined by the test holes, delineated by a dashed
line;
t) A statement that a Board of Health approval of a leaching site plan does not
constitute the issuance of a septic system permit, which must later be obtained for each lot;
and that Board of Health certification does not grant the buyer of the lot immunity from more
stringent requirements for subsurface disposal which may be adopted after the subdivider’s
tests;
u) A dashed line on the Plan that delineates the line of clearing/regrading necessary
for construction, labeled “limit of clearing line”;
v) A comprehensive erosion and sedimentation plan, submitted to the Board, the
Planning Board’s consulting engineer and the Town Engineer showing the stages of
construction and the measures to limit water borne and wind induced erosion, which shall
include quick rooting vegetation, expedious stabilization of disturbed areas, hay bales,
siltation fences and diversions.
3. Plan/Profile Plans Each plan/profile shall, be drawn at a horizontal scale of l”=50’ and a
vertical scale of l”=5’. Both the horizontal and vertical datum shall tied be to the State horizontal control
system and NGVD vertical datum with reference to an established Town Bench Mark.
Each plan/profile sheet shall contain:
a) Boundary lines of ways, north point, scale, and date of plan;
b) Name and address of person preparing the plan together with a Massachusetts
registration certificate number as land surveyor or engineer;
c) Bearings and distances, radii and arcs, central angle and tangent distances on
all curves, with stationing on the center line;
d) The existing ground contour on the street center line in a solid black line, the
existing right side in a short dash line and the existing left side in a long dash line; the
proposed grade shall be shown in a heavy line;
e) The grade of all existing streets intersecting the proposed streets shall be
shown for at least 200 feet each side of the intersection of the new street center lines;
f) The proposed water mains and appurtenances, drainage, catch basins,
manholes, pipes and any other drainage facilities, together with the location of the proposed
footpaths, shall be shown on both plan and profile, with all utility crossings shown by
elevation;
g) Such additional information as the Board may deem necessary;
E. Overall Development Plan In the case of only part of a parcel of land held in one
ownership being subdivided, the Definitive Subdivision plan shall be accompanied by a separate plan
showing schematically a proposed development of all the contiguous land held in one ownership and
indicating the section for which approval is sought.
14
F. Projections of Streets Streets within the subdivision shall be projected to connect with
existing, planned, or potential streets.
In order for the Board to determine appropriate street projections, the subdivider shall provide
a 24” x 36” Area wide Property and Street Reference Map which shall show, at a scale of l”=300’, lot
lines, easements therein for trails, drainage or other purposes, all public lands, wetlands and water bodies,
minor and major roads, land parcels and developments. This map may be compiled from the Town
Assessors naps, wetland maps, USGS Quadrangle sheets, etc.
If adjoining property is, in the opinion of the Board, suitable for eventual development,
provision shall be made for proper projection of streets into such property, by continuing appropriate
streets within the subdivision to the perimeter thereof.
Streets with temporary dead ends, laid out to allow future projection, shall conform to the
provisions of alignment, width, and grade that would be applicable to such streets if extended.
G. Adequacy of Streets Submission must include information on the adequacy as to design
and capacity of existing external and internal streets to handle the expected traffic from the subdivision.
No subdivision shall be approved unless the Planning Board, following its public hearing and consultation
with the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Highway supervisor, determines that access will be adequate in
light of the expected traffic.
In order to properly evaluate existing traffic under “worst case” conditions, recorded traffic
volumes must be adjusted to represent the heaviest traveled time of day and period of the year.
H. Site Walk After the meeting with the Planning Board where the Preliminary filing is
discussed, the Planning Board may schedule a field walk of the proposed subdivision. In order to
optimize the usefulness of a field walk, the Board shall be accompanied on the visit by the Applicant or
his representative, and the Engineer of record who prepared the Plans. The locus shall be further
physically identified as to the location of perimeter boundaries, abutting properties, proposed road right of
way, centerline stationing, wetlands, and other physical features all of which shall be shown on a half
scale plan furnished to each Planning Board member and shall be identified on the property to be in
accordance with the flagging specifications as set forth in Appendix to these Rules and Regulations.
I. Public Hearing The Board will not take action on a Definitive Subdivision plan until it
shall have held a public hearing with respect to such plan. Notice of each such public hearing shall be
given by the Board in accordance with the laws of the commonwealth of Massachusetts.
J. Action by the Board After the public hearing, the Board will approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the Definitive Subdivision. Nothing shall be construed as a limitation on the
authority of the Board to condition its approval of any plan upon the fulfillment of conditions whether or
not such conditions are specifically set forth in these Rules and Regulations.
The Board will then file a Certificate of Action with the Town Clerk and will send notice of
its action by certified mail to the applicant at the address stated in the application. The Board will send a
copy of the decision to any person upon written request stating the name and address of the person to
whom the decision shall be sent.
K. Time Limit on Subdivision Approval The Planning Board’s approval of a Definitive
Subdivision plan shall expire at the end of five months unless it is duly recorded in the Middlesex
Registry of Deeds or with the Recorder of the land Court including all easements and restrictions.
15
3.04 Other Information
A. Endorsement of Plans Prior to endorsement of the Definitive Subdivision
plans:
1. the statutory appeal period must be over without an appeal being filed;
2. all easements and other documents must be submitted to the Board for approval as
to form;
3. the Subdivider shall prepare for the Board’s execution the Agreement and Contract
(Forms D & E);
4. Subdivider shall provide for long-term provisions for maintenance of the proposed
streets within the subdivision until such time as all the houses are constructed
and/or the performance guarantee is released. Such provision shall be in the form
of a recordable instrument. The Subdivider, or any heir, successor or assignee shall
be bound by such provisions.
5. all other conditions that were part of the approval and subject to action prior to
endorsement must be satisfied.
B. Provision of Performance Guarantee Before endorsing an approved Definitive
Subdivision Plan, the Planning Board shall require that the Subdivider file with the Planning Board a
performance guarantee to secure the construction of ways and the installation of municipal services. The
following section outlines the kinds of performance guarantees permitted under MGL Chapter 41, Section
81-U. The guarantees are of two kinds: a covenant and sureties. While the method may be selected and
varied from time to time by the Subdivider or successor in interest, the Planning Board prefers the use of
an Agreement/Covenant and may submit other forms of performance guarantee to Town Counsel for
review as to form, and manner of execution. The Planning Board will not accept any bond or other surety
that has a fixed expiration date. Letters of credit or negotiable securities are unacceptable.
Listed below are the methods by which the installation of ways and municipal services
are secured, and which are allowed and specified in MGL Chapter 41, Section 81-U.
(1) By a Covenant/Agreement, executed and duly recorded by the owner of
record and running with the land, providing that the ways and services shall be
constructed to serve any lot before such lot may be built upon or conveyed, other
than by mortgage deed. However, a mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged
premises by foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding owner of such premises or
part thereof may sell any such lot, subject to that portion of the Covenent/ Agreement
which provides that no lot shall be built upon until such ways and services have been
provided to serve such lot; and provided, further, that nothing herein shall be deemed
to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to such covenant, of either the
entire parcel of land shown on the Definitive Subdivision Plan _____ of all lots not
previously released by the Planning Board. A deed of any part of the subdivision in
violation hereof shall be voidable by the grantee prior to the release of the
Agreement/Covenant but not later than three (30 years from the date of such deed.
See Form D for Agreement/ Covenant format.
16
This Agreement/Covenant shall be referred to on the Definitive Subdivision
Plan as follows:
“A Conditional Approval Agreement/Covenant between the Weston Planning
Board and _____________ (the Subdivider and owner), dated______, to secure the
completion of required ways and utilities has been executed and is recorded at the
Middlesex South Registry of Deeds with this Plan.”
(2) By a deposit of money or by proper bond, sufficient in the opinion of the
Planning Board, to secure performance of the construction of ways and the
installation of municipal services required for lots in the subdivision shown on the
Plan, each bond or deposit contingent upon the construction and such installation
within such period as the Planning Board shall determine.
If the Planning Board shall decide at any time during the term of the performance
guarantee that the character and extent of the subdivision requires additional
improvements, previously waived, then the Planning Board may modify its
requirements in accordance with MGL Chapter 41, Section 81 W for any or all such
improvements and the face value of such performance bond, or amount of deposit of
money or value of securities may be increased by an appropriate amount. Such
increase may be requested by the Planning Board and consented to by the Applicant,
or imposed through the procedure for amending an approved Definitive Subdivision
Plan.
(3) By delivery to the Planning Board of an agreement executed after the
recording of a first mortgage covering the premises shown on the plan or a portion
thereof given as security for advances to be made to the applicant by the lender,
which agreement shall be executed by the applicant, and the lender shall provide for
the retention by the lender of funds sufficient in the opinion of the Planning Board
and otherwise due to the applicant, to secure the construction as ways and installation
of municipal services. Said agreement shall also provide for a schedule of
disbursements which may be made to the applicant upon completion of various
stages of the work, and shall further provide that in the event the work is not
completed within the time set forth by the applicant, any funds remaining
undisbursed shall be available to the Town of Weston for the completion of the
required ways and utilities.
C. Copies of Endorsed Plan After a Definitive Subdivision plan has been endorsed by the
Board, the applicant shall furnish the Board one set of 1/2 scale reproducible copies of each drawing of
the Subdivision plans.
D. Recording of Plan Within ten (10) days after the Definitive Subdivision plans, as
approved and endorsed, along with the Certificate of Action, have been recorded in the Registry of Deeds
or in the case of registered land, with the records of the Land Court, the applicant shall notify the Board in
writing of the date of such recording and show evidence of the recording of the plan and the Certificate of
Action and the Agreement/Covenant, if applicable. The Applicant shall file one reproducible of the
recorded subdivision with the Town Planner and one print with the Building Inspector, Town Engineer,
Assessor, Board of Health and Police and Fire Department.
E. Release of Lots The Town will not release lots in a subdivision for building purposes
until utilities are installed and binder placed on the subdivision roadways, and inspection and approval
granted by the Planning Board’s consulting engineer, pursuant to Section VI. B. 1. Minimum
Requirements, in the Zoning By-Law and in consideration of public safety.
17
3.05 Time Period and Extensions for Construction of Required Improvements
Construction of all required improvements shall be completed within two (2) years of the date
of recordation of the approved Definitive Subdivision Plan. A subdivider may request an extension to the
two year period in which the required improvements may be constructed. The request may be submitted
in writing to the Planning Board stating what further time period to complete the required improvements
is required and the reasons why an extension is requested. The Planning Board may grant an extension of
not more than one (1) year on the motion of four members. More than one extension may be granted.
As a condition of permitting the extension, the Planning Board shall have the right to revise
the amount of sureties to ensure that sufficient adequate funds to insure the completion of the required
improvements are retained and shall have the right to revise the Agreement/Covenant to reflect the
increased construction period and any additional conditions to ensure satisfactory completion of the
subdivision improvements.
3.06 Certificate of Construction
Following completion of the Subdivision construction, the applicant must record in the
Registry of Deeds or with the Recorder of the Land Court a certificate from the Board that the conditions
have been satisfied (Form G).
Each Certificate of the Board will be issued only after the Board is satisfied that all
conditions have been satisfied and after the filing with the Board of a completed and signed request form
substantially in the form of Form F, and the receipt by the Board of the written approval of the Town
Engineer, the Superintendent of Streets, the Chief of the Fire Department and any other Town official
concerned with the performance of any other conditions contained in the agreement between the
subdivider and the Board.
3.07 Procedures for the Release or Reduction in Performance Guarantees
Upon completion of some or all of the improvements for which a performance guarantee was
given, the subdivider may request a full or partial release of the bond, deposit or covenant by sending a
statement of completion and a request for release by registered mail to the Planning Board.
Such written request shall be accompanied by two (20 copies of a certificate by a Registered
Professional Engineer which shall describe work completed in the subdivision and its conformity with the
approved Definitive Subdivision Plan. The Planning Board, upon receipt of such written notice and
certificate, shall consult with the Town Planner, Planning Board’s consulting engineer and any other
relevant Boards or Departments to determine whether the subdivider has complied with all requirements
of the approved Definitive Subdivision Plan and these Rules and Regulations.
In the event of deviation from the Approved Definitive Subdivision Plan, such deviation shall
be described in the certificate from the Registered Professional Engineer, and shall be accompanied by
two (2) copies of the street layout plan, the topographic plan and the road profile showing the deviation.
If the Planning Board determines that said construction and installation has been completed in
accordance with these Rules and Regulations, it shall release the full or partial interest of the Town in
such land, or deposit to the person who furnished the same, or release the covenant or specific lots within
the covenant by an appropriate instrument, duly acknowledged, which may be recorded.
18
If the Planning Board determines that required construction or installation has not been
completed, it will specify the details wherein the construction or installation fails to comply with its Rules
and Regulations.
The Town shall retain up to 50% of the bond or deposit until all work has been completed to
the Planning Board’s satisfaction and a Certificate of Performance has been issued.
For a partial release of surety or deposit, the subdivider shall submit a written request as set
forth in the preceding section, detailing what work is claimed to be satisfactorily completed. The
subdivider shall also provide a detailed estimate, specifying the remaining incomplete improvements and
their construction costs, and shall calculate the amount of guarantee to secure the remaining work.
The Planning Board, if satisfied that the work has been completed as specified in the
Subdivider’s request, and satisfied that the proposed reduced amount of surety is sufficient to cover the
cost of completing the remaining work, may accept a new surety in the revised amount and release the
previously provided surety.
3.08 Withholding of Final Release
The Board shall withhold final release of any security deposited until the Board is satisfied as
to: (a) pavement integrity after one winter; (b) any required planting areas have been installed for a
sufficient time and are in a healthy condition so that the Planning Board may be satisfied that the
vegetation has been established. The required time period shall be one (1) year from the time of planting
plus whatever time through to July 1st for grassed areas and two (2) years from the time of planting plus
whatever time through to July 1st for shrubs and trees. The Planning Board shall retain a surety in the
amount of five (5)% of the total cost of improvements to ensure the establishment of the vegetation.; (d)
functional integrity of all parts of the drainage, system; (e) satisfactory installation of utilities as required
by the Board; and (f) compliance by the subdivider with the provisions of Paragraph 5.13 below; (g)
Compliance by the Subdivider with the provisions of paragraph 3.09 below; (h) all improvements have
been completed and verified as completed by the Planning Board’s consulting engineer
3.09 Progress and Final As-Built Plans
Upon installation of water, gas, and/or underground electrical systems and prior to the
installation of pavement binder course, the subdivider shall submit to the Town Planner, Planning Board’s
consulting engineer and the Town engineer definitive data identifying the location and elevation of all
structures and services for water, gas, and /or electrical systems including shut of valves and lateral stubs
serving each lot in the subdivision. This information shall be submitted as a “Progress As-Built Plan”
which shall indicate the actual location of the subdivision improvements completed to date.
Upon completion of construction, and before release of a performance guarantee, the
subdivider shall have prepared and submitted a “Final As Built Plan” at the same scale as the street plans,
which shall indicate:
Boundaries of ROW; Boundaries of Roadway Improvements; Driveway locations, Permanent
monuments; locations and inverts with elevations of the required utilities; hydrants and drainage
including the location, with ties and depth of water laterals serving each lot; location of any other
underground utilities, such as natural gas, electricity, cable, telephone lines and street lighting.
19
A Registered Land Surveyor or Registered Professional Engineer retained by the
subdivider shall certify the completion of the construction of ways and services as shown in the final asbuilt
plans and certify the accuracy of the final as-built plans themselves. The final as-builts must be
satisfactory to the Planning Board in terms of their content and form. Certification of monumentation
shall be made upon the final as-built plan. Upon determination by the Planning Board that the Final As-
Built is satisfactory, the subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board, the Board’s consulting engineer
and the Town Engineer hard copy of the plans along with a CAD drawing files, compatible with the
Town’s CAD system.
3.10 Approval Not to Constitute Acceptance of Streets or Sidewalks
Approval by the Board of a definitive subdivision plan shall not constitute the laying out or
acceptance by the Town as a public way of any streets or sidewalks within a subdivision. Such action
requires Town Meeting acceptance.
20
ARTICLE IV.
DESIGN STANDARDS
4.00 Design Goals
Consideration shall be given to natural features of the land, such as trees, watercourses,
scenic points, and to historic features, parks, open area and other community assets.
All developers of subdivisions shall be encouraged to consider designs and improvements
consistent with the following:
Reduce, to the extent reasonably possible:
• volume of cut and fill;
• area over which existing vegetation will be disturbed, especially on land
near a river, pond, or stream, or, having a slope of more than 15%;
• number of mature trees removed; extent of waterways altered or relocated;
• visual prominence of man-made elements which are not necessary for
safety or orientation; visibility of building sites from existing streets;
blockage of vistas through new development; removal of existing stone
walls;
• number of driveways exiting onto existing streets or collector streets;
• alteration in groundwater or surface water levels or chemical constituents;
• disturbance of important wildlife habitats, outstanding botanical features,
scenic or historic environs; soil loss or instability during and after
construction.
4.01 General
All streets shall be designed so as to provide safe travel for vehicles and pedestrians. The
Board will give due regard to the prospective character of the proposed subdivisions, whether open
residence, dense residence, business or industrial, nature of terrain, the prospective amount of travel upon
the various streets and sidewalks therein, and the prospective extension of such streets if the adjoining
property has not been developed.
4.02 Standards
The right of way shall be cleared according to the requirements of the Standard Cross
Section (Exhibit A) prior to any other work, except that trees of aesthetic value and over 4-inch caliper
may be allowed to remain provided that they are located at least 5 feet from the proposed edge of
pavement of the roadway and approved by the Board.
Street right-of-ways shall not be less than 50 feet wide and the sidelines shall be parallel
throughout their length.
The traveled way shall be centered on the center line of the street and the paved surface
thereof shall be not lass than 24 feet in width. Along each side of the paved surface a four-foot wide
shoulder shall be constructed at grade, as shown on Exhibit A. Granite edging, type VA-4, shall be
installed at edges of pavements where the longitudinal slope of the street exceeds 4%, at street
21
intersections and elsewhere as required by the Board. Each shoulder shall be graded with topsoil
satisfactory to the Board to a depth of four (4) inches and shall be seeded either with a permanent grass
mixture rolled, fertilized, watered, mowed and maintained until approved by Town Engineer or otherwise
covered with a ground cover material satisfactory to the Board.
4.03 Radii
Street right-of-way side lines at intersections shall be cut back so as to provide for curved
radii of not less, than 35 feet and pavement lines at intersections shall be cut back so as to provide curb
radii of not less than 48 feet. The minimum centerline radii of streets shall be 250 feet.
4.04 4.04 Grades
Grades of streets shall be not less than 1.00% nor, shall grades be greater than 6%. All
streets shall be graded so as to provide not less than 250 feet of clear sight distance at 4 1/2 feet above
pavement. At an intersection, no grade shall exceed 3% within a distance of 225 feet of the centerline
intersections of the two roads. The minimum vertical curve shall be 200 feet.
4.05 Dead-end
Subdivision plans providing for permanent dead end streets will not be approved. However,
the Board may determine in a particular case that circumstances exist where a dead end street may be
allowed. If a waiver is granted a circular turnaround shall be required. The exterior line of the circular
turnaround layout shall have a minimum radius of 70.00 feet; the outer edge of the pavement shall have a
minimum radius of 57.00 feet; the inner edge of the pavement shall have a minimum radius of 33.00 feet.
Where a waiver has been granted for a dead-end road in contemplation of future extension to
adjoining land, the area of the turning circle between the outside of the circular right of way and the future
straight/parallel right of way lines forced by the extension of the approved right of way width, may be
relinquished to the adjacent properties upon extension of the road over the projected route.
4.06 Reserve Strips
Reserve Strips or barriers which may have the effect of prohibiting access to streets or
adjoining property will not be approved.
4.07 Intersection Geometry
Street lines shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. No street
shall intersect any other street lines at less than 60 degrees. The distance between the centerline of a
proposed street and the centerline of any other street, existing or proposed, shall be at least 250 feet at all
points.
22
4.08 Side Slopes
All slopes resulting from construction of streets are to be graded to a slope not steeper than 2
on 1 in earth not more than 4 on 1 in ledge. Slopes and other areas where topsoil has been removed shall
be loamed with a topsoil satisfactory to the Board to a depth of at least 4 inches, and seeded as provided
in Section 4.02. In the event that such slopes cannot be contained within the street side lines, the
subdivider shall provide slope easements. No grading shall be permitted on abutting land unless written
permission from the abutter is submitted to the Board prior to the Public Hearing. If retaining walls are
necessary, in the opinion of the Board, they shall be constructed of reinforced concrete, stone, brick, or
other materials deemed suitable by the Board.
4.09 Driveways
Driveway connections to street pavement shall slope from the street right-of-way line up or
down to the edge of the pavement at a minimum grade of 1/4 inch per foot.
4.10 Sidewalks
On one side of the street, there shall be a paved sidewalk at least five (5) feet wide, which
shall be located along the street side line, as shown on Exhibit A, constructed in conformance with the
Architectural Barriers guidelines.
4.11 Pedestrian Easements
Easements for pedestrian ways will normally be required to provide convenient circulation
or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping areas, churches, transportation, parks, conservation areas
and/or other facilities, and shall consist of an easement at least 20 feet wide.
4.12 Easements
Easements for water mains, storm drains, utilities, conservation, and other appurtenances and
purposes, shall be provided where such are located outside the street line, and shall be at least 20 feet
wide.
4.13 Signs
Street signs shall be erected to designate the name of each street in a subdivision. Signs shall
be erected as specified by the Board of Selectmen.
4.14 Utilities
All gas, telephone, electricity, fire alarm lines and other utilities shall be installed
underground in the locations as shown on Exhibit A.
23
4.15 Guard Rails
Guard rails shall be installed where deemed necessary by the Board and shall be as specified
by the Board of Selectmen.
4.16 Open Spaces
Before approval of a plan, the Board may require the plan to show a park or parks suitably
located for playground or, recreation purposes or for providing light and air. The park or parks shall be of
reasonable size. Land designated for park or playground purposes shall not include wetlands or other land
unsuitable for recreation purposes. Pedestrian ways will normally be required to provide access from each
of the surrounding streets, if any, to which the open space, park, or playground has no frontage. Such
parks and/or playgrounds may be required to have maintenance provided for by covenants and
agreements acceptable to the Board, until public acquisition is accomplished by the Town, but in no case
longer than three (3) years. The Board may by appropriate endorsement on the plan require that no
building be erected upon such park or parks without its approval for a period of three (3) years.
4.17 Shade Trees
Shade trees, not less than 12 feet in height and of a species approved by the Planning Board
shall be planted on each side of every street in the subdivision wherever, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, existing woodlands or suitable individual trees are not adequate. Trees shall be located outside the
exterior street lines, and at such distance therefrom, and at such spacing, as the Planning Board shall
specify, in accordance with the most recent general practice of the Town relating to planting trees on
private property along public ways.
4.18 Fire Alarm
A fire alarm system shall be installed underground in accordance with the specifications and
requirements of the Weston Fire Department as promulgated and amended from time to time.
4.19 Drainage
The subdivider shall provide drainage for the subdivision in accordance with generally
accepted engineering principles. All street drain pipe, manholes, catch basins, laterals to catch basins, and
discharge culverts for street drainage shall be designed for a 25 year storm expectancy; swales and ditches
shall be designed for a 50 year storm expectancy; retention/detention areas, and major streams and
culverts shall be designed for a 100 year storm expectancy.
The drainage system shall be designed so that there is no net increase in the pre v. post peak
rates of storm water discharge for the 2, 20 and 100 year storm events. The subdivider shall demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the Planning Board that the project is designed to have no measurable or significant
impact to existing vegetation, topography, wetlands and other natural or man made features. Where
groundwater elevations allow, infiltration of storm water runoff into the ground shall be promoted in
order to reduce the quantity of runoff from a site. All storm water plans and calculations shall be
prepared by a Professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The Planning
24
Board requires that proper calculations and plans be submitted to the Town Planner, Town engineer
and the Planning Board’s consulting engineer.
The system shall be designed to treat storm water to applicable standards of Federal, State
and local agencies. System design shall promote on site infiltration and minimize the discharge of
pollutants to ground and surface water.
Design Criteria: The subdivider shall use the best available drainage systems. The suitability
of the drainage design shall be based on the natural features, such as soil types, slopes, vegetative cover,
water table etc. of the site. Drainage plans shall be developed in consultation with the Planning Board
office and the Board’s consultant with the following objectives in mind:
a) protect surface and ground water quality;
b) promotion of environmentally sensitive design. The most consideration will be
given to the BMP that closely matches natural processes including but not limited to
vegetated swales, filter swales, created and extended wetland systems, and other similar
“green” storm water management techniques., referred to as “Low Impact Design Strategy
Techniques”;
c) attractiveness of the plan, minimizing disruption to existing features and
successful imitation of natural systems;
d) on site detention facilities shall be designed to function as natural wetlands,
having characteristics of side slopes, gradients, vegetation and topographic location which
follow naturally occurring wetlands;
e) when clearing and/or regrading is unavoidable, vegetation shall be
reestablished in conformity with an approved landscape plan, submitted by the subdivider,
including areas covering subsurface infiltration facilities and within detention/retention
basins or manufactured wetlands;
f) test holes shall be conducted by a licensed soil evaluator in each
detention/retention basin in accordance with 310CMR.
4.20 4.20 Streams, etc
Streams and water courses shall remain open except at street crossings.
4.21 Street Lights
Street lights shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the Town of Weston.
4.22 Water Supply
The Board will not approve a subdivision plan unless water, suitable in the opinion of the
Board for domestic use and fire protection, will be available throughout the subdivision a minimum
standard of 750 gallons per minute open hydrant flow, with at least 20 pounds per square inch residual
pressure. In addition, the Board may require the installation of booster pumps in buildings to assure at
least 20 pounds per square inch pressure throughout such buildings.
25
4.23 4.23 Buffer Requirement
Proposed subdivision streets shall be designed so that the right-of-way lines are no closer to
an abutting owners lot line than the distance of the minimum setback from the street sideline less the
minimum setback from a lot line. If the land of the proposed subdivision is in a different zone than the
abutting lot, the greater of the two setback distances shall be used. This regulation may be waived by the
Planning Board only upon the Subdivider providing a written statement from the abutting lot owner that
the regulation may be waived as it pertains to his lot.
Where the distance between proposed streets and abutting lots is less than 25 feet, the land
between the street sideline and abutting lots shall be planted with evergreen-type trees at least 12 feet high
and spaced so that they will provide a visual buffer.
26
ARTICLE V.
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
5.00 General Standards
Except as otherwise provided herein all materials and construction methods shall conform to
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Public Works “Standard Specifications for
Highways, Bridges and Waterways,” current edition.
5.01 Testing & Quality Assurance
Clerk of the Works may be required by the Board at the expense of the Subdivider.
5.02 Notice to Superintendent of Streets and Town Engineer
Notice shall be given to the Superintendent of Streets and to the Town Engineer and
Planning Board consulting engineer at least 10 days before the subdivider commences construction of any
street, sidewalk, drain, catch basin, culvert, or other facilities or installations approved by the Planning
Board.
5.03 Standard Cross Section
Street construction shall conform to the “Standard Cross Section of a Fifty Foot Street”
included as Exhibit A with these Rules and Regulations.
5.04 Removal of Material from Streets
Organic, and unsuitable material shall be removed from streets to at least the full width of
the right of way and to such depth as may be required, in the opinion of the Board, to provide a lasting
and safe street. Rocks and stones shall be removed to at least 18 inches below finished grade.
5.05 Subgrade
Streets shall be brought to subgrade 15 inches below finished grade as shown on the
approved profile, with bank gravel compacted to 95% modified procter density. A licensed soils
laboratory shall conduct density testing of subgrade, at the Subdividers expense, at a frequency specified
by the Town Engineer. Written test reports shall be filed with the Town Engineer within 24 hours of the
test. Samples of material shall be supplied and location of borrow pits furnished to the Superintendent of
Streets for inspection purposes. Water mains and storm drains, culverts and catch basins shall be installed
before the finished subbase (see Paragraph 5.06) is put in place. To the extent feasible, other utilities shall
be installed also before the finished subbase is put in place.
27
5.06 Finished Subbase
The finished subbase of gravel for all streets shall consist of (a) 8 inches of well compacted
clean gravel (containing no stones over 4 inches in diameter) laid in two 4” lifts, each of which shall be
rolled after spreading, with the same type of roller. Such grading shall be brought to a grade 3 inches
below the finished grade shown on the approved profile and shall be treated with a bituminous asphalt oil
(at a rate of 1/3 of a gallon per square yard) as approved by the Town Engineer or the Superintendent of
Streets of the Town.
5.07 Pavement
All streets shall have 4 inches of Type I-1 bituminous concrete pavement laid in two courses,
the first of which shall be 3 inches in thickness and the second of which shall be one inch in thickness,
compacted measure.
5.08 Paving of Sidewalks
Sidewalks shall be brought to subgrade by the necessary excavation and filling and shall
receive a coat of selected gravel at least 8 inches in thickness, free of all stone over 1 inch in diameter and
free from loam, clay, and other foreign matter. Thereafter, each sidewalk shall receive a two-course
bituminous paving at least 2 1/2 inches in total thickness after compaction.
5.09 Drains, Catch Basins, etc.
Storm drains, culverts, ditches, and related installations, including catch basins, gutters, and
manholes shall be installed as necessary, in the Board’s opinion to provide adequate disposal of surface
water, including control of erosion, flooding, and standing water, from or in the subdivision and adjacent
land. A catch basin-to-manhole system is required. Oil and gas separators are required in catch basins.
Proper connections shall be made with any existing drains in adjacent streets or easements.
Where property adjacent to the subdivision is not subdivided, provision shall be made for proper
extension of the drainage system by continuing appropriate drains to the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision at such size and grade as will allow for such extension.
Drainage rights which are appropriate and sufficient in the opinion of the Board shall be
secured for the Board.
Drains shall be at least 12 inches in diameter and shall be of good quality reinforced
concrete. A minimum of 3 feet of cover will be required over all pipes.
Catch basins and manholes shall be spaced as required by the Planning Board’s consulting
Engineer and shall be at least 6 feet deep and 4 feet in diameter by inside measurements. They shall be
constructed with standard cement concrete blocks, with brick and mortar or, of precast reinforced
concrete substantially in conformance with the Construction Standards of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. Catch basins located in pavements shall have curb inlets.
Drains, catch basins, and manholes shall not be back-filled until inspected and approved by
the Town Engineer.
28
5.10 Street Monuments
Bounds shall be placed at all changes of direction on the right of way, at the beginning and
end of all curves, at all intersections of streets, and at such other places as may be required by the
Planning Board’s consulting Engineer.
Bounds shall be of granite or reinforced concrete, not less than 48 inches long and not less
than 6 inches square and installed flush with the ground as shown on Exhibit A. A drill hole shall be
placed in the top of each bound. Wrought-iron rods may be used where the points fall on exposed ledge.
5.11 Perimeter Boundary Monumentation
Monuments of a permanent nature acceptable to the Town Engineer shall be set at points on
the perimeter of the subdivision as required by the Town Engineer.
5.12 Shade Trees
All trees of 4” caliper 12” above ground shall be preserved unless determined by the Board
to be unsuitable or otherwise not appropriate for preservation. Where in the opinion of the Board, existing
trees are inadequate, shade trees having a diameter of at least 1 1/2” to 2” and of a variety suitable, in the
opinion of the Board, shall be planted; such planted trees shall usually be spaced not more than 40 feet
apart, in one half (1/2) cubic yard of topsoil satisfactory to the Board.
5.13 Cleaning Up
Upon completion of the work, the Subdivider shall clean up any debris thereon caused by
street construction, installation of utilities, and other operations of the subdivider. All areas within a right
of way or foot path destroyed, damaged, or altered in construction operations shall be restored to
vegetation or other finish satisfactory to the Board. Any areas which are used for the disposition of excess
fill, stumps, rock, and similar materials which may have accumulated during the prosecution of the work
shall, as soon a practicable (and no later than the time of completion of the work), be excavated and then
recovered, graded, and landscaped by the Subdivider. The Subdivider shall leave the subdivision area in a
neat and orderly condition.
29
ARTICLE VI.
STANDARDS FOR COMMON DRIVEWAYS
6.00 General Standards
Common driveways as authorized in the Zoning Bylaw for 1, 2, or 3 lots shall be of
sufficient dimensions so as to provide safe travel for vehicles and pedestrians. Where appropriate the
specific standards set forth below may be modified. The Board will give consideration to the number of
residences on the common driveway, the character of the neighborhood and the nature of the terrain in
setting standards for a common driveway.
6.01 Width of Driveway
Common driveways shall have an easement width of not less than 24 feet and shall have a
paved or graveled width of not less than l8 feet. The side lines of such driveways shall be parallel
throughout their length.
6.02 Shoulders
A three-foot wide shoulder shall be constructed along each side of the paved or graveled
driveway.
6.03 Radii of Common Driveways
The minimum centerline radii of driveways shall be 60 feet.
Grades of Driveways Grades of common driveways shall be not less than 0.5%. Within 50
feet of street line no grade shall exceed 3%.
Driveway Connection with Street The driveway connection to a public street shall be
perpendicular to the street pavement and shall slope from the street right-of-way line up or down to the
edge of the street pavement at a minimum rate of one-quarter inch per foot.
30
ARTICLE VII.
FEE SCHEDULE
7.00 Fees
The following fees are classified as “Filing Fees”. Refer to the Planning Board document
entitled “ Project Review Fees”, for information on additional fees required under the Subdivision
Process. Filing fees are non refundable.
7.01 ANR Plan that creates no new building lots --------------------------------------------$250.00
7.02 ANR Plan that creates new building lots ---------------------------$700.00 for the Plan and
$150.00 for each new building lot
7.03 Preliminary Subdivision Plan--------------------------------------------$ 1500.00 for the Plan
7.04 Preliminary Density Plan under Flexible Development -------------$1500.00 for the Plan
7.05 Conventional Definitive Subdivision Plan preceded by a Preliminary Plan---- $1.00 per
linear foot of proposed roadway as shown on the Plan, or $2000.00, whichever is greater, plus
$400.00 for each new lot proposed
7.06 Flexible Development Plan --------------------$ 1.00 per linear foot of proposed roadway
as shown on the Plan, or $2000.00, whichever is greater, plus $355.00 for each new lot
proposed
7.07 7.07 Definitive Plan not preceded by a Preliminary Plan---------1.00 per linear feet of
proposed roadway as shown on the Plan or $2000.00, whichever is greater, plus $500.00 for
each new lot proposed.
7.08 Advertising Fee – a $50 advertising fee shall be required for any application requiring
public notice under Massachusetts General Law or the Bylaws of the Town of Weston.”
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
RULES AND REGULATIONS
APPENDIX
FIELD MARKINGS REOUIRED BY APPLICANT
PRIOR TO SITE WALK BY WESTON PLANNING BOARD
Perimeter of Parcel:
All bend points (B.P.) flagged in orange.
Where distances are more than 100 feet, flag every 100 feet in orange.
Where new proposed lot lines intersect, flag in orange.
Where abutter’s property lines intersect boundary, flag in green.
Proposed Road - Centerline and right-of-way
All bend points/points of curvature, flag in red.
Where distances are more than 100 feet, flag every 100 feet in red.
On centerline, flag in red every 100 foot station.
Where new/proposed lot lines intersect right-of-way, flag in orange.
Center of cul-de-sac flag in red.
Lot Lines
At all bend points between right-of-way and perimeter boundary, flag in orange.
Wetland/Flood Plain
Flag every 50 feet along boundary in blue.
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
FORM A
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT OF
PLAN BELIEVED NOT TO REQUIRE APPROVAL
_____________________ ,20 ______
To the Weston Planning Board
Weston Town Hall
Weston, Massachusetts 02493
Enclosed is a plan of land owned by __________________________________________ in the Town of
Weston. This plan is submitted to you for your determination and endorsement that approval under the
Massachusetts Subdivision Control Law is not required.
The applicant believes that Planning Board approval is not required for the following reasons:
____________________________________________________________________________________;
____________________________________________________________________________________;
____________________________________________________________________________________.
Address of Owner: ____________________________________________________________________
Surveyor preparing plan: Name and Reg #: _______________________________________________
Address:______________________________________________________
Date of Plan: _______________________________
Zoning District: __________________________
Location of Property: (Address) __________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
Signature of Applicant
___________________________________________________
Address
___________________________________________________
Signature of Owner (if different)
___________________________________________________
Address
Xc: Town Clerk:
Received:________________________ , 20 ______
Endorsed:________________________ , 20 ______
Filing Fee: $ _____________________ Paid
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
FORM B
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF
SUBDIVISION PLAN
_____________________ , 20______
To the Weston Planning Board
Weston Town Hall
Weston, Massachusetts 02493
Enclosed is a plan of land owned by_____________________________________ in the Town of
Weston. This plan, together with the related plans and profiles of streets, are submitted to you for your
approval under the Massachusetts Subdivision Control Law.
The names and addresses of abutters are attached. The following additional information is furnished for
your assistance:
Name of Subdivision, if any: ____________________________________________________________
Name of Subdivider: __________________________________________________________________
Address:_____________________________________________________________________________
Surveyor preparing plan: Name and Reg #: _______________________________________________
Address:______________________________________________________
Location of Property _________________________________________ Zoning District_____________
A copy of the plan and a copy of this application were filed with the Weston Board of Health
on_______________________________.
___________________________________________________
Signature of Applicant
___________________________________________________
Address
___________________________________________________
Signature of Owner (if different)
___________________________________________________
Address
Xc: Town Clerk
Received:________________________ , 20 ______
Endorsed:________________________ , 20 ______
Filing Fee: $ _____________________ Paid
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
FORM C
FORM OF BOARD APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION
PLAN FILED WITH TOWN CLERK
_____________________ , 20______
_______________________________________
Town Clerk
Weston, Massachusetts 02493
Dear Sir/ Madam:
The Weston Planning Board hereby certifies that at a meeting of said Board on ___________________ ,
20____ , at which a majority and quorum was present, following a public hearing by the Planning Board
on____ ______________________________________________________________________ , it was
VOTED: That a subdivision plan and plan and profile of ________________________________
dated ______________ 20___, and drawn by __________________________ registered as an engineer
or land surveyor in Massachusetts, submitted for the Board’s approval by _________________________
owner hereinafter called the “Subdivider”, be and hereby are approved on condition that prior to the
Board’s endorsement of its approval thereon the Subdivider shall execute an Agreement with the Weston
Planning Board, on behalf of the Town of Weston, that no lot depending on said
_________________________ Road for its legal street frontage shall be conveyed, or buildings or
structures erected or placed on, or application for building permits made with respect to any such lot until:
A. Utilities
(1) ___________________________Road as shown on said plan and profile has been
completed in accordance with Article V of the Rules and Regulations of the Board, as
applicable, including installation of catch basins, drains, man-holes, culverts, and other
drainage facilities;
(2) Facilities for water, electricity and gas, if any, have been installed throughout
________________________________Road in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of
the Board and the requirements of the Weston Water Commissioners;
(3) The Subdivider has constructed a footpath on one side of __________________
Road in accordance with paragraphs 4.10 and 5.08 of the Rules and Regulations of the
Board;
(4) Stone bounds or other permanent marks to establish the lines of said road have been
installed in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Board;
(5) A fire alarm system has been installed in accordance with the requirements of the Weston
Fire Department.
(6) A survey of the existing improvements, in accordance with paragraph 3.08 of the Rules and
Regulations of the Board has been furnished to the Board.
B. Alternatively, the Subdivider has executed a contract with the Weston Planning Board, on behalf of
the Town of Weston accompanied by appropriate security to secure performance of the terms and
35
conditions thereof, to complete or install the improvements in accordance with Paragraph A above;
and
(1) A Subdivision plan bearing the Board’s signed endorsement thereon and a signed copy of
this Agreement have been recorded in the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds (or Registry
District of the Land Court);
(2) Instruments creating the easements shown on the plan have been recorded in the Middlesex
South Registry of Deeds (or Registry District of the Land Court) and copies thereof furnished
to the Board; and
(3) A certificate of the Board that the conditions specified above have been performed or have
been amended, modified, revoked, waived or released by the Board, has been recorded in the
Middlesex South Registry of Deeds (or Registry District of the Land Court).
The Planning Board’s approval of a subdivision plan shall expire at the end of five years unless the plan is
duly recorded in the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds (or Registry District of the Land Court).
Respectfully Submitted,
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
By ____________________________________
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
FORM D
FORM OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
PLANNING BOARD AND A SUBDIVIDER
AGREEMENT
I, ______________________________________of _________________, Massachusetts,
the owner, and hereinafter called the “Subdivider”, for myself, my heirs, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns, hereby covenant and agree with the Weston Planning Board, hereinafter called the
“Board”, on behalf of the Town of Weston, in consideration of the approval by the Board on
________________________, 20___, of a subdivision of land in Weston, Massachusetts, shown on a
plan by _________________________ registered as an engineer or land surveyor in Massachusetts, dated
_____________________, 20___, and of the Board’s approval of a plan and profile
dated____________________, 20___, of ____________________Road included in said subdivision, that
no lot shown on said subdivision plan shall be conveyed, or buildings or other structures erected or placed
on, or application for a building permit made with respect to, any lot shown thereon, until:
A. Utilities
(1) _____________________Road as shown on said plan and profile has been completed in
accordance with Article V of the Rules and Regulations of the Board, as applicable, including
installation of catch basins, drains, man-holes, culverts, and other drainage facilities;
(2) Facilities for water, electricity and gas, if any, have been installed throughout
____________________________ Road in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the
Board and the requirements of the Weston Water Commissioners;
(3) The Subdivider has constructed a footpath on one side of Road in accordance with
paragraphs 4.10 and 5.08 of the Rules and Regulations of the Board;
(4) Stone bounds or other permanent marks to establish the lines of said road have been
installed in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Board;
(5) A fire alarm system has been installed in accordance with the requirements of the Weston
Fire Department;
(6) A survey of the existing improvements, in accordance with paragraph 3.08 of the Rules and
Regulations of the Board, has been furnished to the Board.
B. Alternatively, the Subdivider has executed a contract with the Weston Planning Board, on behalf of
the Town of Weston accompanied by appropriate security to secure performance of the terms and
conditions thereof, to complete or install the improvements in accordance with Paragraph A above;
and
(1) A Subdivision plan bearing the Board’s signed endorsement thereon and a signed copy of
the Agreement have been recorded in the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds (or Registry
District of the Land Court);
(2) Instruments creating the easements shown on the plan have been recorded in the Middlesex
South Registry of Deeds (or Registry District of the Land Court) and copies thereof furnished
to the Board; and
(3) A certificate of the Board that the conditions specified above have been performed or have
been amended, modified, revoked, waived or released by the Board, has been recorded in the
37
Middlesex South Registry of Deeds (or Registry District of the Land Court).
The Planning Board’s approval of a subdivision plan shall expire at the end of five years unless the plan is
duly recorded in the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds (or Registry District of the Land Court).
This instrument shall take effect as a sealed instrument.
WITNESS my hand this ____________ day of ___________________________, 20 ____.
___________________________________________________
(Signature of Subdivider)
Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Middlesex, ss.
Then personally ____________________________________________ appeared and acknowledged the
foregoing instrument to be his free act and deed, before me
___________________________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission expires:
Approved:
Weston Planning Board
By__________________________________
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
FORM E
FORM OF CONTRACT BETWEEN THE
PLANNING BOARD AND A SUBDIVIDER
CONTRACT
I, ______________________________________ , of _______________________ , Massachusetts, the
owner, and hereinafter called the “Subdivider”, for myself, my heirs, executors, administrators, successors
and assigns, here-by covenant and agree with the Weston Planning Board hereinafter called the “Board”,
on behalf of the Town of Weston, in consideration of the approval by the Board of a subdivision of land
in Weston, Massachusetts, shown on a plan by,
________________________________________ registered as an engineer or land surveyor in
Massachusetts, dated __________________ , 20 _____ , and of the Board’s approval of a plan and
profile dated__________________________ , 20 _____ of ___________________________ Road
included in said subdivision, that prior to __________________ , 20_____ , the Subdivider will:
(1) Complete _________________________ Road as shown on said plan and profile in
accordance with Article V of the Rules and Regulations of the Board, as applicable, including
installation of catch basins, drains, manholes, culverts, and other drainage facilities;
(2) Install facilities for water, electricity and gas, if any, in _____________________ Road in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the board and the requirements of the Weston
Water Commissioners;
(3) Construct a footpath on one side of _________________________Road in accordance
with paragraphs 4.10 and 5.08 of the Rules and Regulations of the Board;
(4) Install stone bounds or other substantial marks permanently to establish the lines of said
road in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Board;
(5) Install a fire-alarm system in accordance with the requirements of the Weston Fire
Department;
(6) Furnish to the Board a survey of the existing improvements in accordance with paragraph
3.08 of the Rules and Regulations of the Board.
As security for the faithful performance of the covenants contained herein the Subdivider will deposit the
sum of $ _________________ in a certified or bank cashier’s check with the Town Treasurer prior to
obtaining a release from the Board of any lot for sale or prior to applying for a building permit for any lot
in this subdivision.
The Planning Board shall have the right to review the amount of security on the annual anniversary date
of this contract and may increase the amount of security required. Such an increase shall not, however, be
greater than the increase in the Engineering News Record - Construction Cost Index for that period.
In case of a default on the Subdivider’s part in connection with such construction, the Town, at its
election, may use the proceeds of the certified or bank cashier’s check in the amount of
$ ______________________________ dollars ($ ) deposited by the Subdivider with the
Town Treasurer and Collector as security for the performance of this contract, to remedy such default, the
Board being the sole judge of the amount of such proceeds necessary for it to use for such purpose,
39
repaying to the Subdivider, the unused portion thereof, if any, or, in case there is no default on the
Subdivider’s part, repaying the entire amount thereof.
In case of default on the Subdivider’s part in connection with such construction, the Town, its officers and
agents and those authorized by it, may enter upon the land included in such subdivision and remedy such
default. The Subdivider shall defend, indemnify and save harmless the Town, its officers, agencies, and
employees from and against all claims, demands, payments, suits, actions recoveries, judgments of every
nature and description brought or recovered against it or them by reason of any action, omission or
neglect of said Town, its officers, agents, or employees in remedying such default undertaken in good
faith; and the Subdivider will likewise indemnify and save harmless the Town, its officers, agents, and
employees from all costs of investigating and defending any actions or suits brought against it or them by
reason of any action, omission or neglect of said Town, its officers, agents, or employees in remedying
such default undertaken in good faith.
The certified or bank cashiers check above referred to may be cashed and its proceeds mingled with other
funds in the hands of the Town Treasurer and Collector, but shall be segregated on the Town’s books in a
separate “agency account” for the said construction. Neither the Treasurer and Collector nor the ‘Town
shall be responsible to the Subdivider for any proceeds of said check lost through bank failure.
This instrument is to take effect as a sealed instrument.
EXECUTED under seal this _______ day of _______________________, 20 _____
___________________________________________________
Signature of Subdivider
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
________________________________
________________________________
________________________________
________________________________
________________________________
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
FORM F
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF
PARTIAL PERFORMANCE OF CONDITIONS OF
SUBDIVISION AGREEMENT AND RELEASE OF LOTS
________________________, 20____
To the Weston Planning Board
Weston Town Hall
Weston, Massachusetts 02493
The undersigned, owner of the land being subdivided pursuant to a plan entitled
___________________________________________________________________________________,
drawn by ____________________________________________registered as an engineer or land
surveyor in Massachusetts, dated _________________________, 20 __ believes that the conditions set
forth in his agreement with the Board dated _________________, 20 __ , have been satisfied with
respect to the following described premises with the following exceptions:
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
The undersigned certifies that said plan dated ________________________ , 20 __ , bearing the
Board’s signed endorsement thereon, and a signed copy of said agreement were recorded with the
Middlesex South Registry of Deeds (or with the Registry District of the Land Court) on
______________________ , 20 ___ in Book ____________________ , Page ______________.
Enclosed is proper bond or deposit of money in the amount of $_________________ payable to the
order of the Town of Weston which is deposited as security for complete performance of a contract dated
______________________ , 20 ____ , between __________________________ and the Weston
Planning Board, on behalf of the Town of Weston.
Accordingly, it is requested that the Board issue its certificate of compliance with such conditions.
___________________________________________________
Signature of Owner
41
Approved:
_______________________________________
Superintendent of Streets
_______________________________________
Town Engineer
_______________________________________
Chief of the Fire Department
Filing Fee $ Paid
Date: _____________________
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
FORM G
FORM OF RELEASE OF CONDITIONS
OF PLANNING BOARD APPROVAL
______________________, 20 _____
The undersigned, being authorized agents of the Planning Board of the Town of Weston, Massachusetts,
hereby certify that the conditions set forth in an agreement dated , 20 and
recorded with Middlesex South Registry of Deeds in Book Page (or registered
with Middlesex South Registry District of the Land Court as Document No. ) which
were imposed by the Board at the time of its approval of a subdivision plan of land owned by
and
drawn by , registered as an engineer or
land surveyor in Massachusetts, dated , 20 said plan being filed with said Registry
of Deeds in Book Page (or said Registry District with Certificate of Title No
in Book , Page ), are hereby released as to lots shown on said plan as lots
numbered , , , , , and located at
(streets) in Weston, Massachusetts.
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
Authorized Agents of the Town of Weston
Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Middlesex, ss.
Then personally appeared ______________________________________________________________
(the above authorized agents)
of the Planning Board of the Town of Weston, Massachusetts, and acknowledged the foregoing
instrument to be the free act and deed of said Planning Board, before me
___________________________________________________
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
Filing Fee $___________________ Paid
Date: _______________________
WESTON PLANNING BOARD
FORM H
FORM OF APPLICATION FOR RELEASE OF DEPOSIT
TO SECURE PERFORMANCE OF SUBDIVISION CONTRACT
To the Weston Planning Board
Weston Town Hall
Weston, Massachusetts 02493
The undersigned, owner of the land being subdivided pursuant to a plan of land owned by
, drawn by ,
registered as an engineer or land surveyor in Massachusetts, dated , 20 believes
that the conditions set forth in his contract with the Weston Planning Board, on behalf of the Town of
Weston, dated , 20 , have been satisfied with respect to
.
Accordingly, it is requested that the Board release $ of the $ security deposit
given to the Board pursuant to said contract.
___________________________________________________
Signature of Owner
Approved:
_______________________________________
Superintendent of Streets
_______________________________________
Town Engineer
_______________________________________
Chief of the Fire Department
Filing Fee $ ___________________Paid
Date: _____________________
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion
Control Regulations*
Approved November 28, 2011
Revised March 14, 2012
* Approved by the Stormwater Permitting Authority (SWPA) in accordance with
Article XXVII – Stormwater and Erosion Control By-Law, Section VI.C.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
1.0 PURPOSE ............................................................................................................................................................ 1
2.0 DEFINITIONS ...................................................................................................................................................... 1
3.0 AUTHORITY ........................................................................................................................................................ 1
4.0 APPLICABILITY .................................................................................................................................................. 2
5.0 APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMITS ..................................... 2
A. PERMIT REQUIRED ........................................................................................................................................................ 2
B. FEES .............................................................................................................................................................................. 2
C. FILING APPLICATION ...................................................................................................................................................... 2
1. Applications ............................................................................................................................................................. 2
2. Minor Permit Submission Requirements ............................................................................................................ 3
3. Major Permit Submission Requirements ............................................................................................................ 4
E. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REPORT ............................................................................................................... 6
F. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL REPORT ............................................................................................................... 6
G. OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN .......................................................................................................................... 7
6.0 ADMINISTRATION .............................................................................................................................................. 9
A. ADMINISTRATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS .......................................................................................................... 9
B. ENTRY............................................................................................................................................................................ 9
C. SWPA APPROVAL PROCESS ........................................................................................................................................ 9
D. DEADLINE FOR ACTION ............................................................................................................................................... 11
E. PLAN CHANGES ........................................................................................................................................................... 11
F. APPEALS OF ACTIONS OF THE SWPA ........................................................................................................................ 11
G. PROJECT DELAY .......................................................................................................................................................... 12
H. PROJECT COMPLETION ............................................................................................................................................... 12
7.0 DESIGN STANDARDS ..................................................................................................................................... 12
A. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA ..................................................................... 12
B. EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE CRITERIA ............................................................ 14
8.0 INSPECTIONS .................................................................................................................................................. 14
A. CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT ............................................................................................................................. 14
B. CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS .................................................................................................................................... 15
9.0 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION ................................................................................................................... 16
10.0 ENFORCEMENT ............................................................................................................................................... 16
11.0 SEVERABILITY ................................................................................................................................................. 18
APPENDIX A: DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................................................ 19
APPENDIX B: LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES ............................................................................. 23
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 1 of 25
1.0 PURPOSE
The purpose of these Stormwater and Erosion Control (Regulations) is to protect, maintain and
enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum
requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of soil erosion and sedimentation,
construction site runoff, increased post-development stormwater runoff, decreased groundwater
recharge, and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development, redevelopment and
other land alterations, as more specifically addressed in the Stormwater and Erosion Control
By-Law (By-Law) of the Town of Weston.
2.0 DEFINITIONS
The definitions contained herein apply to issuance of a Stormwater Management Permit (SMP)
established by the Town of Weston Stormwater and Erosion Control By-Law and implemented
through these Regulations. Terms not defined in this section shall be construed according to
their customary and usual meaning unless the context indicates a special or technical meaning.
All definitions are provided in the Appendix A of the Regulations.
3.0 AUTHORITY
A. The Rules and Regulations contained herein have been adopted by the Stormwater
Permitting Authority (SWPA) in accordance with the Stormwater and Erosion Control
By-Law.
B. Nothing in the Stormwater and Erosion Control By-Law or these Regulations is intended
to replace the requirements of the Town of Weston Zoning By-Law, the Town of Weston
General By-Law, any other By-Law that may be adopted by the Town of Weston, or any
Rules and Regulations adopted there under. Any activity subject to the provisions of the
above-cited By-Laws or Rules and Regulations must comply with the specifications of
each.
C. These Stormwater and Erosion Control Regulations may be periodically amended by the
SWPA in accordance with the procedures outlined in Section VI.C of the Town of
Weston Stormwater and Erosion Control By-Law.
D. The SWPA may review and recommend revisions to the fee schedule periodically as it
sees fit.
E. Waivers. The SWPA may waive strict compliance with any of the requirements of this
By-Law or the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, if it determines that some of the
application requirements are unnecessary because of the size or character of the development
project or because of the natural conditions at the site and where such action is:
1. Allowed by federal, state and local statutes and/or,
2. In the public interest, and
3. Not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of the Town of Weston Stormwater
Management By-Law.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 2 of 25
Any applicant may submit a written request to be granted such a waiver. Such a request
shall be accompanied by an explanation or documentation supporting the waiver request
and demonstrating that strict application of these Regulations does not further the purposes
or objectives of the By-Law and these Regulations.
4.0 APPLICABILITY
These Regulations apply to all activities subject to the Applicability Section of the Stormwater
and Erosion Control By-Law. Projects and/or activities not specifically under the currently
regulated jurisdiction of any of the Town of Weston boards, commissions or departments but still
within the jurisdiction of the Town of Weston Stormwater and Erosion Control By-Law must
obtain a Stormwater Management Permit from the SWPA in accordance with the permit
procedures and requirements defined in Sections 5.0 through 7.0 of these Regulations.
No work may commence without written approval of the SWPA or its designee, confirming that
the project or activity is in compliance with the Design Standards of these Regulations.
5.0 APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMITS
A. Permit Required
1. Projects that exceed the thresholds for a SMP shall require a Stormwater
Management Permit in accordance with Section IV. of the By-Law.
2. Permit issuance is required prior to any site altering activity.
B. Fees
1. The SWPA shall obtain with each submission an application fee to be collected at
the time of application according to the Fee Schedule as approved by the Board of
Selectmen.
C. Filing Application
1. Applications for a Stormwater Management Permit (SMP) shall include the materials
as specified in this section and must meet the Design Standards as specified in
these Regulations. The applicant shall file with the SWPA one (1) original completed
application package for a Stormwater Management Permit (SMP); two (2) paper
copies of the the plans and one (1) electronic copy of the application package in PDF
format.
Additional copies may be requested by the SWPA. The applicant may be a
representative of the Owner; the Owner must sign the application. The SMP
Application submission requirements for Minor Permits and Major Permits shall be as
follows:
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 3 of 25
2. Minor Permit Submission Requirements
a. A completed Stormwater Management Permit Application Form with original
signatures of all owners.
b. Project Narrative that includes a description of the proposed project and
description of how and where stormwater will be controlled and erosion and
sediment controls to be implemented.
c. Payment of the application and review fees.
d. Stormwater Management Site Plan may be prepared by drafting or hand
sketching and show at a minimum the entirety of the parcel and location of
physical features.
i. General Information
1. The original drawing of the Plan; one set of drawings at a legible scale
and a drawing size of not more than 24”x36”, and one electronic copy.
2. Name and address of record owner and if applicable the name and
address of the engineer or surveyor.
3. Address of property, Assessor Map and Parcel ID.
ii. Existing Conditions Plan.
1. The site’s existing topography with contours at 2 foot intervals for work
area.
2. Locations of bodies of water, including wetlands.
3. Location of existing septic systems and private wells if infiltration systems
are proposed.
4. Locations of existing buildings, driveways, walls, etc.
iii. Proposed Conditions Plan.
1. Proposed grading plan for work area.
2. Proposed improvements including location of buildings or other
structures, impervious surfaces, utilities, and easements, if applicable.
3. Proposed drainage facilities, if applicable (plan view and details).
4. Areas of soil disturbance and areas that will not be disturbed.
5. Locations of soil testing including test pits, groundwater determinations,
and percolation tests with the soil logs and percolation testing results,
and/or other soil testing procedures.
iv. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
1. Locations of all structural and nonstructural erosion and sediment control
measures and BMPs.
2. Locations where stabilization practices are expected to occur.
3. Locations for storage of materials, waste, vehicles, equipment, soil, snow
and other potential pollutants.
4. Areas where final stabilization has been accomplished and no further
construction-phase permit requirements apply.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 4 of 25
e. Any other information requested by the SWPA.
3. Major Permit Submission Requirements
a. A completed Stormwater Management Permit Application Form with original
signatures of all owners, including indication whether a public hearing is
requested.
b. Project Narrative that includes a description of the proposed project and
description of how and where stormwater will be controlled and erosion and
sediment controls to be implemented.
c. Payment of applicable application and review fees.
d. Stormwater Management Site Plan prepared as follows:
i. General Information
1. The original drawing of the Plan; dark lines on white background; one set
of drawings at a scale of not less than 1”=30’ and a drawing size of not
more than 24”x36”, and one electronic copy. Coordinate system shall be
1983 North American Datum, Massachusetts State Plane, feet, and North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988.
2. Name and address of record owner and engineer or surveyor.
3. Address of property, Assessor Map and Parcel ID.
4. A locus map.
ii. Existing Conditions Plan
1. The existing zoning, and land use at the site and abutting properties.
2. The location(s) of existing easements.
3. The location of existing utilities.
4. The site’s existing topography with contours at 2 foot intervals.
5. Locations of bodies of water, including wetlands.
6. Location of existing septic systems and private wells if infiltration systems
are proposed.
iii. Proposed Conditions Plan
1. Proposed grading.
2. Proposed improvements including location of buildings or other
structures, utilities, easements if applicable, and impervious surfaces.
3. Proposed drainage facilities, if applicable (plan view and details).
4. Areas of soil disturbance and areas that will not be disturbed.
5. Locations of soil testing including test pits, groundwater determinations,
and percolation tests with the soil logs and percolation testing results,
and/or other soil testing procedures.
6. Notes indicating the required inspection for the site and the stormwater
drainage facilities.
iv. Erosion and Sediment Control Plan
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 5 of 25
1. Locations of all structural and nonstructural erosion and sediment control
measures and BMPs.
2. Locations where stabilization practices are expected to occur.
3. Locations for storage of materials, waste, vehicles, equipment, soil, snow
and other potential pollutants.
4. Locations where stormwater discharges to surface water (include all
roads, drains and other structures that could carry stormwater to a
wetland or other water body, on or offsite).
5. Areas where final stabilization has been accomplished and no further
construction-phase permit requirements apply.
6. Erosion control notes applicable to the project.
v. A description & delineation of existing stormwater conveyances,
impoundments, wetlands, drinking water resource areas, swimming beaches
or other critical environmental resource areas on or adjacent to the site or into
which stormwater flows.
vi. A delineation of FEMA Special Flood Hazard areas, if applicable.
vii. Estimated seasonal high groundwater elevation in areas to be used for
stormwater retention, detention, or infiltration.
viii. The existing and proposed vegetation and ground surfaces with runoff
coefficients for each.
ix. Drawings of all components of the proposed stormwater management system
including:
1. Locations, cross sections, and profiles of all brooks, streams, drainage
swales and their method of stabilization.
2. All measures for the detention, retention or infiltration of water.
3. All measures for the protection of water quality.
4. The structural details for all components of the proposed drainage
systems and stormwater management facilities.
5. Notes on drawings specifying materials to be used, and construction
specifications.
x. Soils Information from test pits performed at the location of proposed
stormwater management facilities, including but not limited to soil
descriptions, depth to seasonal high groundwater, depth to bedrock, and
percolation rates. Soils information will be based on site test pits logged by a
Massachusetts Registered Soil Evaluator.
xi. Landscaping plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetative
stabilization and management techniques to be used within and adjacent to
the stormwater practice.
xii. Stamp and signature of a Professional Engineer (PE) licensed in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts to certify that the Stormwater Management
Plan is in accordance with the criteria established in the Stormwater
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 6 of 25
Regulations; a stamp and signature of a Professional Land Surveyor (PLS) is
acceptable if no drainage facilities are proposed and they have the
experience and capability to prepare the required Site Plan and to provide the
required existing and proposed grading, and erosion control provisions.
e. Stormwater Management Plan Report
A Stormwater Management Plan Report shall be prepared in conformance with
the Design Standards contained in Section 7.A and contain the following
elements:
i. The existing site hydrology.
ii. A drainage area map showing pre and post construction watershed
boundaries, drainage area and stormwater time of concentration (Tc) flow
paths, including municipal drainage system flows.
iii. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and
post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this
Regulation. Such calculations shall include:
1. Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration.
2. Time of concentration;
3. Soil Runoff Curve Number (CN) based on land use and soil hydrologic
group.
4. Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area.
5. Information on construction measures used to maintain the infiltration
capacity of the soil where any kind of infiltration is proposed.
6. Infiltration rates, where applicable.
7. Culvert capacities.
8. Flow velocities.
9. Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the specified design
storms.
10. Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test
results.
iv. Post-Development downstream analysis if deemed necessary by the SWPA.
f. Erosion and Sediment Control Report
An Erosion and Sediment Control Report shall be prepared in conformance with
the Design Standards contained in Section 7.B and contain the following:
i. Estimates of the total area expected to be disturbed by excavation, grading,
or other construction activities, including dedicated off-site borrow and fill
areas.
ii. All pollution control measures (structural and non-structural BMPs) that will
be implemented as part of the construction activity to control pollutants in
storm water discharges. Appropriate control measures must be identified for
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 7 of 25
each major construction activity and the operator responsible for the
implementation of each control measure must also be identified.
iii. The intended sequence and timing of activities that disturb soils at the site
and the general sequence during the construction process in which the
erosion and sediment control measures will be implemented.
iv. Structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, retain/detain flows or
otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from exposed areas of
the site. Placement of structural practices in floodplains must be avoided to
the degree practicable.
v. Interim and permanent stabilization practices for the site, including a
schedule of when the practices will be implemented. Site plans should ensure
that existing vegetation is preserved where possible and that disturbed
portions of the site are stabilized. Use of impervious surfaces for stabilization
should be avoided.
vi. Construction and waste materials expected to be stored on-site with updates
as appropriate, including descriptions of controls, and storage practices to
minimize exposure of the materials to stormwater, and spill prevention and
response practices.
vii. Measures to minimize, to the extent practicable, off-site vehicle tracking of
sediments onto paved surfaces and the generation of dust.
viii. Measures to prevent the discharge of solid materials, including building
materials, to waters of the United States, except as authorized by a permit
issued under Section 404 of the CWA.
ix. Pollutant sources from areas other than construction and a description of
controls and measures that will be implemented at those sites to minimize
pollutant discharges.
x. Proposed dewatering operations including proposed locations of discharge.
xi. An Operation and Maintenance Schedule for structural and non-structural
measures, interim grading, and material stockpiling areas.
g. Operation and Maintenance Plan
i. The O&M Plan shall be designed to ensure compliance with the Permit, the
By-Law and these Regulations and that the Massachusetts Surface Water
Quality Standards, 314, CMR 4.00 are met in all seasons and throughout the life
of the system. The O&M Plan shall be a stand-alone document, and shall remain
on file with the SWPA and shall be an ongoing requirement. To ensure that all
BMPs continue to function as designed a final O&M Plan shall be submitted prior
to issuance of a Certificate of Completion and reflect any modifications made
during the permitting process and the site specific conditions.
ii. The Operation and Maintenance Plan shall include, at a minimum:
1. The name(s) of the owner(s) for all components of the system.
2. The signature(s) of the owner(s).
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 8 of 25
3. The names and addresses of the person(s) responsible for operation and
maintenance; if responsibility is contracted to a third party, a copy of the
maintenance agreement(s) must be provided.
4. A plan or map showing the location of the systems and facilities including
easements, catch basins, manholes/access lids, main, and stormwater
devices.
5. An Inspection and Maintenance Schedule for all stormwater management
facilities including routine and non-routine maintenance tasks to be
performed.
6. A list of easements with the purpose and location of each. Easements
shall be recorded with the Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds
prior to issuance of a Certificate of Completion by the SWPA.
7. Provisions for the SWPA or its designee to enter the property at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of
inspection.
8. Any other information required by the SWPA.
iii. O&M Plan shall apply to the entire project site, not just the disturbance area.
iv. At a minimum, inspections shall occur during the first year of operation and in
accordance with the operation and maintenance plan in the approved
stormwater management permit.
v. The owner of the property shall maintain a log of all operation and
maintenance activities, including without limitation, inspections, repairs,
replacement and disposal (for disposal, the log shall indicate the type of
material and the disposal location). This log shall be made available to the
MassDEP and the SWPA upon request.
vi. Inspection reports shall be submitted to and maintained by the SWPA for all
stormwater management systems. Inspection reports for stormwater
management systems shall include:
1. The date of inspection.
2. Name of inspector.
3. The condition of each BMP, including components such as:
a. Pretreatment devices.
b. Vegetation or filter media.
c. Fences or other safety devices.
d. Spillways, valves, or other control structures.
e. Embankments, slopes, and safety benches.
f. Reservoir or treatment areas.
g. Inlet and outlet channels and structures.
h. Underground drainage.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 9 of 25
i. Sediment and debris accumulation in storage and forebay areas
(including catch basins).
j. Any nonstructural practices.
k. Any other item that could affect the proper function of the stormwater
management system.
4. Description of the need for maintenance.
vii. Changes to Operation and Maintenance Plans: The owner(s) of the
stormwater management system must notify the SWPA of changes in
ownership or assignment of financial responsibility.
viii. The SWPA may require recordation of the O&M Plan depending on the
complexity of the systems installed.
h. Any other information required by the SWPA.
6.0 ADMINISTRATION
A. Administration of Rules and Regulations
The SWPA shall administer, implement and enforce these Regulations. The SWPA may
designate in writing any authorized Town employee, board or agent for the purposes of
reviewing stormwater submittals and issuing stormwater permits. Any Town employee,
board or agent so designated by the SWPA shall be defined as the “Reviewing Agent.”
When a Reviewing Agent is designated by the SWPA, as outlined above, the Applicant
shall submit all Stormwater Management Permit application submittals in compliance
with these Regulations to the Reviewing Agent.
The Reviewing Agent will review the submittal for compliance with the requirements and
standards of Section 5 through 7.0 of these Regulations. If the proposed project
complies with these Regulations, the Reviewing Agent shall grant a Stormwater
Management Permit, in addition to any other approval or permit it may grant.
The Reviewing Agent shall notify the SWPA of all Stormwater Management Permits it
approves. Both the SWPA and the Reviewing Agent shall have authority to enforce the
Stormwater and Erosion Control By-Law and these Regulations.
B. Entry
Filing an application for a permit grants the SWPA, its Reviewing Agent, or designee as
specified in these Regulations, permission to enter the site throughout the term of the
permit to verify the information in the application and to inspect for compliance with the
resulting permit.
C. SWPA Approval Process
1. Action by SWPA
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 10 of 25
a. Determination of Completeness: The SWPA shall review the application
submission and issue a determination stating whether the application is complete
within 5 business days.
b. Incomplete Applications: If the SWPA determines the application is incomplete,
including insufficient information to describe the site, the work, or the effect of the
work on water quality and runoff volume, the SWPA may require the submission
of additional information and/or disapprove the application and deny the Permit.
c. Complete Applications. Each application for a Stormwater Management Permit
that is determined to be a complete application shall be reviewed by the SWPA for
compliance with the Stormwater By-Law. The application shall be acted upon
within thirty (30) days of the date of filing of a complete application with the SWPA,
unless such application has been withdrawn from consideration. The SWPA may:
i. Approve the Permit Application upon finding that the proposed plan will
protect water resources and meets the objectives and requirements of this
By-Law;
ii. Approve the Permit Application with conditions, modifications or restrictions
that are required to ensure that the project will protect water resources and
meets the objectives and requirements of this By-Law; or
iii. Deny the Perm it Application due to non-compliance with Design Standards.
d. Applications not in compliance with Design Standards.
i. For applications where the SWPA has determined that the Design Standards
are not met, the Applicant may appeal the determination and request a public
hearing with the SWPA to consider the application or resubmit the application
demonstrating compliance.
ii. For applications where the Design Standards cannot be met due to site
conditions or the applicant wishes to propose an alternative design not
consistent with the Design Standards, the applicant may immediately request a
public hearing with the SWPA.
2. Public Hearing Process
a. A public hearing is required for all Minor and Major Stormwater Management
Permits (SMP) where design standards cannot be met. Minor Permits and Major
Permits that meet design standards shall not require a public hearing.
b. Applicants requesting a Public Hearing shall submit an Application for Stormwater
Management Permit (SMP) Public Hearing with the SWPA. Applications for a
public hearing shall include the materials as specified in Section 5.0 and include
a statement on how compliance with the Design Standards as specified in
Section 7.0 cannot be met or alternatively a statement of determination of
noncompliance prepared by the SWPA. The applicant shall file with the SWPA,
one (1) original completed application package for a Stormwater Management
Permit (SMP); two (2) paper copies of the plans and one (1) electronic copy of
the application package in PDF format.
c. Public hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation for two (2)
consecutive weeks. The first publication date shall be published not less than
fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing. A copy of the hearing notice shall
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 11 of 25
be posted in the Office of the Town Clerk for a period of not less than fourteen (14)
days before the date of the hearing. Copies of the notice shall be mailed, postage
prepaid, to the applicant, property owner (if different) and to direct abutters and
owners of land directly opposite on a public or private way as they appear on the
most recent Assessor’s list.
d. The SWPA may take any of the following actions following the close of the public
hearing for an application for a Stormwater Management Permit
i. Approve the Permit Application upon finding that the proposed plan will
protect water resources and meets the objectives and requirements of this
By-Law;
ii. Approve the Permit Application with conditions, modifications or restrictions
that are required to ensure that the project will protect water resources and
meets the objectives and requirements of this By-Law; or
iii. Disapprove the Permit Application if the proposed plan will not protect water
resources or fails to meet the objectives and requirements of this By-Law.
D. Deadline for Action
Failure of the SWPA to take final action upon an application within 30 calendar days of
receipt of a complete application shall be deemed to be approval of said application,
unless extension of said deadline date is mutually agreed upon in writing by the SWPA
and the applicant. Upon certification by the Town Clerk that the allowed time has passed
without SWPA action, the SWPA must issue a Stormwater Management Permit. For
applications requiring a public hearing, the public hearing shall be held within 45 days of
the Date of Submission of the Application for SMP Public Hearing. The SWPA shall file
a decision within 60 days of the receipt of the Application for Public Hearing.
E. Plan Changes
The Applicant must notify the SWPA in writing of any drainage change or alteration in
the system authorized in a Stormwater Management Permit before any change or
alteration is made. If the SWPA determines that the change or alteration is significant,
based on the Stormwater Management Standards in Section 7.0 of these Regulations
and accepted construction practices, the SWPA may require that an amended
application be filed.
F. Appeals of Actions of the SWPA
A decision of the SWPA shall be final. Further relief of a decision by the SWPA made
under these Regulations shall be reviewable in a court of competent jurisdiction of an
action filed within sixty (60 days) thereof, in accordance with M.G.L. Ch 249. § 4. An
appeal of an action by a board, commission or department that has current regulatory
authority for a project and/or activity shall be conducted under the applicable appeal
provisions of said board, commission and/or department of the Town of Weston. Such
an appeal shall result in revocation of the written approval as described in these
Regulations, until such time as the appeal process of the applicable board, commission
and/or department has been resolved.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 12 of 25
G. Project Delay
Should a land-disturbing activity associated with an approved plan in accordance with
this Section not begin within12 months following permit issuance, the SWPA may
evaluate the existing stormwater management plan to determine whether the plan still
satisfies local program requirements and to verify that all design factors are still valid. If
the SWPA finds the previously filed plan to be inadequate, a modified plan shall be
submitted and approved prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. If the
project associated with an approved Stormwater Management Permit granted under the
By-Law has not been substantially completed within three (3) years of permit issuance, a
new permit or a permit extension will be required by the SWPA.
H. Project Completion
For all Permits, as determined by Section IV.C.1 and 2. of the By-Law, at the completion
of the project the Applicant shall request a Certificate of Completion from the SWPA
pursuant to the requirements of Section 9 of these Regulations. The SWPA will issue a
letter certifying completion upon review and approval of the final inspection reports
and/or upon otherwise determining that all work of the permit has been satisfactorily
completed in conformance with the By-Law.
7.0 DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Stormwater Management Design and Performance Criteria
1. At a minimum all projects subject to a Stormwater Management Permit (SMP) shall
comply with the performance standards of the most recent version of Massachusetts
Stormwater Standards and accompanying Stormwater Management Handbook, as
well as the criteria contained herein. The following criteria shall be used in the
submittal of an application for a Stormwater Management Permit under the Town of
Weston By-Laws:
a. The design of the project shall, to the maximum extent feasible, employ
environmentally sensitive site design as outlined in the DEP handbook and shall
attempt to reproduce natural hydrologic conditions with respect to ground and
surface waters.
b. Consideration of Low Impact Development practices is required and
implementation of such practices is encouraged and preferred, to the maximum
extent practicable and where it provides a substantially equivalent alternative.
Guidance on these practices is provided in Appendix B of these Regulations and
the MA Stormwater Management Handbook.
c. The water quality volume for sizing of BMPs shall be based on 1-inch of runoff
from the tributary area.
d. Stormwater Management systems designed to accept runoff from impervious
areas, e.g., infiltration devices for roof and driveway runoff, shall be sited in
acceptable areas on the property and shall be evaluated on the basis of the
following criteria.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 13 of 25
e. Projects are to be designed such that the peak rates of stormwater runoff and
volumes in the post development conditions are less than in the pre-development
conditions (See #2 below).
2. Design for mitigation of peak stormwater runoff rates:
a. A hydrologic analysis using TR-55/TR-20 methodology or other acceptable
analysis method shall be performed on the entire project site and include any off
site areas that drain to or through the project site.
i. The analyses shall be conducted for the 1 inch, and the 2, 10, 25 and 100-
year design storms under pre-development and post-development conditions.
The 24-hour rainfall amounts for the 2, 10, 25 and 100 year storms are to be
based on the Northeast Regional Climate Center “Atlas of Precipitation
Extremes for the Northeastern United States and Southeastern Canada.” For
Weston, the 24 hr. rainfall amounts are as follows (rounded to the nearest
one-tenth of an inch):
1. 2 yr. - 24 hr. event = 3.2 inches
2. 10 yr. - 24 hr. event = 4.7 inches
3. 25 yr. - 24 hr. event = 6.0 inches
4. 100 yr.- 24 hr. event = 8.5 inches
5. 1-inch - 24 hr. event = 1.0 inches
ii. The analysis is to be performed on a pre-development and post development
sub-watershed basis with designated control points at each location where
runoff leaves the site.
iii. The same land area shall be used in the analysis to facilitate comparison of
pre- development and post development conditions.
iv. The total volume of discharge as well as peak rate of runoff shall be
evaluated at each control point. The analysis must demonstrate that the
design achieves a net reduction of volume and peak flow rate in all design
storms when comparing existing with proposed conditions.
b. Stormwater infiltration systems may be needed to provide stormwater storage to
mitigate peak stormwater runoff and volume in the proposed conditions to be less
than the peak runoff in the existing conditions.
i. Infiltration systems must be located 2 feet above high ground water and be
constructed in an area surrounded by existing pervious material to ensure
drainage from the proposed drainage structures.
ii. High ground water and depth of pervious material must be established on the
site by a Licensed Soil Evaluator prior to the construction of any drainage
structures which discharges through infiltration.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 14 of 25
iii. Systems must be designed so that inspection and maintenance can be
readily performed.
3. Roadway Reconstruction Standards
All public/private roadway projects must provide a net improvement to stormwater
conditions, either in the area of disturbance or to other areas on the site. The SWPA
may require improvements to areas outside of disturbance activity where known
problems exist and reasonable solutions are available. Such opportunities might
include:
a. Reduce impervious surfaces
b. Implement source controls of potential stormwater pollutants on the entire site
c. Reroute drainage to maximize treatment efficiencies
d. Update/Prepare Operation and Maintenance plans and procedures for the
roadway.
B. Erosion and Sediment Control Design and Performance Criteria
Approval of an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan by the SWPA is required prior to any
site altering activity. The plan shall be designed to ensure compliance with the Permit,
these Regulations, and if applicable, the NPDES General Permit for Storm Water
Discharges from Construction Activities. In addition, the plan shall ensure that the
Massachusetts Surface Water Quality Standards (314 CMR 4.00) are met in all seasons.
The applicant shall submit such material as is necessary to show that the proposed
development will comply with the design requirements.
1. If a project requires a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) per the
NPDES General Permit for Storm Water Discharges from Construction Activities
(applicable to construction sites that disturb one or more acres of land), then the
Applicant is required to submit a complete copy of the SWPPP (including the signed
Notice of Intent and approval letter) as part of its application for a SMP. If the
SWPPP meets the requirements of the NPDES General Permit, it will be considered
equivalent to the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan described in this Section.
2. The Erosion and Sediment Control Plan shall be designed to meet the following
criteria and guidelines.
a. Minimize total area of disturbance and minimize unnecessary clearing and
grading from all construction sites. Clearing and grading shall only be performed
within areas needed to build the project, including structures, utilities, roads,
recreational amenities, post-construction stormwater management facilities, and
related infrastructure.
b. Erosion and Sediment Control measures used shall be chosen based on the goal
of minimizing site disturbance from installation of such measures, such as the
use of filter mitts where appropriate.
8.0 INSPECTIONS
A. Construction Commencement
1. Pre-Construction Meeting
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 15 of 25
The SWPA may require a pre-construction meeting prior to starting clearing,
excavation, construction or land disturbing activity by the Applicant. The Applicant’s
technical representative, the general contractor or any other person with authority to
make changes to the project, shall meet with the SWPA or its representative to
review construction sequencing and the permitted plans and their implementation.
2. Notice of Construction Commencement
The applicant must notify the SWPA two (3) days prior to the commencement of
construction. In addition, the applicant must notify the SWPA two (3) days prior to
construction of critical components of any stormwater management facility.
3. A copy of the approved and signed plans and permits for a SMP shall be kept on the
construction site at all times.
4. The SWPA or its designee shall be granted the right to enter the property at
reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. The
SWPA, its agents, officers, and employees shall have authority to enter upon
privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this Regulation
and may make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys, or sampling as the
SWPA deems necessary, subject to the constitutions and laws of the United States
and the Commonwealth.
B. Construction Inspections
The SWPA may require the submission of periodic inspections and reporting by the
Applicant as dictated by site conditions.
1. The SWPA may inspect the project site at the following stages, at a minimum:
a. Initial Site Inspection of erosion and sedimentation controls prior to any land
disturbance to assess overall effectiveness and functioning to protect resources
b. Stormwater Management System Excavation Inspection: An inspection will be
made of the excavation of the stormwater management system to insure depth to
ground water and presence of approved soil type.
c. Stormwater Management System Inspection: An inspection will be made of the
completed stormwater management system, prior to backfilling of any
underground drainage or stormwater conveyance structures.
d. Final Inspection
i. After the stormwater management system has been constructed, all
applicants are required to submit actual “as built” plans for any stormwater
management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. Asbuilt
plans must be submitted both in hard copy and electronically as either
AutoCAD drawings or PDF documents.
ii. The SWPA shall inspect the system to confirm its "as-built" features. . If the
inspector finds the system to be adequate he/she shall so report to the SWPA
which will issue a Certificate of Completion.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 16 of 25
e. Notes indicating the required inspections are to be added to the Site Plan(s).
9.0 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION
A. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Completion, the SWPA may require the applicant
to submit the following material to the SWPA demonstrating that the completed project is
in accordance with the approved plans and specifications:
1. As-built plan. For projects designed by a registered professional engineer, the
SWPA may require the as-built plan to be prepared and stamped by the design
engineer.
2. Documentation on compliance with all permit conditions
3. All Inspection reports as required during construction have been submitted, if
applicable
4. Final Operation & Maintenance Plan, if applicable
5. Maintenance contracts in place, if applicable
6. Stormwater Management Permit has been recorded at Registry of Deeds, if
applicable
B. Upon receipt and approval of the final inspection and reports and/or upon otherwise
determining that all work of the permit has been satisfactorily completed in conformance
with this Regulation, the SWPA shall issue a letter certifying completion in conformance
with this Regulation.
10.0 ENFORCEMENT
Enforcement powers of the SWPA are granted in the Stormwater and Erosion Control By-Law,
Section VIII.
A. The SWPA shall enforce the By-Law, Regulations, orders, violation notices, and
enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil, criminal and non-criminal remedies for
such violations.
B. Notices and Orders
1. The SWPA may issue a written notice of violation or enforcement order to enforce
the provisions of the By-Law or the Regulations thereunder, which may include
requirements to:
a. Cease and desist from construction or land disturbing activity until there is
compliance with the By-Law and the Stormwater Management Permit.
b. Repair, maintain; or replace the stormwater management system or portions
thereof in accordance with the operation and maintenance plan.
c. Perform monitoring, analyses, and reporting.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 17 of 25
d. Fix adverse impact resulting directly or indirectly from malfunction of the
stormwater management system.
2. If the SWPA determines that abatement or remediation of adverse impacts is
required, the order may set forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation
must be completed. Said order may further advise that, should the violator or
property owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the specified deadline, the
Town of Weston may, at its option, undertake such work, and the property owner
shall reimburse the Town of Weston for expenses incurred.
3. Within thirty (30) days after completing all measures necessary to abate the violation
or to perform remediation, the violator and the property owner shall be notified of the
costs incurred by the Town of Weston including administrative costs. The violator or
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs
with the SWPA within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notification of the costs
incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the time in which to
file a protest or within thirty (30) days following a decision of the SWPA affirming or
reducing the costs, or from a final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the
costs shall become a special assessment against the property owner and shall
constitute a lien on the owner’s property for the amount of said costs. Interest shall
begin to accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate provided in G.L. Ch. 59, §
57, after the thirty-first day at which the costs first become due.
C. Any person who violates any provision of the Town of Weston Stormwater Management
By-Law, or Regulations, order or permit issued there under, may be ordered to correct
the violation and/or shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300. Each day or part
thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Non-Criminal Disposition
As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town of Weston may elect to
utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in G.L. Ch. 40, §21D. The
following shall be the fines applicable to the listed offenses:
First violation: Warning
Second violation: $100
Third violation: $200
Fourth and subsequent violation: $300
Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
F. Remedies Not Exclusive
The remedies listed in the By-Law and these Regulations are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 18 of 25
11.0 SEVERABILITY
The invalidity of any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of these Regulations
shall not invalidate any other section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause thereof, nor
shall it invalidate any permit or determination that previously has been issued.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 19 of 25
Town of Weston
Stormwater Regulations
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A: DEFINITIONS
ALTER: Any activity that will measurably change the ability of a ground surface area to absorb
water, will change existing surface drainage patterns, or will increase or decrease the rate or
volume of flow from a site.
APPLICANT: A property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a
Stormwater Management Permit.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Structural, non-structural and managerial
techniques that are recognized to be the most effective and practical means to prevent
and/or reduce increases in stormwater volumes and flows, reduce point source and
nonpoint source pollution, and promote stormwater quality and protection of the
environment. “Structural” BMPs are devices that are engineered and constructed to provide
temporary storage and treatment of stormwater runoff. “Nonstructural” BMPs use natural
measures to reduce pollution levels, do not require extensive construction efforts, and/or
promote pollutant reduction by eliminating the pollutant source.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION (COC): A document issued by the Stormwater Permitting
Authority after all construction activities have been completed which states that all
conditions of an issued Stormwater Management Permit (SMP) have been met and that a
project has been completed in compliance with the conditions set forth in a SMP.
CONVEYANCE: Any structure or device, including pipes, drains, culverts, curb breaks, paved
swales or man-made swales of all types designed or utilized to move or direct stormwater
runoff or existing water flow.
DEVELOPER: A person who undertakes or proposes to undertake land disturbance activities.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction that disturbs or alters a parcel of land.
DISTURBANCE OF LAND: Any action causing removal of vegetation or a change in the
position, location, or arrangement of soil, sand, rock, gravel or similar earth material.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of
private land for stormwater management purposes.
EROSION CONTROL: The prevention or reduction of the movement of soil particles or rock
fragments due to stormwater runoff.
EROSION CONTROL PLAN: A plan that shows the location and construction detail(s) of the
erosion and sediment reduction controls to be utilized for a construction site.
EXEMPT USE: Any use subject to the provisions of M.G.L. chapter 40A, section 3.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 20 of 25
FLOOD CONTROL: The prevention or reduction of flooding and flood damage.
FLOODING: A local and temporary inundation or a rise in the surface of a body of water, such
that it covers land not usually under water.
GRADING: Changing the level or shape of the ground surface.
GROUNDWATER: All water beneath any land surface including water in the soil and bedrock
beneath water bodies.
HOTSPOT: Land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, such as auto
salvage yards, auto fueling facilities, fleet storage yards, commercial parking lots with high
intensity use, road salt storage areas, commercial nurseries and landscaping, outdoor
storage and loading areas of hazardous substances, or marinas.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material or structure on, above or below the ground that
prevents water from infiltrating through the underlying soil. Impervious surface is defined to
include, without limitation: paved surfaces (parking lots, sidewalks, driveways), roof tops,
swimming pools, patios, and paved, gravel and compacted dirt surfaced roads.
INFILTRATION: The act of conveying surface water into the ground to permit groundwater
recharge and the reduction of stormwater runoff from a project site.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): An ecosystem-based approach to land development and
stormwater management that ensures that each development site is designed to protect, or
restore, the natural hydrology of the site.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS: The latest version as may
be amended from time to time of the Stormwater Management Standards and
accompanying Stormwater Handbook issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection pursuant to authority under the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. c. 131, § 40, and
the Massachusetts Clean Waters Act, M.G.L .c. 21, §§ 26-53. The Stormwater
Management Standards are incorporated in the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations, 310
CMR 10.05(6)(k) and the Water Quality Certification Regulations, 314 CMR 9.06(6)(a).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN
SYSTEM: The system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater, including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped
storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered
drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage structure that together comprise the storm
drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Weston.
NEW DEVELOPMENT: Any construction or land disturbance of a parcel of land that is currently
in a natural vegetated state and does not contain alteration by man-made activities.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from many diffuse sources caused by rainfall,
snowmelt, or other method of pollutant transport moving over and through the ground. As
the runoff moves, it picks up and carries away natural and human-made pollutants, finally
depositing them into water resource areas.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 21 of 25
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN: A plan that defines the functional, financial and
organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance of a stormwater
management system to insure that it continues to function as designed.
OWNER: A person with a legal or equitable interest in a property.
PERSON: Any individual, group of individuals, association, partnership, corporation, company,
business organization, trust, estate, the Commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the
extent subject to Town By-Laws, administrative agency, public or quasi-public corporation or
body, the Town of Weston, and any other legal entity, its legal representatives, agents, or
assigns.
PERVIOUS MATERIAL: Soil Types that are listed as Class I, II and III soils as defined in 310
CMR 15.243 and 15.244 based upon the general soil classification used by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture and depicted in the Soil Textural Triangle
PRE-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that exist prior to the proposed disturbance activity.
When phased development or plan approval is part of the site plan development i.e.
(preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the first plan submission is considered to
establish pre-development existing site conditions.
POINT SOURCE: Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited
to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, or container from which
pollutants are or may be discharged.
POST-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to
exist after completion of the land development activity in accordance with approved plans on
a specific site or tract of land. Post-development refers to the phase of a new development
or redevelopment project after completion, and does not refer to the construction phase of a
project.
RECHARGE: The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction, alteration, improvement, repaving, or resurfacing on a
previously-developed site.
RESOURCE AREA: Any area protected under including without limitation: the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act, Massachusetts Rivers Act, or Town of Weston Wetlands Protection
By-Law.
REVIEWING AGENT: Any Town employee, board or agent delegated in writing by the
Stormwater Permitting Authority to administer, implement and enforce the Stormwater By-
Law.
RUNOFF: Rainfall or snowmelt water flowing over the ground surface or other source resulting
in transport of other pollutants.
SEDIMENTATION: A process of depositing material that has been suspended and transported
in water.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 22 of 25
SLOPE: The incline of a ground surface expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical
distance (e.g. a 4:1 slope). It can also be expressed as a percentage of the vertical rise
divided by the horizontal distance (e.g. a twenty-five (25) percent slope).
SITE: The parcel of land being developed.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The use of structural or non-structural practices that are
designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow
discharge rates. Stormwater Management includes the use of Low-Impact Development
(LID) management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT (SMP): A permit issued by the Stormwater
Permitting Authority, after review of an application, plans, calculations, and other supporting
documents, which is designed to protect the environment of the Town from the deleterious
effects of uncontrolled and untreated stormwater runoff.
STOP WORK ORDER: An order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be
stopped.
TSS: Total Suspended Solids.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQv): The storage needed to capture a specified average
annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically (WQv) will vary as a function of drainage
area or impervious area.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 23 of 25
APPENDIX B: LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT PRACTICES
Low Impact Development (LID) strategies use careful site design and decentralized stormwater
management to reduce the environmental footprint of new growth and redevelopment. This
approach improves water quality, minimizes the need for expensive pipe and pond stormwater
systems, and creates more attractive developments. The following are LID strategies and
various benefits of implementation.
1. Bioretention cells, commonly known as rain gardens, are relatively small-scale, landscaped
depressions containing plants and a soil mixture that absorbs and filters runoff.
Management Objectives:
? Provide quality treatment.
? Remove suspended solids, metals, nutrients.
? Increase groundwater recharge through infiltration.
? Reduce peak discharge rates and total runoff volume.
2. Permeable and porous pavements allow water to soak through the paved surface into the
ground beneath. Permeable pavement encompasses a variety of mediums including: porous
concrete and asphalt, plastic grid systems and interlocking paving bricks.
Management Objectives:
? Reduce stormwater runoff volume from paved surfaces.
? Reduce peak discharge through infiltration.
? Reduce pollutant transport through direct infiltration.
? Improve site landscaping benefits (grass pavers).
3. Grass swales are broad, open channels sown with erosion resistant and flood tolerant
grasses. This has been used alongside roadways for years.
Management Objectives:
? Provide water quality treatment; remove suspended solids; heavy metals, trash.
? Reduce peak discharge rate and total runoff volume.
? Infiltrate water into the ground.
? Provide a location for snow storage.
4. Infiltration Trenches and Dry Wells Dry wells are standard stormwater management
structures that store water in the void space between crushed stone or gravel; the water
slowly percolates downward into the subsoil.
Management Objectives:
? Remove suspended solids, heavy metals trash, oil, and grease.
? Reduce peak discharge rate and total runoff volume.
? Provide modest infiltration and recharge.
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 24 of 25
? Provide snow storage areas.
5. Grass Filter Strips are low-angle vegetated slopes designed to treat sheet flow runoff from
adjacent impervious areas.
Management Objectives:
? Remove suspended solids, heavy metals, trash, oil and grease.
? Reduce peak discharge rate and total runoff volume.
? Provide modest infiltration and recharge.
? Provide snow storage areas.
6. Roadway and Parking Lot Design:
Management Objectives:
? Reduce total impervious surface.
? Reduce road/parking construction costs.
? Provide save access and adequate parking.
? Minimize disturbance to natural site hydrology.
? Create opportunities for stormwater treatment and infiltration.
? Improve site appearance.
7. Cisterns and rain barrels harvest and store rainwater collected from roofs.
Management Objectives:
? Storing and diverting runoff.
? Reduce flooding and erosion caused by stormwater runoff.
? They contain no salts or sediment which provides "soft" chemical-free water for
garden or lawn irrigation, reducing water bills and conserving municipal water
supplies.
8. Other LID Implementations
? Shared Driveways.
? Green Roofs.
? Eliminating curbs and gutters, or minimizing in new construction.
? Roughening surfaces.
? Creating long flow paths over landscaped areas.
? Installing smaller culverts, pipes, and inlets.
? Creating terraces and check dams.
? Infiltration, Filtration
? Rain gardens.
? Disconnected downspouts (not on hills).
? Filter Mitts.
9. Maintenance of Paved Surfaces
Town of Weston
Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations March 14, 2012
Page 25 of 25
? No coal-tar pavement sealants.
? No sodium de-icers.
10. Low Impact Landscaping
? Native, drought tolerant species.
? Turf area conversion (shrubs, etc.).
? Encouraging longer grass length
? Planting wildflower meadows rather than turf along medians.
Conservation Development
Like LID, Conservation Development tries to mitigate the effects of urbanization, but it places
additional emphasis on protecting aquatic habitat and other natural resources. Conservation
Development subdivisions are characterized by compact clustered lots surrounding a common
open space. Conservation Development's goal is to disturb as little land area as possible while
simultaneously allowing for the maximum number of residences permitted under zoning laws.
Prior to new construction, conservation developers evaluate natural topography, natural
drainage patterns, soils and vegetation. They deploy stormwater best management practices to
help prevent flooding and protect natural hydrology. By maintaining natural hydrological
processes, Conservation Development creates conditions that slow, absorb, and filter
stormwater runoff onsite.
Because future development threatens valuable natural features, Conservation Development
provides specific provisions for long-term and permanent resource protection. Conservation
easements, transfer of development rights, and other "in perpetuity" mechanisms ensure that
protective measures are more than just temporary.
Better Site Design
The goals of Better Site Design are to reduce impervious cover, preserve natural lands, and
capture stormwater onsite. To meet these goals, designers employ a variety of methods. To
reduce impervious cover, they narrow streets and sidewalks, minimize cul-de-sacs, tighten
parking spaces, and reduce the size of driveways and housing lots.
To reduce stormwater runoff, designers preserve natural lands, using them as buffer zones
along streams, wetlands and steep slopes. They employ landscaping techniques that flatten
slopes and preserve native vegetation and clusters of trees. They create bio-retention areas -
open channels, filter strips and vegetated swales - to increase stormwater infiltration, helping to
protect streams, lakes, and wetlands.
Water Reuse/Water Conservation
In order to conserve potable water supplies and maximize recharge, it may be appropriate on
some sites to store and reuse clean runoff (e.g. from roofs) for reuse on the site for irrigation or
other greywater purposes. This can be accomplished through the use of cisterns and rain
barrels. Where appropriate, a water budget may be required to be prepared to determine
applicability.
TOWN OF WESTON
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL
NOVEMBER 18, 1991
APPROVED BY THE PLANNING BOARD: November 19, 1991
FILED WITH TOWN CLERK: December 4, 1991
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1 - General Provisions 1
1.01 Authority 1
1.02 Purpose 1
1.03 Applicability 1
1.04 Waiver of Specific Information Requirements 1
1.05 Amendments to the Rules and Regulations 1
Section 2 - Filing Procedures for Site Plan Approval 2
2.01 Who May File a Submission for Site Plan Approval 2
2.02 Filing Fees 2
2.03 Site Plan Approval Submission and Date of Submission 2
2.04 Transmittal of the Submission 2
2.05 Certified Abutters List 3
Section 3 - Form of Plans 4
3.01 Sheet Size 4
3.02 Professional Certification 4
3.03 Forms of Plans 4
Section 4 - Content of the Submission 5
4.01 General 5
4.02 List of All Items Submitted 5
4.03 Location 5
4.04 General Site Characteristics 5
4.05 National Site Characteristics 6
4.06 Use Description 6
4.07 Site Improvements 6
4.08 Site Utilities 7
4.09 Waste Disposal 7
4.10 Earth Removal/Fill 8
4.11 Light, Shadow, Sound, Odors 8
4.12 Signs 8
4.13 Design and landscape 8
4.14 Traffic Study 8
4.15 Impact and Mitigation 9
4.16 Additional Information 9
Section 5 - Site walk and Public Hearing Information 10
5.01 Site walk and Public Hearing 10
5.02 Deliberation and Vote 10
Fee Processing Schedule 12
SPA-1 Application for Site Plan Approval 13
SPA-2 Transmittal of Site Plan Approval Submission 14
SPA-3 Proof of Transmittal 15
SPA-4 Waiver Request Form 16
SPA-5 Request for List of Certified Abutters 17
SPA-6 Extension Agreement Form – Hearing 18
SPA-7 Extension Agreement Form – Decision 19
SPA-8 Site Walk Notification Notice 20
SPA-9 Public Hearing Notice 21
Updated February 2018 1
SECTION 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.01 AUTHORITY
These Rules and Regulations for Site Plan Approval are adopted by the Weston Planning Board, as
authorized by Section XI of the Weston Zoning By-Law.
1.02 PURPOSE
The purpose of these Rules and Regulations is to establish procedures for conducting Site Plan
Approval, as set forth in Section XI of the Weston Zoning By-Law.
1.03 APPLICABILITY
Any person applying for Site Plan Approval under Section XI of the Weston Zoning By-Law shall
comply with these Rules and Regulations.
1.04 WAIVER OF SPECIFIC INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
Strict compliance with these Rules and Regulations, including the holding of a Public Hearing, may
be waived if the Planning Board finds that the waiver is in the public interest, or if the required
information is irrelevant to the project, and the result of the waiver granted is consistent with the
purpose of the Weston Zoning By-Law and these Rules and Regulations. Planning Board shall
vote on these requests for waivers within 21 days of Date of Submission. If no vote is taken, waiver
requests shall be deemed to be denied.
Any request from an Applicant for a waiver of the Public Hearing or of these Rules and Regulations
must be submitted in writing at the time of the application for Site Plan Approval on Form SPA-4,
WAIVER REQUEST FORM. The request must clearly identify the provisions(s) from which relief
is sought and include a statement setting forth the reasons why, in the applicant’s option, the
granting of such a waiver would be in the public interest; why required information is irrelevant to
the project; and why a waiver would be consistent with the purpose of the Zoning By-Law and these
Rules and Regulations.
1.05 AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES AND REGULATIONS
The Rules and Regulations may be amended by a majority vote of the Board after a duly noticed
and help Public Hearing.
Updated February 2018 2
SECTION 2.
FILING PROCEDURES FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL
2.01 WHO MAY FILE A SUBMISSION FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL
If the applicant is a party other than the record owner, the Application must be co-signed by all of
the record owners.
2.02 FILING FEES
Every Submission (other than by the Town of Weston) shall be accompanied by a filing fee payable
by check to the Town of Weston. The applicant should refer to the PROCESING FEE SCHEDULE
at the end of these Rules and Regulations for the fee schedule. If waiver of the public hearing is
requested but denied, the applicant will be required to pay the full filing fee.
A $50 advertising fee shall be required for any application requiring public notice under
Massachusetts General Law or the Bylaws of the Town of Weston.
2.03 SITE PLAN APPROVAL SUBMISSION AND DATE OF SUBMISSION
a) Submission. To initiate the Site Plan Approval process the applicant shall file an application
with the Town Planner on form SPA-1, the Application for SITE PLAN APPROVAL. This
application along with the supporting documentation required in these Rules and
Regulations and in Section XI of the Zoning By-Law constitutes the Submission.
b) Date of Submission. The applicant shall file or cause to be filed 7 copies of the Submission
in the office of the Town Planner. The Town Planner’s office shall stamp the upper right
hand corner of SPA-1 with the date of receipt. The Town Planner shall thereafter have 5
business days to review the Submission for completeness. If the Submission is complete,
the Town Planner shall endorse the Submission by completing the lower portion of SPA-1.
The date of such endorsement shall be the Date of Submission.
c) Incomplete Submission. If the Submission is incomplete, it will be returned to the Applicant
by the Town Planner with a listing of the missing information. The filing fee is
nonrefundable.
d) The Applicant shall file a copy of SPA-1, SITE PLAN APPROVAL APPLICATION
endorsed with the Date of Submission, with the Town Clerk’s Office within 2 business days
of the Date of Submission. Proof of receipt of the Application by the Town Clerk’s Office
shall be furnished on SPA-1.
2.04 TRANSMITTAL OF THE SUBMISSION
The Applicant shall transmit a complete copy of the endorsed, date stamped Submission to each of
the following: Board of Selectmen; Board of Health; Building Inspector; Fire Chief; Water
Department; Conservation Commission; Police Chief; Town Engineer at the DPW. The Applicant
Updated February 2018 3
shall use SPA-2, TRANSMITAL OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL SUBMISSION, as a cover sheet for
the Transmittals. It is the Applicant’s responsibility to furnish proof of receipt of the transmittal on
SPA-3, PROOF OF TRANSMITTAL FORM. The completed signature form must be returned to
the Town Planner not later than 3 business days after the Date of Submission. Failure to return
SPA-3 in the prescribed time will cause the Submission to be considered incomplete, and it will be
returned to the Applicant.
2.05 CERTIFIED ABUTTERS LIST
A list of abutters and abutters to abutters with 300’ including their postal addresses that are “parties
in interest” (as defined by M.G.L. C.40A) taken from the most recent tax list of the Town, shall be
certified by the Assessors Office and included in the Submission on SPA-5, CERTIFIED
ABUTTERS LIST FORM.
Updated February 2018 4
SECTION 3
FORM OF PLANS
3.01 SHEET SIZE
All plans shall be drawn on sheets 24”x36”. One set of 24”x36” reproducible plans and seven sets
of half scale prints shall be submitted to the Town Planner as part of the Submission. Transmittals
to other Boards, etc., shall include full size drawings.
3.02 PROFESSIONAL CERTIFICATION
All plans shall be prepared, as appropriate, by a Registered Architect, Landscape Architect,
Registered Land Surveyor or Registered Professional Engineer unless this requirement is waived by
the Planning Board.
3.03 FORMS OF PLANS
Plans shall be legibly drawn, be fully detailed and demonstrate the intentions of the Applicant.
Plans shall be drawn at a standard scale and so stated. All plan sheets shall be consecutively
numbered e.g. 1 of 5, 2 of 5, etc. All plans shall have an appropriate title block, north arrow, scale
and legend identifying any representative symbols used. All plans shall be dated and bear the name
and address of the owner of record, the project name, the applicant, and professional seal where
applicable.
Updated February 2018 5
SECTION 4
CONTENT OF THE SUBMISSION
4.01 GENERAL
The information submitted by an applicant shall include data and analyses which are pertinent to the
Standards and Criteria set forth in the Weston Zoning By-Laws, Section XI, Subsection H. At a
minimum, a Submission shall contain the following items.
4.02 LIST OF ALL ITEMS SUBMITTED
The Submission shall include a separate sheet titled “List of Items Submitted” which shall number
and identify each document, plan, drawing or other item that is submitted by the Applicant as part
of the Submission. Any item that is added to the Submission during the course of the site plan
approval process shall be added to the List by the Applicant.
4.03 LOCATION
A separate locus map at 1”=300 ft. shall show the location of the site showing details similar to that
shown on the Assessor’s Maps, within a minimum radius of 500’ of the site. A separate abutters
map at 1”-100 ft. shall show the total of abutters’ and next abutters’ land with structures, driveways,
watercourses, roadways, easements and rights of way.
4.04 GENERAL SITE CHARACTERISTICS
The plans shall show all existing lot lines and boundaries on the site and those of any abutting
properties to the site owned by the same owner (s), present and proposed easements; rights of way;
covenants; restrictions; and agreements on the development parcel.
The size of the development parcel area shall be stated in acres or square feet.
All zoning district boundaries shall be specified including any overlay districts on or within 500 ft.
of the perimeter of the site. The Applicant shall provide copies of all variances, special permits and
dates of issue by other Town Boards or Federal Agencies, and a list of any variance, permit or
special permit required to begin the proposed work.
The plans shall show the area of the parcel within the Weston Wetlands and Floodplain Protection
District with base elevations.
The plans shall show the location and type of trails, recreation areas, scenic views, historic
structures and buildings, stone walls and written description/plans for their preservation.
4.05 NATURAL SITE CHARACTERISTICS
The plans shall show existing and proposed topography at two (2) foot contour intervals (all
elevations shall refer to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929).
Updated February 2018 6
The plans shall show location of water resources including ponds, lakes, brooks, intermittent
streams, vernal ponds, streams, flood plains and all proposed changes to these features.
The plans shall show all wetlands and wetland buffer area boundaries subject to the provisions of
the “Wetlands Protection Act “ M.G.L. C.131, Section 40.
4.06 USE DESCRIPTION
The applicant shall provide a detailed written description of the existing and proposed use. General
description such as “business use” or “medical use” are not acceptable. The use description must
identify the specific type(s) of activities currently existing and proposed to be conducted on the site.
The statement shall include occupancy information for existing and proposed uses including the
total and maximum number of employees on site at one time with size of shifts; maximum seating
or service capacity; total occupancy including residents, clients, and service providers on site.
4.07 SITE IMPROVEMENTS
A table shall show the dimensional requirements (maximum-minimum) of the zoning district and
pre-and post-development site characteristics including square feet and percentage of land; of open
space, undisturbed open space, wetlands, floodplain, developable site area, footprint of structures,
and paved areas; front yard; side yard; rear yard; any buffers; building height; floor to lot ratio;
amount of impervious cover; number of parking spaces (including handicapped and compact car
space) with supporting calculations;
The following shall be shown on the plans:
The existing conditions on the development parcel shall be shown; such as, the location of any
existing septic systems, cesspools, leaching fields and wells on or within 500 feet of the
development parcel. The final disposition of any existing building or structure, whether it is to
remain, be altered or removed, shall be shown.
The location of all proposed buildings, structures, and improvements within the development parcel
shall be shown with all exterior entrances and all anticipated future additions and alterations.
All required setbacks for buildings and structures, parking and loading facilities shall be shown with
dimensions on the plan to demonstrate compliance with zoning requirements.
Parking spaces must be located and identified as either standard size, or handicapped spaces. The
location of any signs intended for identification of handicapped spaces must be shown. Pavement
markings must be shown.
Proposed parking structures must contain the above information as well as: dimensions of the
structures; means of ingress and egress; internal traffic circulation; lighting and access to the
principal structure.
Updated February 2018 7
All driveway entrances shall be shown with dimensions; and sight distances at the driveway
intersection shall be provided. The weight, turning radius length and height of the largest truck
expected to use the site shall be noted. All the driveways and entrances must be designed to
accommodate trucks as well as fire apparatus which must be able to maneuver freely. Service
areas, truck loading areas and utility buildings shall be shown.
Provisions for emergency access must be shown.
The location of all present and proposed public and private ways sidewalks (including construction
material to be used), ramps, paths, and curbs must be shown.
The plans shall show areas intended for outdoor storage (open) with dimensions and screening.
Traffic flow patterns within the site and off site must be shown and curb cuts and intersections
within 500 feet of the property line.
4.08 SITE UTILITIES
Drainage and Erosion: The storm drainage system must be shown and described including existing
and proposed drain lines, culverts, catch basins, headwalls, manholes and drainage swales; storm
water runoff calculations; measures to prevent the pollution of surface or groundwater, or the
erosion of soil during and after construction; calculations for and measures proposed to prevent or
control increases in the rate of off-site runoff; calculations for 100 year flood levels during and after
construction.
Location and type of all other present and proposed utility systems shall be shown including but not
limited to sewage disposal, electric, gas, water, telephone and cable.
Location of any underground storage tanks for fuel or other chemical storage shall be shown
including tank type, capacity, age and condition.
4.09 WASTE DISPOSAL
Location, type and screening details for all waste disposal containers shall be shown including type
and composition of solid waste and any hazardous wastes with estimated amounts; and operational
plans and facilities for solid waste disposal.
The location of the area which is capable of supporting on site sewage disposal from the proposed
project shall be shown. Design, operating and maintenance details of the proposed disposal facility
shall be explained.
4.10 EARTH REMOVAL/FILL
Indicate areas where earth removal, blasting, or filling is proposed and the approximate volume in
cubic yards, along with the rationale for proposed removal of vegetation, threes, soil and for any
grade change.
Updated February 2018 8
Precise calculations for determining the total amount of earth removal or fill will only be required
when the development will require earth materials to be obtained or removed off site. If the amount
is over 30 cubic yards, a removal/fill schedule will be required which shows size of trucks, gross
vehicle weight, estimated number of trips per day for each vehicle, travel routes to be taken, and
hours of operation, and certification that fill is free of hazardous materials.
4.11 LIGHT, SHADOW, SOUND, ODORS
The proposed location, height, intensity and bulb type (e.g., fluorescent, sodium incandescent) of all
external lighting fixtures shall be shown including the direction of illumination and methods to
eliminate glare onto adjoining properties; and post development shadow on abutting properties.
Calculations and descriptions of construction noise during and after construction shall be provided
and a description and explanation of any potential odors during construction and thereafter.
4.12 SIGNS
The location, height, size, material and design of all proposed signages shall be shown including
demonstration of compliance with Zoning By-Law.
4.13 DESIGN AND LANDSCAPE
Elevation plans shall be provided at a scale of 1/8 inch= 1 foot for all exterior facades of the
proposed structure and/or existing facades, plus additions(s), showing design features and indicating
the type of material to be used. A landscaping plan shall be provided showing all existing natural
features, trees proposed for removal over six inches caliper (measured twelve inches over the soil
line), area of forest cover including description of type, height, and density, and all proposed
changes to these features including size, and type of plant material.
4.14 TRAFFIC STUDY
The Traffic Study Area will be defined by the Planning Board to include all Intersections and roads
within 500’ of the development site, as well as all intersections and roads potentially impacted by
the proposed development. A detailed traffic study will evaluate the traffic before development,
during development (including any phased development stages), and post development. The traffic
study shall include: present and projected number of vehicle trips by vehicle type; i.e. passenger
car, delivery truck, employee vehicle, public transit, etc. estimated daily A.M. and P.M. peak hour
traffic levels; accident records for five years in the traffic study area including nature of accident
and time of day; the proposed traffic flow pattern including vehicular movements at all intersections
likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site; the impact of this traffic upon existing abutting
public ways in relation to existing road capacities before, during, and after development; the
adequacy of vehicular queuing storage at the site entrance; and transportation management system
plans and traffic mitigation measures that are consonant with Town character and acceptable to the
Planning Board. The traffic study area shall be defined by the Planning Board. The traffic study
should take into account any proposed projects or road improvements that are being considered by
local, state, or other agencies that may affect the proposed traffic projections.
Updated February 2018 9
4.15 IMPACT AND MITIGATION
Analysis shall be provided of impacts during construction including days and hours of operation;
provisions for employee and equipment parking; traffic, noise, dust vibration; impacts on wildlife
habitats; demand for and effects on character of the community. Any proposed mitigation of
negative impacts shall be provided and shall be consistent with the Standards and Criteria set forth
in Section XI, Subsection H. of the Weston Zoning By-Law.
4.16 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Applicant may submit whatever additional information he/she feels is necessary to inform the
Board about the proposed development including legal opinions, copies of deeds, historical data,
studies and reports.
The Board is empowered by the Zoning By-Law to require additional information in addition to that
specifically required by these Rules and Regulations if it finds that such information is necessary to
properly act upon the Submission and is pertinent to the Standards and Criteria set forth in the
Weston Zoning By-Law, Section XI, Subsection H.
Updated February 2018 10
SECTION 5
SITE WALK AND PUBLIC HEARING INFORMATION
5.01 Site walk and Public Hearing Information
A minimum of one site walk with Planning Board members and interested citizens may be held
prior to the public hearing.
The Applicant and his/her engineer shall be present at the site walk and prepared to explain the
proposal. The development site shall be staked and flagged prior to the site walk according to
subdivision flagging requirements and such other flagging as required by the Board or directed by
the Planning Board.
The Planning Board will set the date and time for a site walk at the development parcel, and the
date, time and place for a public hearing on the proposal. The public hearing shall be held within 45
days of the Date of Submission or 65 days if a Special Permit is required subsequent to Site Plan
Approval. An extension of time may be granted if it is mutually agreed to by the Applicant and
Board and filed with the Town Clerk by the Planning Board on SPA-6 EXTENSION
AGREEMENT FORM-HEARING.
The applicant Planning Board shall notify abutters within 300’ as defined by the Town Assessor and
Boards/Commissioners listed on SPA-3 of the site walk and public hearing. Notification shall be
made by mail sent at least fourteen days prior to the public hearing.
Failure to properly notify the parties in interest may cause the Board to invalidate the site walk and
public hearing.
A notice of the Public Hearing shall be published by the Planning Board office in a newspaper of
general circulation once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than 14
days before the day of the hearing. At the hearing, an applicant may appear on his/her behalf or be
represented by an agent to present the Submission to the Board and to the public.
5.01 DELIBERATION AND VOTE
For those projects that do not require a subsequent Special Permit, the Board shall make a decision
within 120 days of the Date of Submission. For those projects that require a subsequent Special
Permit, the Board shall make a decision within 90 days after the close of the public hearing.
However, the time period within which final action shall be taken may be extended to a date agreed
to by the Applicant and the Board. The extension for a decision shall be filed by the Planning
Board with the Town Clerk on SPA-7, EXTENSION AGREEMENT-DECISION FORM.
A majority vote of the Planning Board shall be necessary to grant Site Plan Approval. The Board
will within 14 days of making its vote shall file its decision with the Town Clerk and hand deliver
or send a copy to the Applicant by certified mail. Notice of the decision shall be sent as required by
MGLC.40A Section 9 to other parties in interest and to other parties that in writing request a copy.
Updated February 2018 11
FEE PROCESSING SCHEDULE
Type of Project Description Fee
1. Major Project Project over 1,000 gross $2,500
square feet or comparable.
2. Mid-Range Project Project 1,000 gross $1,000
square feet or comparable.
3. Residential Cluster, Multifamily, $1,000 +
Long Term Care $15/Dwelling Unit
4. Minor Project Project temporary or $150
Seasonal
Project where public hearing is $150
waived
Project with minimal impact $150
TOWN OF WESTON
Updated February 2018 12
Planning Board Office, P. O. Box 378, Weston, MA 02493
APPLICATION FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL
SPA-1
Date of Receipt at Town Planner’s Office:_________________
Applicant’s Name:_____________________________________ Telephone No:_____________
Applicant’s Address:_____________________________________________________________
Owner or Names and Addresses (if different) including all parties with 1 % or more interest:
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________________________________
Street Address of Site:___________________________________________________________
Assessors’s Map:__________ Parcel Number:______________Zoning District:_____________
Project Determination:
(Check fee computation page for definitions) Major For Res. # Units
Minor Requires subsequent
Special Permit
The undersigned hereby apply to the Planning Board for Site Plan Approval under Section XI of the
Weston Zoning By-Law. The undersigned hereby certifies that to the best of my knowledge the
information on this Application and Submission is correct.
____________________________________________________________________________
Date Signature of Applicant
Endorsement of Submission
To be completed by the Town Planner
Application and fee rec’d amount of :___________________ Date of Submission:___________
Endorsed Application/form SPA-1 filed with Town Clerk:_______________________________
Updated February 2018 13
TOWN OF WESTON
Planning Board, P. O. Box 378, Weston, MA 02493
TRANSMITTAL OF SITE PLAN APPROVAL SUBMISSION
SPA-2
Date of Submission:_____________
Dear Board/Commission Member/Agent:__________________________________________
The enclosed submission for Site Plan Approval has been filed by:
___________________________________________________________________________
Name
for the property located at ______________________________________________________
Address of Property
The Planning Board welcomes any comments you may have on this proposal. They should be
received by the Planning Board within 21 days of the above Date of Submission.
The Planning Board may hold a public hearing of which you will receive a notice of the exact date.
Thank you.
Very truly yours,
Weston Planning Board
Updated February 2018 14
TOWN OF WESTON
Planning Board, P. O. Box 378, Weston, MA 02493
PROOF OF TRANSMITTAL
SPA-3
A Submission for Site Plan Approval (see ZBL XI) has been filed by:
______________________________________________________for the property located at
Applicant Name
_____________________________________________________________________________,
Property Address
and has been received by the following: (Please Initial and Date Below)
__________BOARD OF HEATH __________FIRE CHIEF
__________BOARD OF SELECTMEN __________POLICE CHIEF
__________BUILDING INSPECTOR __________TOWN ENGINEER
__________CONSERVATION COM. __________TREASURER*
__________ DPW DIRECTOR __________ WATER DEPT.
Thank you,
Weston Planning Board
*Pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 57, the applicant has no outstanding debt in excess of
$200.00 on record with the Collector as of the date signed.
Date of Submission:________________
SPA-3 returned to the Town Planner
Updated February 2018 15
TOWN OF WESTON
Planning Board, P. O. Box 378, Weston, MA 02493
WAIVER REQUEST FORM
SPA-4
Applicant’s Name:_____________________________________ Telephone No:_____________
Applicant’s Address:_____________________________________________________________
Authorization of owner if not applicant______________________________________________
Street Address of Site____________________________________________________________
Do you request a waiver of Public Hearing? Yes No
If yes, describe your proposal and any impacts it may have on the Town road, neighborhood,
environment or Town services.
______________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
List all other items requested for waiver and reasons:
(Site sections in Zoning By-Law or Rules and Regulations)
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
PLANNING BOARD ACTION ON WAIVER REQUEST:
________________________________________________________________________________
____________________________________________________________________________
_________________________
For Planning Board
_________________________
Date
Updated February 2018 16
TOWN OF WESTON
Planning Board, P. O. Box 378, Weston, MA 02493
TOWN OF WESTON REQUEST FOR LIST OF CERTIFIED ABUTTERS
SPA-5
It is the applicant’s responsibility to determine which properties abut the subject property. In order for the Assessor to certify the
names and mailing address of each property owner, we require a list of properties identified by map and lot. Please complete the
following:
APPLICANT:__________________________________________________________________
ADDRESS:____________________________________________________________________
PHONE:_______________________________EMAIL___________________________________
SITE LOCATION:_______________________________________________________________
SITE MAP & LOT: MAP_______ LOT________ DATE____________________
****************************************************************************************************************
1. MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 16.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
2. MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 17.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
3. MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 18.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
4. MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 19.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
5. MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 20.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
6. MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 21.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
7. MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 22.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
8. MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 23.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
9. MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 24.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
10.MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 25.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
11.MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 26.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
12.MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 27.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
13.MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 28.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
14.MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 29.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
15.MAP: _______ LOT: _______ 30.MAP: _______ LOT: _______
PLANNING BOARD WITHIN 300 FEET OF THE PROPERTY LINE OF THE SITE AS THEY
APPEAR ON THE MOST RECENT TAX LIST.
Planning Boards of Lincoln, Natick, Newton, Waltham, Wayland and Wellesley will be included.
Updated February 2018 17
TOWN OF WESTON
Planning Board, P. O. Box 378, Weston, MA 02493
EXTENSION AGREEMENT FORM – HEARING
SPA-6
Date:______________________
__________________________________ and the Weston Planning Board, acting on a Submission
Applicant’s Name
for Site Plan Approval for the property located at________________________________________,
Address of Site
Agree to extend the Public Hearing period from ___________________to ___________________.
Date Date
This extension becomes effective when filed by the Planning Board with the Town Clerk.
Signed_________________________________________________(for Applicant)
Signed_________________________________________________(for Board)
Updated February 2018 18
TOWN OF WESTON
Planning Board, P. O. Box 378, Weston, MA 02493
EXTENSION AGREEMENT FORM – DECISION
SPA-7
Date:______________________
The Weston Planning Board and _____________________________________________________
Applicant’s Name
have agreed to extend deliberations on a Site Plan Approval Submission for the property located on
________________________________________________________________________________
Address of Site
beyond the regulatory review period.
Final action on the Submission will be made by ______________________________
Date
Signed ______________________________________ ________________________________
for Applicant for Planning Board
This extension becomes effective when filed by the Planning Board with the Town Clerk.
Signed_________________________________________________(for Applicant)
Signed_________________________________________________(for Board)
Updated February 2018 19
TOWN OF WESTON
Planning Board, P. O. Box 378, Weston, MA 02493
SITE WALK NOTIFICATION NOTICE
SPA-8
The Weston Planning Board will hold a site walk on a parcel of land located at
____________________________________________ on ________________________________
Street Address Date of Walk
at __________________ concerning an Application for Site Plan Approval submitted by
Time of Walk
______________________________________and owned by ______________________________
Name of Applicant Name of Owner(s)
A brief description of the proposal is:
The public is invited to attend the site walk and the Public Hearing.
Updated February 2018 20
TOWN OF WESTON
Planning Board, P. O. Box 378, Weston, MA 02493
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE
SPA-9
The Weston Planning Board will hold a Public Hearing on an application for Site Plan Approval
submitted by:
____________________________________________________for the property located at
Applicant’s Name
_____________________________________________________________________________
Address of Property
The Public Hearing will be held on _________________________, _________________________
Date Time
at _____________________________________________________________________________
Location
A complete submission for review is available at the Town Planners office, Monday through Friday
from 9:00 a.m. – 4:30 p.m.
A brief description of the Proposal is:
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________
Weston Conservation Commission Land Use Regulations 1
Weston Conservation Commission
CONSERVATION LAND USE POLICY & REGULATIONS
Adopted: March 18, 2014
Revised: October 13, 2015
MISSION STATEMENT
The Weston Conservation Commission shall endeavor: (1) to preserve open space for the enjoyment of the
community; (2) to protect water, land, animal and plant natural resources for the health of the
environment; (3) to manage Conservation Land in a sustainable manner; (4) to educate the community
about natural resources and the role of human stewardship; and (5) to encourage community participation
in town conservation issues.
Conservation Land Regulations
The following Rules and Regulations are intended to ensure that the conservation lands are managed and
maintained in accordance with the requirements of the Conservation Commission Act (M.G.L. Chapter 40,
section 8C) and the Mission of Weston’s Conservation Commission (WCC). For the purpose of this
document, “conservation land” is land under the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission. Generally,
the WCC allows, on conservation land, activities that do not harm natural resource values and functions
and do not interfere with natural resource processes, wildlife, wildlife habitat, or passive public enjoyment
of the land. Generally, activities that harm or interfere with these values, processes, or passive public
enjoyment are prohibited. Activities that may promote certain of these values, processes, or passive public
enjoyment to the detriment of other values, processes, or passive public enjoyment shall be evaluated and
allowed if the WCC determines that the activity serves some overriding public interest. The Conservation
Commission may undertake or contract with others to undertake all necessary management actions.
These Regulations may be made more restrictive for any specific parcels as deemed necessary by the WCC
for the protection of the natural resources and the safety of the public. With regard to a particular
proposed use, the WCC will evaluate the compatibility of the use with the WCC Mission Statement, these
regulations, and the impact on wildlife and abutters.
Agriculture
Agriculture is a large part of Weston’s past. Many conservation lands include former pasture and crop
areas. Several parcels of conservation land were purchased by the Town for the purpose of continuing its
agricultural traditions and maintaining the Town’s historic character. Therefore, the WCC may periodically
enter into “license” agreements with farmers for the purpose of keeping historic fields in continued
agricultural use. Any fields licensed for farming will include the requirement that the farmer must permit
public access to the land around the perimeter of the fields during the growing season and throughout the
property outside of the growing season.
Forest Management
Much of Weston’s conservation land is forested. A forest management policy has been implemented on
select conservation land parcels to meet the following four goals: ecological protection, education,
recreation, and wood production. Harvesting of trees for firewood and timber makes use of valuable
renewable resources. By selection cutting and careful management, the Town’s forests will be more
productive in the long run and will also provide diverse wildlife habitat. WCC may enter into contracts with
Weston Conservation Commission Land Use Regulations 2
organizations who will work with the Town to file appropriate Forest Cutting Plans with the State to allow
for harvesting trees for timber and firewood on conservation land.
Section I. GENERAL INFORMATION FOR USING THE TRAILS
The conservation lands of Weston are open to the public for recreational use without charge or special
permit unless otherwise indicated in these regulations. Users should observe the following:
A. The trails which are open to the public for recreational use are identified by white trail markers with
a tree symbol and the letter “W”. Paths that are unmarked are generally private and not for public
use.
B. In case of an emergency, call the Weston Police at 911. For non-emergency communications, please
call the Weston Conservation Commission at 781-786-5068.
C. Most of Weston’s conservation trails are for multiple uses. Depending upon the season, users may
encounter walkers, runners, horses, dogs, bicyclists, skiers, snowshoers, and farmers using
equipment. Please respect other users.
D. Bicyclists should be mindful of the following:
1. Bicyclists should stay on the fire roads as shown on the Trail map.
2. Bicycle riding is discouraged on hillsides or in wet weather when the ground is soft.
3. Bicycle riding can be dangerous; riders should be courteous and attentive to other trail
users.
E. Dog Walkers must comply with Weston’s Dog Bylaw which requires that:
1. Dogs must be leashed or under voice control at all times;
2. Commercial dog walkers must get a permit at Town Hall which allows them to walk up to 5
dogs;
3. Except for commercial dog walkers, persons walking more than three dogs must leash all of
their dogs;
4. Dog waste must be cleaned up and properly disposed of.
5. The Animal Control Officer will enforce Weston’s Dog Regulations and can be reached at
781-786-6200.
F. Horseback Riding:
1. Groups of more than five riders, and any organized horseback activities, require a permit
from the WCC;
2. Organized use of Dickson Memorial Riding Rings require a special Use Permit for Horse
Events (attached);
3. Riding is discouraged in wet weather when the ground is soft;
4. Horseback riding can be dangerous and riders should be courteous and attentive to other
trail users.
G. Failure to observe these regulations and common courtesies may result in restrictions or
prohibitions of public use.
Section II. Conservation Land Restrictions
The following restrictions shall be applicable to Town land under the care and management of the
Conservation Commission (herein referred to as Conservation Land).
Weston Conservation Commission Land Use Regulations 3
A. The following activities are prohibited on Conservation Land, unless otherwise permitted in Section
IIB:
1. Using paintball guns;
2. Swimming;
3. Cutting, breaking, removing, defacing, defiling, or ill-using any building, structure, fence, or sign;
4. Cutting, removing, defacing, or otherwise damaging trees, shrubs, flowers, fungus, grass, or
other flora;
5. Drinking alcoholic beverages;
6. Disturbing the peace; and
7. Depositing litter, yard waste, garbage, brush, excavated fill or any hazardous waste.
B. The following activities are prohibited on Conservation Land without a written Use Permit from the
Weston Conservation Commission:
1. Conducting organized group events or activities;
2. Starting fires;
3. Camping overnight;
4. Operating cars, trucks, motorbikes, snowmobiles, or power tools; and
5. Collecting or removing mushrooms, plants, or wood.
6. Cutting or removing trees for firewood or lumber, or tapping trees for their sap.
C. The following activities are prohibited on Conservation Land except as expressly permitted in
Weston’s Bow Hunting Regulations promulgated by the Conservation Commission, as they may exist
from time to time:
1. Hunting or trapping;
2. Carrying firearms; and
3. Willfully disturbing or endangering wildlife.
Section III. Non-Criminal Disposition
As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town may utilize the non-criminal disposition
procedure set forth in M.G.L. Ch. 40, §21D and Article V of the By-Laws of the Town of Weston, in which
case any police officer of the Town of Weston, the Conservation Commission, the Conservation
Administrator, and such other persons as are authorized by the Commission shall be the enforcing person.
If non-criminal disposition is used, the following fine schedule shall be applicable for any violation of this
By-Law, or any regulation, order or permit issued hereunder and each day a violation exists shall constitute
a separate violation:
A. First violation: warning.
B. Second violation: $100.
C. Third violation: $200.
D. Fourth and subsequent violations: $300.
Section IV. General Use Permits
A. Any activities and uses not set forth above require the permission of the WCC. For any activity
seeking written permission, the WCC shall apply the following criteria to the activity:
1. Does the activity contribute to the WCC’s responsibilities under M.G.L. Chapter 40, section
8C and the WCC Mission Statement?
Weston Conservation Commission Land Use Regulations 4
2. Will the activity promote or enhance the natural resource functions of the site?
3. Will the activity promote or enhance the passive enjoyment of the property by the general
public?
B. Any individual or group requesting special permission from WCC shall fill out the attached Use
Permit Application. Permits will be issued at the discretion of the WCC.
C. Use Permit requests for equestrian events will be reviewed by the Volunteer Dickson Ring
Coordinator, and requests from other special interest groups (i.e., running races, bicycle events,
canine events, etc.) will be reviewed by an appointee knowledgeable in the discipline, followed by a
recommendation to the WCC as to the suitability of such events.
D. If the event will take place on a Sunday, the applicant must request a Commonwealth of Mass.
“Permit to Hold Public Entertainment on a Sunday” with the appropriate fees for any Sunday
activity. This permit form is to be submitted to the Board of Selectmen, and must be filed a
minimum of 2 months prior to the proposed event.
E. Insurance - The organized group shall obtain, and maintain during the duration of the event,
insurance coverage with companies licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, at the limits acceptable to the Town.
F. Should trails on private property be used, the landowner’s permission shall be sought.
G. An organized group’s past use or abuse of the privilege of using Weston’s Conservation Land may be
taken into consideration.
Section V. Use Permit for Dickson Memorial Riding Rings
A. All general use permit requirements listed above must be met in addition to the following
requirements.
B. An “organized use” is considered to be any activity hosted by an organization with a recognized
presence. These activities may or may not be posted on public or private websites, or advertised via
email blasts, mailings, or word of mouth.
C. Any group wishing to run organized activities at Dickson Memorial Riding Rings must submit its
request in writing to the WCC via the Conservation Administrator at least 3 months prior to the
proposed event.
D. Dates for approved activities based at the Dickson Memorial Riding Rings will be scheduled by the
Volunteer Dickson Ring Coordinator.
E. Events involving non-human participants (i.e., equine, canine, etc.) must be confined to the Dickson
Memorial Riding Rings unless the Volunteer Dickson Ring Coordinator or an approved substitute
agrees to oversee course design, landowner notification, and marking of trails.
F. A suitable donation should be made as acknowledgement of gratitude for the use of the land. For
equestrian activities or those based at the Dickson Memorial Riding Rings, donations should be
made to the Weston-Wayland Open Spring Horse Show, Inc. to be used for the upkeep of the
property. Donations for all other activities should be made to the Weston Forest and Trail
Association Endowment Fund. (WCC suggests a donation of 10% of profits.)
G. There will be no alcohol present.
H. Foxhunting (live or drag) will not be permitted on the Weston conservation lands.
Filed with Town/City Clerk: October 14, 2015
Page 1
ARTICLE XXVII. Stormwater and Erosion Control By-Law
Section I. Purpose
A. The purpose of this By-Law is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety,
environment and general welfare of the Town by establishing minimum requirements and
procedures to control the adverse effects of soil erosion and sedimentation, construction site
runoff, increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated
with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of
stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure,
safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, protect water
and aquatic resources, protect and enhance wildlife habitat, and promote groundwater recharge to
protect surface and groundwater drinking supplies. This Bylaw seeks to meet that purpose
through the following objectives:
1. Establish a mechanism by which the municipality can monitor and ensure compliance with
requirements of its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4) and other
applicable State and Federal mandates.
2. Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the
integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources.
3. Require that new development, redevelopment and other land alteration activities maintain the
after-development runoff characteristics as equal to or less than the pre-development runoff
characteristics where appropriate in order to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, siltation,
nonpoint source pollution, property damage, and to maintain the integrity of stream channels and
aquatic habitats.
4. Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria
for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; Establish minimum design
criteria for the protection of properties and aquatic resources downstream from land development
and land conversion activities from damages due to alterations in volume, velocity, frequency,
duration, and peak flow rate of storm water runoff; Establish minimum design criteria for measures
to eliminate or minimize to the extent feasible nonpoint source pollution from stormwater runoff
which would otherwise degrade water quality.
5. Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater
control facilities that can be used to meet or exceed the minimum post-development stormwater
management standards.
6. Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management, better site design practices or
“low-impact development practices”, such as reducing impervious cover, increasing site-wide
infiltration, and preserving open space and other natural areas, to the maximum extent
practicable.
7. Promote water conservation through the re-use of stormwater for irrigation.
8. Establish provisions that require practices that eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation and
control the volume and rate of stormwater runoff resulting from land disturbance activities.
Page 2
9. Establish provisions to ensure that soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and
stormwater runoff control practices are incorporated into the site planning and design process and
are implemented and maintained.
10. Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural
stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that
they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety or the
environment.
11. Establish provisions to ensure there is an adequate funding mechanism, including surety, for
the proper review, inspection and long-term maintenance of stormwater facilities implemented as
part of this By-Law.
12. Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval or disapproval of
stormwater management plans, erosion and sediment controls, and for the inspection of approved
active projects, and long-term follow up; Establish certain administrative procedures and fees for
the submission, review, approval, or disapproval of stormwater plans, inspection of construction
sites, and the inspection of approved projects.
13. Ensure that construction and waste materials, toxic materials, hazardous materials, and other
pollutants are prevented from mixing with stormwater runoff, which would degrade water quality.
14. Establish the Town of Weston’s legal authority and capacity to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this By-Law through funding, permitting, inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
B. Nothing in this Bylaw is intended to replace the requirements of the Town of Weston Zoning By-
Law, the Mass Wetlands Protection Act, the Town of Weston General By-Law, any other By-Law
that may be adopted by the Town of Weston, or any Rules and Regulations adopted there under.
Section II Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and implementation of this By-Law.
Additional definitions may be adopted by separate regulation:
ALTER: Any activity that will measurably change the ability of a ground surface area to absorb
water, will change existing surface drainage patterns, or will increase or decrease the rate or
volume of flow from a site.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): Structural, non-structural and managerial techniques
that are recognized to be the most effective and practical means to prevent and/or reduce
increases in stormwater volumes and flows, reduce point source and nonpoint source pollution,
and promote stormwater quality and protection of the environment. “Structural” BMPs are devices
that are engineered and constructed to provide temporary storage and treatment of stormwater
runoff. “Nonstructural” BMPs use natural measures to reduce pollution levels, do not require
extensive construction efforts, and/or promote pollutant reduction by eliminating the pollutant
source.
BETTER SITE DESIGN: Site design approaches and techniques, including low-impact
development (LID) that can reduce a site’s impact on the watershed through the use of
nonstructural stormwater management practices. Better site design includes conserving and
Page 3
protecting natural areas and green space, reducing impervious cover, using natural features for
stormwater management, and providing site-wide infiltration.
DEVELOPMENT: Any construction that disturbs or alters a parcel of land.
DISTURBANCE OF LAND (Land Disturbance): Any action causing any removal of vegetation
including tree and brush clearing; importation, removal or redistribution of soil, sand, rock, gravel
or similar earth material.
EXISTING LAWN: Grass area which has been maintained and mowed in the previous two years.
IMPERVIOUS: Any material or structure on, above or below the ground that prevents water from
infiltrating through the underlying soil. Impervious surface is defined to include, without limitation:
paved surfaces (parking lots, sidewalks, and driveways), concrete, brick, stone, and roof tops.
INFILTRATION: The act of conveying surface water into the ground to permit groundwater
recharge and the reduction of stormwater runoff from a project site.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID): An ecosystem-based approach to land development and
stormwater management that ensures that each development site is designed to protect, or
restore, the natural hydrology of the site.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS: The latest version as may
be amended from time to time of the Stormwater Management Standards and accompanying
Stormwater Handbook issued by the Department of Environmental Protection pursuant to
authority under the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. c. 131, § 40, and the Massachusetts Clean
Waters Act, M.G.L .c. 21, §§ 26-53. The Stormwater Management Standards are incorporated in
the Wetlands Protection Act Regulations, 310 CMR 10.05(6)(k) and the Water Quality Certification
Regulations, 314 CMR 9.06(6)(a).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) or MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN
SYSTEM: The system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater,
including any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping
facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, reservoir,
and other drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated
by the Town of Weston.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from many diffuse sources caused by rainfall,
snowmelt, or other method of pollutant transport moving over and through the ground. As the
runoff moves, it picks up and carries away natural and human-made pollutants, finally depositing
them into water resource areas.
NORMAL MAINTENANCE: Activities that are regularly scheduled to maintain the health and
condition of a landscaped area. Examples include removal of weeds or invasive species, pruning,
mowing, raking, and other activities that are done at regular intervals within the course of a year.
PRE-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that exist prior to the proposed disturbance activity.
Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.),
the existing conditions at the time prior to the first plan submission shall establish pre-development
conditions.
Page 4
POST-DEVELOPMENT: The conditions that reasonably may be expected or anticipated to exist
after completion of the land development activity in accordance with approved plans on a specific
site or tract of land. Post-development refers to the phase of a new development or
redevelopment project after completion, and does not refer to the construction phase of a project.
RECHARGE: The replenishment of underground water reserves.
RECONSTRUCTION: Any action causing complete removal and replacement of paved surfaces,
such as driveways, parking areas and roads.
REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction, alteration, improvement, repaving, or resurfacing on a
previously-developed site.
RUNOFF: Rainfall or snowmelt water flowing over the ground surface or other source which may
result in transport of pollutants.
SITE: The entire parcel of land being developed.
STOCKPILING: The storage of unsecured material for future use, excluding the storage of
materials 10 cubic yards or less when secured utilizing erosion controls to prevent erosion of
material.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The use of structural or non-structural practices that are
designed to control or treat stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak flow
discharge rates. Stormwater Management includes the use of Low-Impact Development (LID)
management practices.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT (SMP): A permit issued by the Stormwater Permitting
Authority (SWPA), after review of an application, plans, calculations, and other supporting
documents, which is designed to protect the environment of the Town from the deleterious effects
of uncontrolled and untreated stormwater runoff.
Section III. Authority
This By-Law is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts
Constitution and the Home Rule statutes, and pursuant to the regulations of the federal Clean Water
Act found at 40 CFR 122.34., and as authorized by the residents of the Town of Weston at Town
Meeting dated May 10, 2011
Section IV. Applicability
Where a project is subject to Site Plan Approval, Definitive Subdivision or Special Permit Approval
from the Planning Board, the Stormwater Regulations adopted by the Planning Board shall apply and
the stormwater review shall be completed as part of the Planning Board process provided that the
Planning Board also finds that the activity is in compliance with any additional performance standards
contained in the Regulations promulgated to implement this By-Law.
A. For projects not subject to Site Plan Approval, Definitive Subdivision or Special Permit Approval
from the Planning Board, this By-Law shall be applicable to all new development and
redevelopment, land disturbance and any other activity that may result in an increased amount of
stormwater runoff or pollutants, or changes to drainage characteristics causing an increases in
Page 5
runoff, flowing from a parcel of land, unless exempt pursuant to Section V of this By-Law. This By-
Law shall apply to land or parcels of land that are held in common ownership (including ownership
by related or jointly-controlled persons or entities) as of the effective date of this By-Law, if the
total land-disturbing activities on said land or parcels, considered as a whole, would presently or
ultimately exceed the minimum thresholds in Section IV.B and are not exempted by Section V. A
development shall not be segmented or phased in a manner to avoid compliance with this By-Law.
B. No Permit Required – For activities including, but not necessarily limited to, those listed below, no
permit shall be required by the SWPA provided that erosion control measures are used and the
activity will not result in an increased amount of stormwater runoff or pollutants flowing from a
parcel of land and entering a traveled way or adjacent properties.
1. Land Disturbance not to exceed 5,000 square feet in area other than work described in
Section IV.B.4 and Section IV.C.1.
2. The creation of new impervious area, or expansion of existing impervious area, not to exceed
750 square feet.
3. Repair, replacement or reconstruction of an existing driveway.
4. Restoration of existing lawn areas provided that any imported material is spread at a thickness
no greater than four inches and the total imported material does not exceed 250 cubic yards.
5. The addition or on-site redistribution of up to 250 cubic yards of material.
6. Demolition of a structure provided that any land disturbance, including the area of the
structure, does not exceed 5,000 square feet.
7. Routine maintenance and improvement of institutional open space, and recreational uses,
provided that an annual letter or plan is filed with and approved by the SWPA describing the
work to be done.
C. Storm Water Management Permit Thresholds - A Storm Water Management Permit shall be
required for any of the following, except for an activity exempt per Section V:
1. Minor Permit
a) The creation of new impervious area, or expansion of existing impervious area, greater than
750 square feet and not exceeding 2,500 square feet.
b) Repair, replacement, expansion of septic systems provided the work does not exceed the
thresholds in Section IV.C.2.d.
c) The addition or on-site redistribution of more than 250 cubic yards, but not exceeding 500
cubic yards, of earth materials including, but not limited to, sand, gravel, stone, soil, loam,
clay, sod, fill and mineral products.
2. Major Permit
a) Construction of any new dwelling or new dwelling replacing an existing dwelling in
conformance with Article VIII, Section V.B.1.a and Section V.C.1.a of the Weston Zoning
By-Laws;
b) Any land disturbance exceeding an area of 5,000 square feet, or more than 20% of a
parcel or lot, whichever is less, other than activities described in section IV.B.
c) Creation of new impervious surface area greater than 2,500 square feet.
d) The addition or on-site redistribution of more than 500 cubic yards of earth materials
including, but not limited to, sand, gravel, stone, soil, loam, clay, sod, fill and mineral
products.
e) Reconstruction of public or private way.
f) Reconstruction or replacement of existing non-residential parking lots, including associated
Page 6
driveways, greater than 2,500 square feet.
Section V. Exemptions
Exemptions from this By-Law apply to the following activities, provided that a project is solely
comprised of any one of these activities:
A. Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as defined by the Wetlands
Protection Act Regulations at 310 CMR 10.04 (“Agricultural”) and the conversion of additional land
to agricultural use, when undertaken in such a manner as to prevent erosion and siltation through
the use of Best Management Practices recommended by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
Natural Resources Conservation Service or the Massachusetts Department of Agricultural
Resources.
B. Any work or projects for which all necessary approvals and permits were issued before the
effective date of this By-Law.
C. Normal maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas
D. Construction of any fence that will not alter existing terrain or drainage patterns.
E. Construction of utilities (gas, water, sanitary sewer, electric, telephone, cable television, etc.) other
than drainage which will not alter terrain, ground cover, or drainage patterns, so long as BMPs are
used to prevent erosion, sedimentation and release of pollutants.
F. Emergency repairs to any existing utilities (gas, water, sanitary sewer, electric, telephone, cable
television, etc.) and emergency repairs to any stormwater management facility that poses a threat
to public health or safety, designated by the SWPA. Where such activity is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission, the work shall not proceed without the issuance of an
Emergency Certification by the Commission.
G. The maintenance or resurfacing (not including reconstruction) of any public or private way.
Section VI. Administration
A. The Board of Selectmen shall be the appointing authority for the Stormwater Permitting Authority.
The Stormwater Permitting Authority is responsible for the administration, implementation, and
enforcement of this By-Law. Meetings of the Stormwater Permitting Authority shall be subject to
the Massachusetts Open Meeting Law, MGL Ch. 30A, §§ 18-25.
B. Stormwater Permitting Authority (SWPA). The SWPA shall consist of (5) five members, four of
whom shall permanently be the Town Engineer, the Town Planner, the Conservation
Administrator, and the Public Health Director. One (1) member shall be a resident of the Town of
Weston and possess a degree in landscape architecture, environmental or civil engineering or
environmental science appointed by the Board of Selectmen serving a (3) year term. The SWPA
shall administer, implement and enforce this By-Law. Any powers granted to or duties imposed
upon the SWPA may be delegated in writing by the SWPA to any Town employee, board or agent.
C. Stormwater & Erosion Control Regulations (“Regulations”). The SWPA may adopt, and
periodically amend, rules and regulations relating to the terms, conditions, definitions,
enforcement, fees (including application, inspection, and/or consultant fees), delegation of
authority, procedures and administration of this By-Law after conducting a public hearing to
receive comments on the proposed rules and regulations or any proposed revisions. Such hearing
dates shall be advertised in a newspaper of general local circulation at least seven (7) days prior
to the hearing date. Failure of the SWPA to promulgate such rules and regulations or a legal
declaration of their invalidity by a court shall not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this By-
Law.
Page 7
D. Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook
The SWPA will utilize the policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards
of the most recent edition of the Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook for execution of the
provisions of this By-Law. Unless otherwise specified in the Regulations, stormwater
management practices that are designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with these
design and sizing criteria will be presumed to be protective of Massachusetts water quality
standards.
E. Stormwater Management Permit
The SWPA shall have the authority to issue a Stormwater Management Permit (SMP) for
projects exceeding the thresholds defined in Section IV.B. of this By-Law and not otherwise
exempted by Section V. Requirements of the SMP may be defined and included within the
Regulations promulgated pursuant to Section VI.C of this By-Law.
F. SWPA Approval Process.
1. Action by SWPA
a. Determination of Completeness: The SWPA shall review the application submission and
issue a determination stating whether the application is complete and whether it complies
with the Design Standards established in the Stormwater Rules and Regulations, as may
be waived in accordance with Section 3.E. of this By-Law.
b. Incomplete Applications: If the SWPA determines the application is incomplete, including
insufficient information to describe the site, the work, or the effect of the work on water
quality and runoff volume, the SWPA may require the submission of additional information
and/or disapprove the application and deny the Permit.
c. Applications deemed to be complete and in compliance with Design Standards. Each
application for a Stormwater Management Permit that complies with the Regulations, and is
determined to be a complete application by the SWPA shall be acted upon within thirty (30)
days of the date of filing with the SWPA, unless such application has been withdrawn from
consideration. The SWPA may:
i. Approve the Permit Application upon finding that the proposed plan will protect water
resources and meets the objectives and requirements of this By-Law;
ii. Approve the Permit Application with conditions, modifications or restrictions that are
required to ensure that the project will protect water resources and meets the
objectives and requirements of this By-Law; or
iii Disapprove the Permit Application if the proposed plan will not protect water resources
or fails to meet the objectives and requirements of this By-Law.
d. Applications not in compliance with Design Standards.
i. For applications where the SWPA has determined that the Design Standards are not met,
the Applicant may appeal the determination and request a public hearing with the SWPA
to consider the application or resubmit the application demonstrating compliance.
ii. For applications where the Design Standards cannot be met due to site conditions or the
applicant wishes to propose an alternative design not consistent with the Design
Standards, the applicant may immediately request a public hearing with the SWPA.
2. Public Hearing Process
a. A public hearing is required for all Minor and Major Stormwater Management Permits (SMP)
where design standards cannot be met. Minor Permits and Major Permits that meet design
Page 8
standards shall not require a public hearing. Public hearings shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation for two (2) consecutive weeks. The first publication date
shall be published not less than fourteen (14) days before the day of the hearing. A copy of
the hearing notice shall be posted in the Office of the Town Clerk for a period of not less than
fourteen (14) days before the date of the hearing. Copies of the notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to the applicant, property owner (if different) and to direct abutters and
owners of land directly opposite on a public or private way as they appear on the most recent
Assessor’s list.
b. The SWPA may take any of the following actions following the close of the public hearing
for an application for a Stormwater Management Permit
i. Approve the Permit Application upon finding that the proposed plan will protect water
resources and meets the objectives and requirements of this By-Law;
ii. Approve the Permit Application with conditions, modifications or restrictions that are
required to ensure that the project will protect water resources and meets the
objectives and requirements of this By-Law; or
iii. Disapprove the Permit Application if the proposed plan will not protect water resources
or fails to meet the objectives and requirements of this By-Law.
G. Appeals of Action by the SWPA. A decision of the SWPA shall be final. Further relief of a decision
by the SWPA made under this By-Law shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction.
H. Waivers. The SWPA may waive strict compliance with any of the requirements of this By-Law or
the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, if it determines that some of the application
requirements are unnecessary because of the size or character of the development project or
because of the natural conditions at the site and where such action is:
1. Allowed by federal, state and local statutes and/or regulations,
2. In the public interest, and
3. Not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this By-Law.
Any request from an Applicant for a waiver of these rules shall be submitted, in writing, to the
SWPA at the time of submission of the application. Such requests shall clearly identify the
provision/s of the rule from which relief is sought and be accompanied by a statement setting forth
the reasons why, in the applicant’s opinion, the granting of such a waiver would be in the public
interest or the specific information required to show strict compliance is irrelevant to the project,
and why a waiver would be consistent with the intent and purpose of this By-Law and the rules
and regulations promulgated hereunder.
Section VII. Performance Standards
Criteria for Stormwater Management Standards shall be defined and included as part of any Rules
and Regulations promulgated under Section VI.C of this By-Law.
Section VIII. Enforcement
A. The SWPA, or an authorized agent of the SWPA, shall enforce this By-Law, and any Regulations,
permits orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal
remedies for violations.
B. If a person violates the provisions of this By-Law or its Regulations, or a permit, notice or order
issued there under, the SWPA may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to
restrain the person from activities which would create further violations or to compel the person to
perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
Page 9
C. The SWPA, or an authorized agent of the SWPA, may issue a written order to enforce the
provisions or this By-Law or the Regulations, which may include requirements to:
1. Cease and desist from land-disturbing activity until there is compliance with the By-Law or
provisions of an approved Stormwater Management Permit;
2. Maintain, install or perform additional erosion and sediment control measures;
3. Perform monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
4. Remediate erosion and sedimentation resulting directly or indirectly from land-disturbing
activity;
5. Comply with requirements in the Stormwater Management Permit for operation and
maintenance of stormwater management systems; and,
6. Remediate adverse impacts resulting directly or indirectly from malfunction of the stormwater
management systems.
If the SWPA or its authorized agent determines that abatement or remediation is required, the
order shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement or remediation must be completed.
D. Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this By-Law, regulation, order or
permit issued hereunder, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $300. Each day a violation
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
E. Non-Criminal Disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil action, the Town may
utilize the non-criminal disposition procedure set forth in M.G.L. Ch. 40, §21D and Article V of the
Town By-Laws, in which case any police officer of the Town of Weston, the Town Engineer, and
such other persons as are authorized by the SWPA shall be the enforcing person. If non-criminal
disposition is used, any person who violates any provision of this By-Law, regulation, order or
permit issued thereunder, shall be punished as follows:
1. First Violation: Warning
2. Second violation: $100
3. Third violation: $200
4. Fourth and subsequent violations: $300
5. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation
F. Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this By-Law are not exclusive of any other
remedies available to the SWPA or the Town under any applicable federal, state or local law.
Section IX. Severability
The invalidity of any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this By-Law shall not
invalidate any section, provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause thereof, nor shall it invalidate any
permit or determination that previously has been issued.
Section X. Effective Date
This By-Law, originally adopted October 1, 2011, and amended May 14, 2014, shall take effect on
July 3, 2014, provided that all other requirements of G.L. c.40, §32 have been met.
ARTICLE XXVIII
WATER CONSERVATION
SECTION 1: Authority
This By-Law is adopted by the Town under its police powers pursuant to the Home Rule
Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution, Article LXXXIX, to protect public health and
welfare and its powers pursuant to M.G.L. c.40, §§21 et seq. and implements the Town’s
authority to regulate water use pursuant to M.G.L. c. 41, §69B. This By-Law also implements
the Town’s authority under M.G.L. c. 40, §41A, conditioned upon a declaration of water supply
emergency issued by the Department of Environmental Protection.
SECTION 2: Purpose
The purpose of this By-Law is to protect, preserve and maintain the public health, safety and
welfare whenever there is in force a State of Water Supply Conservation or State of Water
Supply Emergency, by providing for enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions,
requirements, provisions or conditions imposed by the Town, by the Department of
Environmental Protection or by the MWRA.
SECTION 3: Definitions
“Agriculture” shall mean farming in all its branches and agriculture, as defined in M.G.L. c. 128,
§ 1A.
“Outdoor watering” shall mean any residential, municipal, industrial, or commercial watering of
decorative lawns, trees or shrubbery.
“Person” shall mean any individual, corporation, trust, partnership, association, agency or
authority, or other entity and any officer, employee, group or agent of such persons.
“State of Water Supply Emergency” shall mean a State of Water Supply Emergency declared by
the Department of Environmental Protection under M.G.L. c.21G, §15-17
“State of Water Supply Conservation” shall mean a State of Water Supply Conservation declared
by the Town pursuant to Section 4 of this By-Law.
“Water Users or Water Consumers” shall mean all persons using water from the Town’s public
water source irrespective of that person’s responsibility for billing purposes for use of the water.
SECTION 4: Declaration of State of Water Supply Conservation
The Town, through its Board of Selectmen authorized to act as such, may declare a State of
Water Supply Conservation upon a determination by a majority vote of the Board that the
distribution system is nearing capacity and conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an
adequate supply of water to all water consumers. Public notice of a State of Water Conservation
shall be given under section 6 of this By-Law before it may be enforced.
SECTION 5: Restricted Water Uses
A declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall include one or more of the following
restrictions, conditions, or requirements limiting the use of water as necessary to protect the
water supply except as provided in Section 11. The applicable restrictions, conditions or
requirements shall be included in the public notice required under Section 6.
a) Odd/Even Day Outdoor Watering: Outdoor watering on property having an odd
numbered address is restricted to odd numbered days. Outdoor watering on property
having an even numbered address is restricted to even numbered days.
b) Outdoor Watering Method Restriction: Outdoor watering is restricted to bucket, can or
hand held hose watering with automatic shutoff nozzle.
c) Outdoor Watering Ban: Outdoor watering is prohibited.
d) Outdoor Watering Hours: Outdoor watering is permitted only during daily periods of low
demand, to be specified in the declaration of a State of Water Supply Conservation and
public notice thereof.
e) Swimming Pools: Filling and topping off of swimming pools is prohibited.
f) Automatic Sprinkler Use: The use of automatic sprinkler systems is prohibited.
g) Car washing: Car or vehicle washing is prohibited.
SECTION 6: Public Notification of a State of Water Supply Conservation and State of
Water Supply Emergency; Notification of DEP
Notification of any provision, including any restriction, requirement or condition imposed by the
Town as part of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation within the Town, or by such other means reasonably calculated to reach and
inform users of water of the State of Water Supply Conservation. Notification of a State of Water
Supply Emergency declared by the Department or MWRA shall be provided by furnishing a
copy of the Notice to two (2) radio and up to two (2) television stations serving the area served
by the public water system as soon as possible, but no later than 48 hours after the public water
system receives notice of the Department’s declaration. Any restriction imposed under section 5
or in the Department declaration of emergency or order shall not be effective until such
notification is provided. Notification of the State of Water Supply Conservation shall also be
provided to the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection and MWRA at the same
time that notification is given.
SECTION 7: Termination of State of Water Supply Conservation; Notice
A State of Water Supply Conservation may be terminated by a majority vote of the Board of
Selectmen upon a determination that the water supply shortage no longer exists. Public
notification of the termination of a State of Water Supply Conservation shall be given in the
same manner as is required for notice of the Town’s declaration of its State of Water Supply
Conservation.
SECTION 8: State of Water Supply Emergency; Compliance with DEP US
Upon notification to the public that a declaration of a State of Water Supply Emergency has been
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection or MWRA, no person shall violate any
provision, restriction, requirement, or condition of any order approved or issued by the
Department for the purpose of bringing about an end to the State of Water Supply Emergency.
The notice prescribed by this section shall be in writing and shall be published once in a
newspaper of general circulation within the town where it is to be effective. Such notice shall
summarize the provisions of the Declaration of Water Supply Emergency and the requirements
and conditions thereof. Notice as prescribed by this section shall be sufficient for enforcement of
the requirements of such Declaration on and after the date following newspaper publication.
SECTION 9: Penalties
The Town, through its Public Works Director, Water Superintendent, building inspector or local
police may enforce this By-Law. Any person violating this By-Law shall be liable to the Town in
the amount of $50.00 for the first violation and $ 100.00 for each subsequent violation. Fines
shall be recovered by indictment, by complaint before the District Court, or by non-criminal
disposition in accordance with section 21D of chapter 40 of the general laws.
SECTION 10: Severability
The invalidity of any portion or provision of this By-Law shall not invalidate any other portion
or provision thereof.
SECTION 11: Exemptions
The water use restrictions adopted under this By-Law shall not apply to the specific uses outlined
below provided the user meets any applicable eligibility criteria.
a) Commercial agriculture;
b) Water to sustain animal life;
c) Swimming pools used as a primary means of exercise, therapy or Rehabilitation located
at a medical or rehabilitation facility;
d) Commercial car or vehicle washing facilities.
Requests for exemptions shall be made in writing to the Department of Public Works.
(Effective: 11/12/2003)
TOWN OF WESTON
CEMETERY REGULATIONS
(Applicable to each cemetery of the Town)
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section 1. The Superintendent or his representative, acting under
the direction and pursuant to the authority of the Board of Selectmen
(in these Regulations called the Board), shall have charge of the grounds
and buildings of the Cemetery and the use thereof, and shall have
authority to enforce all regulations.
Section 2. Visitors are welcome from 7:00 AM to Sunset. No
horseback riding is allowed. Dogs are not allowed except under
specified circumstances. Dogs are not allowed in any Town-owned
cemetery, except that a dog may attend the funeral of a member of its
keeper’s family and may accompany family members to visit the grave
site of a deceased family member. Under these circumstances, the dog
must be kept on a 6-foot or shorter leash. The dog may not urinate or
defecate on grave sites or gravestones. No firearms are allowed except
at military funerals or at Town organized celebrations on Memorial
Day, Veterans Day, and/or similar Town organized events.
Section 3. Any persons disturbing the peace by unreasonable
noise, driving over 15 miles per hour or any improper conduct, or who
shall violate any of the Regulations will be compelled to leave the
grounds and will be reported to the police for appropriate action.
Section 4. Charges for lots and services shall be fixed by the
Board from time to time. All charges shall be payable in advance. All
payments shall be made to the Town.
ARTICLE 2
BURIAL LOT REGULATIONS
Section 1. Lots shall held subject to applicable laws, and to these
Regulations in their present form and as they may be amended or
revised from time to time.
Section 2 Lots shall be numbered on the plan of the Cemetery
which shall be on file at the Superintendent’s office and which may be
inspected by any lot grantee and his or her heirs at any reasonable time.
Each lot shall be marked with suitable markers.
Section 3. (a) A lot for the purpose of these Regulations shall be:
for full interments - a two grave lot of 75 square feet, more or less or
multiples thereof; for cremations only - a four urn lot of 50 square feet
more or less, plus 25 square foot increments for each additional four
urns.
(b) Lots shall be sold to individuals aged 65 years or
older and may not be sold to anyone not a current resident of the
Town of Weston at time of such sale. Lots may be sold to a current
resident of the Town of Weston who is under the age of 65 in order to
accommodate the interment of the owner’s wife, husband, child,
stepchild, parent, or parent in law. A maximum of a two-grave casket
lot will be sold to an eligible resident. Lots of greater capacity or the
sale of lots outside of the aforementioned conditions may be sold on a
case by case basis as circumstances may warrant in the sole discretion
of the Board of Selectmen, with a recommendation from the cemetery
superintendent. In no case will a casket lot in excess of four graves be
sold. Present or retired employees of the Town who are not residents
may purchase a lot as described above.
(c) No body shall be interred in such lot unless the
deceased was at the time of his or her death an owner of such lot or
was by blood, marriage, or adoption the wife or husband, the child or
stepchild or spouse thereof, or the parents or parents-in-law of the
owner, or a lot is newly purchased by a qualified purchaser for the
interment of eligible deceased. If the owner of the lot in question
shall have deceased, the successor owner(s) shall be similarly limited
except that persons who met the requirement of relationship to the
previous owners shall remain eligible as of right to be interred in such
lot. Deceased persons other than those above specified as of right may
be buried in any lot if a written request is made to and approved by
the Board, the owner(s) of the lot agree (if not a new lot) and the lot
contains sufficient space for such interment. Any eligible person may
waive and transfer his or her grave to another eligible person in the
same family with the Board’s approval.
Section 4. No interment shall be made in any lot, nor any work
done on it until it is fully paid for. Lots shall not be used for any other
purpose than as a place of burial of the human dead. No tree within the
lot or border shall be cut down or destroyed without the consent of the
Board. No change shall be made in the grade of a lot except with the
Board’s approval and under its direction. A change in grade shall be
made when in the opinion of the Board such action is necessary for the
improvement of the Cemetery.
Section 5. No fence or wall of any description may be installed
around a lot or lots
Section 6. No trees or plants shall be planted on a lot without the
approval of the Board. For other than annual plants such approval must
be requested in writing.
Section 7. The Board reserves the entire control of every tree,
shrub, plant or vine growing within the Cemetery, whether or not
planted by the owner, including the right of removal or substitution of
the same when it considers such removal or substitution advisable.
Section 8. Floral designs, flowers, and movable ornamentation
may be removed by the Cemetery employees under the direction of the
Superintendent as soon as they become unsightly.
Section 9. Flags will not be permitted upon lots or graves except
for Memorial Day unless special written permission shall have been
received from the Board. They must be placed by authorized
representative of lodges, veterans’ organizations, and the like, not more
than one week before May 30th, and if not thereafter promptly removed,
may be removed by the Cemetery employees. Any flag may be removed
without notice if it becomes soiled, faded, torn or unsightly in any way.
Section 10. No lot shall be sold, or reconveyed to the Town,
except with the approval of the Board and at the original sales price, and
only if there have been no burials in it. This section shall not apply to
conveyances to the Town in trust under General Laws, Chapter 11,
Section 28.
ARTICLE 3
BURIAL REGULATIONS
Section 1. No burial shall be made in any lot for hire.
Section 2. No burial shall be made until all necessary deeds and
documents relative to the purchase of the grave have been approved or
ratified by a majority of the Board. The full Board shall sign and
execute all required documents.
Section 3. No burial shall be made until all charges shall have
been paid and all necessary documents relative to the death and burial
shall have been delivered to the Board or its representative.
Section 4. Interment orders shall be furnished the Superintendent,
unless waived, at least forty-eight hours, exclusive of Sundays and
holidays, before the time of interment, and shall be accompanied by
instructions as to the location of the grave. If such instructions are not
received by the Superintendent, if they are indefinite, or if for any
reason the interment cannot be made where specified, the
Superintendent may determine the location in the lot for such interment.
Section 5. Openings for interment shall be made Monday to
Friday, only. Interments are not made on Sunday, nor the following
holidays: New Year’s Day, President’s Day, Memorial Day, July
Fourth, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day,
Veteran’s Day, Patriot’s day, Martin Luther King Day, December 24
after 11:00 A.M., and December 31 after 11:00 A.M. An opening for
interment on Saturday is permitted if: 1)Frost in the ground does not
prevent such opening. 2)The Superintendent has been able previously
to determine that geological conditions will permit proper preparation
without blasting. Such determination shall be done by the Cemetery
Division only at the lot owner’s written request and expense.
3)Properly qualified employees of the Town of Weston are available
for the opening and closing of the grave and for supervision of the
burial. 4) Additional charges for openings and closings on Saturday
may be made at the direction of the Board and shall be paid prior to
opening. No grave shall be opened for interment by any person not in
employ of the Town. Arrangements for Monday interments must be
made with the Superintendent or his/her designee by noon the
previous Friday. Arrangements for Interments the day after a
recognized holiday must be made with the Superintendent or his/her
designee by noon the previous business day. The superintendent
reserves the right to postpone an interment to a more convenient time
if more than one interment is scheduled within the same time frame.
Section 6. No interment shall be made without the use of a
suitable permanent container.
Section 7. Interment shall not be more than one deep.
Section 8. In addition to one full adult interment each grave may
receive one cremated remains. The additional interment of small
children whether or not cremated may be made in the same grave where
feasible, as determined by the Superintendent.
Section 9. No disinterment or removal shall be made without (a) a
signed order from the owner or representative of the lot or appropriate
legal authority; (b) the consent of the Board; (c) such other permits as
are legally required, unless such disinterment or removal is ordered by
the Courts of the Commonwealth or the Attorney General
Section 10. No disinterment or removal shall be made on
Saturday, Sundays, or holidays unless otherwise ordered by the Courts
of the Commonwealth or the Attorney General.
Section 11. While a funeral or interment is being conducted
nearby, all work of any description shall be suspended until the
departure of the funeral party.
Section 12. The board may designate certain areas as suitable for
cremations only. Deeds to lots in such areas will carry this restriction
which may not be waived.
Section 13. All burials shall take place between 8 A.M. and 2 P.M.
of the day scheduled.
ARTICLE 3A
BURIAL REGULATIONS
SCATTERING GARDEN
Section 1. Scattering of cremated remains will be subject to all
regulations in Article 3, Sections 1-5.
Section 2. Burial Rights shall be sold to individuals aged 65
years or older and may not be sold to anyone not a current resident of
the Town of Weston at time of such sale. Burial Rights may be sold to
a current resident of the Town of Weston who is under the age of 65 in
order to accommodate the interment of the owner’s wife, husband,
child, stepchild, parent, or parent in law. Present or retired employees
of the Town who are not residents may purchase Burial Rights as
described above. Burial Rights are not transferable.
Section 3. All interments shall be made under the direct
supervision of a Cemetery Employee. No containers are allowed and
the remains cannot be recovered. The sod may be lifted by shovel and
the remains placed in the earth. Over time remains may be
commingled with others.
Section 4. No individual memorials, plantings, containers,
mementos, or other items will be allowed.
Section 5. (a) Ownership and maintenance of memorial stones
shall remain with the Cemetery. Engraving of said markers shall be
done under the control and direction of the Cemetery and shall be
limited to full name, date of birth and date of death as space permits.
(b) Engravings will be done in a timely manner so long as
weather and conditions beyond the control of the Cemetery allow.
Engravings will take place only after interment with the exception of
a spouse. Upon the interment of a spouse, the engraving of the date
of birth and name of the surviving spouse will be allowed on the next
line in succession on the memorial stone in so long as burial rights
have been purchased for both. There will be an additional fee at the
time of engraving to cover the cost of a second engraving for the date
of death of the surviving spouse.
(c) Text for engravings shall be approved by a member of
the decedent’s family or a duly appointed representative. If no such
person is available the Cemetery will use the information supplied by
the burial documents. The Cemetery shall not be held responsible for
errors in text.
Section 6. One(1) American flag shall be placed at each
memorial stone for the purpose of honoring the presence of United
States Veterans within the Scattering Garden. Individual flags and
markers will not be permitted.
ARTICLE 4
MEMORIAL REGULATIONS
Section 1. Only one monument is allowed on a lot. However, the
Board on written application from the owner or representative of the lot
may permit additional monuments but never in excess of one monument
per twelve grave.
Section 2. Headstones are not permitted except on lots where
there are already similar stones. Grave markers, flush with the grave,
may be used.
Section 3. Designs, dimensions, materials, and locations for all
monuments and markers must be submitted to the Board for approval.
If any monument or other structure, or any inscription used thereon,
shall be determined offensive or improper by the Board, it may be
removed by the Board.
Section 4. Monuments shall not be more than three feet six
inches above grade and shall be centrally located on the lot at a
position designated by the Superintendent. Monuments shall not be
more than twelve inches in thickness front to back at any location.
Monument base dimensions shall conform to the following
specifications: Single grave lot in which the side to side dimension is 6
feet or less - 2 feet by 1 foot; Two grave lot in which the side to side
dimension is between seven and ten feet - 3 feet by 1 foot; four grave
lot in which the side to side dimension is between seven and ten feet -
3 feet by 1 foot; four grave lot in which the side to side dimension is
greater than 12 feet - 4 feet by 1 foot. Lots of any size not mentioned
above shall be subject to size restrictions set forth by the
Superintendent. Above ground monuments will not be allowed on lots
that have been restricted to flush markers only.
.
Section 5. No mausoleum or tomb shall be constructed within the
bounds of the Cemetery except by the Board for its exclusive operating
use.
Section 6. The monuments and grave markers shall be set on solid
concrete foundations. The building of all such foundations shall be done
by the Cemetery employees. Orders for foundations must be signed by
the owner or representative of the lot, and must be received by the
Superintendent at least ten days before the foundations are wanted. If
the ground is frozen or unduly soft the Superintendent shall have
authority to postpone the building of a foundation or the erection of a
monument. The Superintendent shall supervise the erection of a
monument and see that the work is properly done, that the grounds are
not damaged, and that all refuse material is removed and the grounds
left in good order.
Section 7. No memorial work, including but not limited to
installation and removal, inscription, engraving, and cleaning shall be
done until such time as a proper permit issued by the Cemetery
Division is signed by the authorized owner or representative of the lot
and approved by authorized Cemetery personnel. All memorial work
shall be done during business hours of the cemetery, and not before
the cemetery office has been made aware of the date and time the work
is to be done. The Superintendent may cease any memorial work if an
interment or other such service is being conducted in the area.
Memorial work will be allowed from 7:00 A.M. - 3:00 P.M. The
Superintendent may give special permission for additional hours of
work if it is deemed necessary. The placing of name plates or other
means of advertisement of memorial work is prohibited.
ARTICLE 5
PERPETUAL CARE REGULATIONS
Section 1. No lot shall be sold without perpetual care.
Section 2. Perpetual Care provides for cutting grass, fertilizing,
reseeding, and regrading when necessary. It does not include care or
replacement of monuments or markers, or replacements or any planting
Section 3. Where the Board deems it to be in the best interests of
the Cemetery, paved roads may be converted to grass. Such roads shall
retain their designation as roads and may not be sold as lots.
Section 4. The Town shall not accept funds from individuals,
estates, or corporations for the purpose of establishing memorial trust
funds for individual grave sites.
ARTICLE 6
Unless the Board has been permitted or prohibited by previous
provisions in these Regulations, the Board may waive any requirement
of these Regulations but only in a medical, health or disaster emergency,
which waiving would not violate law but would aid in the solution of
the emergency.
ARTICLE 7
These Regulations shall supersede all previous regulations.
Weston Bow Hunting Regulations
Approved July 10, 2012
Amended 2/18/14, 3/24/15, 9/27/16
I. The Weston Conservation Commission (WCC) allows Bow Hunting for deer on select Conservation Land
properties by permit only. The Weston season will coincide with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Hunting
season.
II. The WCC and its staff and representatives will limit the number of access permits based on the amount of land
available for hunting.
a. Archery hunting is limited to specifically designated areas at the following conservation land parcels:
Blaney Aquifer, Coburn Meadows, College Conservation Area, Dickson Field, Doublet Hill, Highland
Forest, Jericho Town Forest, Ogilvie Town Forest, Old Road and the Sears Land.
b. The WCC reserves the right to close any parcel to hunting for any reason.
III. Conservation land may be hunted only by those persons who have been issued a lawful Bow Hunting Access
Permit by the Commission.
a. Hunting Access Permits will only be issued to those hunters who have passed a proficiency test.
IV. The WCC will monitor the program to ensure public safety and compliance with land management goals.
a. Trails leading to hunting areas shall be marked with temporary signs indicating that hunting is occurring
on the property.
b. The Commission reserves the right to cancel hunting at any time, for any reason.
V. Permitting Regulations
a. All State hunting rules and regulations apply.
b. Only archery hunting is allowed.
c. Permits will restrict hunters to specific locations.
d. Hunters must carry, at all times photo identification, all licenses, permits and maps of approved locations
showing boundaries. Hunters must be prepared to show these documents to anyone who asks to see them.
e. The WCC reserves the right to revoke hunting access permits at any time, without cause.
VI. Field Regulations
a. Daily hunting hours will coincide with State’s allowed hunting hours (1/2 hour prior to sunrise to 1/2 hour
after sunset).
b. Hunting is permitted only from temporary portable tree stands.
c. Strap-on steps or ladder steps only are permitted.
d. The permit number issued by the WCC must be visible on tree stand & the dashboard of the hunter’s car.
e. No night-vision or other low-light devices are permitted.
f. Minor clearing of shooting lanes is permitted within reason, no limbs over one inch in diameter shall be
cut
VII. Take-Related Regulations
a. No other forms of wildlife may be taken.
b. All deer taken must be reported to the WCC within 24 hours or by 5pm of the next business day.
c. Harvested animals must be removed without damage to the area. All traces of the kill must be removed
or buried at least 100 feet from any trail and streams/wetlands.
?
1
Model BOH Regulation for Private Wells
Guidance in Using the Model Regulation
October 31, 2011
Dear Board of Health;
The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (MassDEP) developed the following Model
BOH Regulation for Private Wells for the use by Boards of Health (BOH) in adopting a municipal regulation
governing private wells within their borders. This model regulation as written serves to regulate private
wells used for drinking water and irrigation purposes.
This model regulation does not address the installation of geothermal wells. The requirements for siting,
construction and water quality sampling, necessary to obtain MasssDEP approval of Underground Injection
Control (UIC) registration for these types of wells are specified in the MassDEP Guidelines for Ground
Source Heat Pump wells.
This document serves as a model regulation; the contents can be modified by the BOH so that unique
situations or concerns of the municipality can be addressed by the regulation. If the BOH wants to include r
technical requirements in addition to those contained in the model regulation, you may find the documents
found on the MassDEP Drinking Water Program webpage useful in crafting your regulation. For instance,
the Private Well Guidelines contains more detailed technical guidance on private well construction than the
model regulation. These documents can be found at: http://www.mass.gov/dep/water/drinking/privatew.htm
It is highly recommended that the Board develop standardized forms for information requested of private
well owners by these regulations. Such forms may include the following: Well Construction Permit
Application, Pumping Test Report, Water Quality Report and/or Water Supply Certificate Application.
Examples of these forms are included in the Appendix to this document.
Some additional points to consider incorporating into the local regulation are:
Section IV: Well Construction Permit
The Board may choose to indicate that applicants for well construction permits are be required to obtain
additional local permits, e.g. plumbing and/or building permits.
When, for some reason, a change is made in well drilling company after the initial drilling permit is issued,
the Board may chose to require a new permit application (and Fee), as reflected in the model regulation
language. However, you can revise the regulation to allow the transfer of the drilling permit with an
appropriate written notice from the new certified well driller.
?
2
Section VI: Well Siting
The Board may choose to require additional information pertaining to the location of hazardous waste sites,
underground storage tanks, agricultural land uses, permitted groundwater discharges and/or utility rightsof-
way that are within 500-1000 feet of the well site.
It is prohibited by 310 CMR22.22 (2) (j) to have a cross connection between a public water system and a
private well used for either drinking water or irrigation purposes.
Section VII: Water Quantity
The MassDEP Private Well Guidelines section entitled "Water Quantity (Pumping Tests)” provides a table
of values listing gallons of water per foot of water column length for various casing or hole diameters and a
table of flow volumes in gallons per minute and corresponding flow volumes in gallons per day.
Section VIII: Water Quality Testing
MassDEP recommends that Board of Health regulations require that potable wells meet Massachusetts
primary and secondary drinking water standards and guidelines. These standards and guidelines for private
wells are excerpted and noted in the most recent update of “MassDEP Recommended Parameters and
Testing Frequency for Private Wells." MassDEP recommends that Board of Health regulations specify the
parameters for which water is required to be tested rather than generally stating that the water must meet
drinking water standards. Such general statements could provide a loophole whereby an applicant could
test the well water for only one or two parameters and as long as the water met drinking water standards for
those parameters, the well would pass the water quality test. MassDEP recommends that the Board of Health
regulation do not include the MCL or the Secondary MCL values for particular contaminants because these
standards are subject to change, unless the BOH decides to adopt a standard more stringent than the
current MassDEP standard for drinking water.
For the MassDEP's recommended list of water quality testing parameters for which a potable private well
should be tested, the Board of Health is referred to the MassDEP website:
http://www.mass.gov/dep/brp/dws/privwell.htm.
Additional test requirements for volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and synthetic organic compounds
(SOCs) should be required in areas known to be, or suspected as being, impacted by other pollutants listed
in the MassDEP/ORS Standards and Guidelines for Chemicals in Massachusetts Drinking Waters. To check
for DEP classified hazardous waste sites in your town, you can use the Searchable Waste Site List/Site Files
database at: http://db.state.ma.us/dep/cleanup/sites/search.asp
Water quality sampling for geothermal wells is not required under this regulation. Parameters required for
these types of wells are specified in the MassDEP Ground Source Heat Pump permitting requirements.
Section IX: Well Construction
MassDEP does not recommend Boards of Health allow dug wells as these types of wells are shallow, making
them especially susceptible to contamination and seasonally fluctuating water tables. In communities where
they are allowed, they should be permitted only as a last resort.
You may choose to adopt more detailed construction requirements than contained in this model regulation.
The MassDEP Private Well Guidelines, contain additional information on well construction, well screen ,
?
3
pump installation, grouting and wellhead completion that can be incorporated into the locally adopted
regulation.
Section X: Decommissioning
The MassDEP Private Well Guidelines section entitled "Decommissioning Abandoned Wells, Test Holes, and
Dry or Inadequate Borings" contains a more comprehensive discussion of plugging procedures and other
aspects of decommissioning and contains specific recommendations for the contents of a Well
Decommissioning Report which the Board may choose to require a well driller to submit.
If you have any questions about the model regulation or would like assistance in drafting your town’s
private well regulation, contact Suzanne Robert, DWP/Boston at Suzanne.Robert@state.ma.us or 617-
292-5620.
?
4
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection
MODEL BOARD OF HEALTH REGULATIONS FOR
PRIVATE WELLS
October 30, l989
Revised: October 2011
Table of Contents
Page
I. Purpose .........................................................1
II. Authority ......................................................2
III. Definitions ...................................................2
IV. Well Construction Permit ............................3
V. Water Supply Certificate .............................4
VI. Well Location and Use Requirements .........4
VII. Water Quantity Requirements......................5
VIII. Water Quality Testing Requirements ..........6
IX. Well Construction Requirements .................8
X. Decommissioning Requirements .................12
XI. Enforcement .................................................13
XII. Hearing .........................................................13
XIII. Appeal ..........................................................14
XIV. Penalties .......................................................14
XV. Variance .......................................................14
XVI. Severability ..................................................15
XVII. Effective Date ..............................................15
XVIII. Disclaimer ....................................................15
I. PURPOSE
The purpose of this regulation is to provide for the protection of the public health, safety welfare
and the environment by, among other things, requiring the proper siting, construction and testing of
private wells.
?
5
II. AUTHORITY
These regulations are adopted by the [insert name of municipality] Board of Health, pursuant to its
authority under Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 111, section 31. These regulations
supersede all previous Regulations for Private Wells adopted by the Board of Health.
III. DEFINITIONS
Agent: Any person designated and authorized by the Board to implement, in whole or part, these
regulations. To the extent provided by the Board, the agent shall have all the authority of the Board
and shall be directly responsible to the Board and under its direction and control.
Applicant: Any person who applies to have a private well constructed.
Aquifer: A water bearing geologic formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that
contains sufficient saturated permeable material to yield significant quantities of water to wells and
springs.
Bentonite Grout: A mixture of bentonite (API Standard 13A) and water in a ratio of not less than
one pound of bentonite per gallon of water.
Board: The Board of Health of [insert name of municipality], Massachusetts or its authorized agent.
Business of Digging or Drilling: A person who charges a fee for digging or drilling a well, or a
person who advertises for hire to dig or drill wells within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Casing: Impervious durable pipe placed in a boring to prevent the walls from caving and to serve as
a vertical conduit for water in a well.
Certified Laboratory: A laboratory certified by the Department of Environmental Protection for the
analysis of drinking water and required water quality analytes. Provisional certification is
acceptable.
Certified Well Driller: Any person certified with the Department of Environmental Protection Well
Driller Program to dig or drill wells in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Concrete: A mixture consisting of Portland cement (ASTM Standard C150, type I or API Standard
10, Class A), sand, gravel, and water in a proportion of not more than five parts of sand plus gravel
to one part cement, by volume, and not more than six gallons of water. One part cement, two parts
sand, and three parts gravel are commonly used with up to six gallons of water.
Irrigation well: Well used for the sole purpose of watering or irrigation. The well shall not be
connected at any time to a dwelling or a building unless they meet the requirements of a Private
Drinking Water Well and have the Board’s written approval.
MassDEP: Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection,
?
6
Neat Cement Grout: A mixture consisting of one bag (94 pounds) of Portland cement (ASTM Standard
C 150, Type I or API Standard 10, Class A) to not more than six gallons of clean water. Bentonite
(API Standard 13A), up to two percent by weight of cement, shall be added to reduce shrinkage. Other
additives, as described in ASTM Standard C494, may be used to increase fluidity and/or control
setting time.
Person: An individual, corporation, company, association, trust, or partnership.
Private Drinking Water Well: Any dug, driven, or drilled hole, with a depth greater than its largest surface
diameter constructed or used to supply water for human consumption that is not regulated by 310 CMR
22.00
Pumping (Aquifer) Test: A procedure used to determine the characteristics of a well and adjacent
aquifer by installing and operating a pump.
Sand Cement Grout: A mixture consisting of Portland cement (ASTM Standard C150, Type I or
API Standard 10, Class A), sand, and water in the proportion of one part cement to three or four
parts sand, by volume, and not more than six gallons of water per bag (94 pounds) of cement. Up to
five percent, by weight of bentonite (API Standard 13A) shall be added to reduce shrinkage.
Static Water Level: The level of water in a well under non-pumping conditions.
Structure: A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location to give-support or shelter, such
as a building, framework, retaining wall, fence, or the like.
IV. WELL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT
A Massachusetts Certified Well Driller shall obtain a permit from the Board of Health prior to the
commencement of construction of a private well.
Each permit application to construct a well shall include the following:
1) the property owner's name and address
2) the well driller's name and proof of valid Massachusetts certification
3) a plan with a specified scale, signed by a registered surveyor or engineer, showing the
location of the proposed well in relation to existing or proposed above or below ground
structures.
4) a description of prior and current land uses within two-hundred (200) feet of the proposed
well location, which represent a potential source of contamination, including
but not limited to the following:
a) existing and proposed structures
b) subsurface sewage disposal systems
c) subsurface fuel storage tanks
d) public and private ways
e) utility rights-of-way
?
7
f) any other potential sources of pollution.
5) proof that the owner of any property abutting the applicant's property has been
notified of the applicant's intention to install a well.
6) a permit fee of $____
The permit shall be on site at all times that work is taking place. Each permit shall expire one (1)
year from the date of issuance unless revoked for cause, or extended. Permits may be extended for
one additional six (6) month period provided that a written explanation for the request is received
by the Board prior to the one year expiration date.
Well Construction Permits are not transferable.
V. WATER SUPPLY CERTIFICATE
The issuance of a Water Supply Certificate by the Board shall certify that the private well may be
used as a drinking water supply. A Water Supply Certificate must be issued for the use of a private
well prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit for an existing structure or prior to the issuance of
a building permit for new construction which is to be served by the well.
The following shall be submitted to the Board of Health to obtain a Water Supply Certificate:
1) a well construction permit
2) a copy of the Water Well Completion Report as required by MassDEP Well Driller
Program regulations (310 CMR 46)
3) a copy of the Pumping Test Report required pursuant to Section VII of these regulations
4) a copy of the Water Quality Report required pursuant to Section VIII of these
regulations
Upon the receipt and review of the above documents, the Board shall make a final decision on the
application for a Water Supply Certificate. A final decision shall be in writing and shall comprise
one of the following actions:
1) Issue a Water Supply Certificate
2) Deny the applicant a Water Supply Certificate and specify the reasons for the denial.
3) Issue a conditional Water Supply Certificate with those conditions, which the Board
deems necessary to ensure fitness, purity and quantity of the water, derived from that
private well. These conditions may include, but not be limited to, requiring treatment
and/or additional testing of the water.
VI. WELL SITING
In locating a well, the applicant shall identify on a plan all potential sources of contamination,
which exist or are proposed within two-hundred (200) feet of the site. When possible, the well shall
be located upgradient of all potential sources of contamination and shall be as far away from
potential sources of contamination as possible, given the layout of the property.
?
8
No well shall be permitted for use as a potable water source unless it meets the following setback
requirements:
15 feet from the property line
25 feet from public or private roadway
15 feet from right of way
50 feet from building sewer line or septic tank
100 feet from leaching field or drywell
100 feet from stable, barnyard, manure storage
15 feet from power line or overhead distribution line
50 feet from any surface water, including but not limited to wetlands
The Board reserves the right to impose minimum setback requirements from other potential sources
of contamination not listed above. All such additional setback requirements shall be listed, in
writing, as a condition of the well construction permit.
Each private well shall be located so that it is accessible for repair, maintenance, testing, and
inspection. The well shall be completed in a water bearing formation that will produce the required
volume of water under normal operating conditions.
Water supply lines shall be installed at least ten (10) feet from and eighteen (18) inches above any
sewer line. Whenever water supply lines must cross sewer lines, both lines shall be constructed of
Class 150 pressure pipe and shall be pressure tested to assure watertightness.
No private well, or its associated distribution system, shall be connected to either the distribution
system of a public water supply system or any type of waste distribution system.
VII. WATER QUANTITY and PUMPING TEST
The applicant shall submit to the Board for review and approval a Pumping Test Report. The
Pumping Test Report shall include at a minimum: the name and address of the well owner, well
location referenced to at least two permanent structures or landmarks, date the pumping test was
performed, depth at which the pump was set for the test, location for the discharge line, static water
level immediately before pumping commenced, discharge rate and, if applicable, the time the
discharge rate changed, pumping water levels and respective times after pumping commenced,
maximum drawdown during the test, duration of the test, including both the pumping time and the
recovery time during which measurements were taken, recovery water levels and respective times
after cessation of pumping, and reference point used for all measurements.
In order to demonstrate that the well capacity can provide the required volume of water, a pumping
test shall be conducted in the following manner:
1) The volume of water necessary to support the household's daily need shall be
determined using the following equation: (number of bedrooms plus one bedroom) x (110
gallons per bedroom) x (safety factor of 2) = number of gallons needed daily.
?
9
2) The storage capacity of the well shall be determined using the measured static water
level and the depth and radius of the drillhole or casing.
3) The required volume shall be calculated by adding the volumes of water in (1) and
(2) above. It is this volume of water that must be pumped from the well within a twentyfour
(24) hour period.
The pumping test may be performed at whatever rate is desired. Following the pumping test, the
water level in the well must be shown to recover to within eighty-five (85) percent of the
prepumped static water level within a twenty-four (24) hour period.
Example 1: a one bedroom house with a well six (6) inches in diameter containing 200 ft. of
standing water:
1) 1 bedroom + 1 bedroom = (2 bedrooms) x (110 gallons per bedroom) x (safety
factor of 2) = 440 gallons needed daily.
2) the volume of a 6-inch well is 1.5 gallons for every foot of water column length.
Therefore, (200 ft. of standing water) x (1. 5 gal/ft.) = 300 gallons.
3) 440 gallons + 300 gallons = 740 gallons that must be pumped from the well in 24
hours or less to demonstrate suitable capacity. Recovery to at least 85% of the static
water level must also occur within 24 hours after cessation of pumping.
Example 2: For a 4 bedroom house with a well that is six (6) inches in diameter containing
100 ft. of standing water:
1) 4 bedroom house + 1 bedroom = (5 bedrooms) x (110 gallons per bedroom) x
(safety factor of 2) = 1,100 gallons needed daily.
2) the volume of a 6-inch well is 1.5 gallons for every foot of water volume length.
Therefore, (100 ft. of standing water) x (1. 5 gal/ft.) = 150 gallons.
3) 1,100 gallons + 150 gallons=1250 gallons that must be pumped from the well in 24
hours or less to demonstrate suitable capacity. Recovery to at least 85% of the
static water level must also occur within 24 hours after cessation of pumping.
VIII. WATER QUALITY TESTING
After the construction of the well has been completed and disinfected, and prior to using it as a
private drinking water well, baseline water quality testing shall be conducted.
A water sample shall be collected either after purging three (3) well volumes or following the
stabilization of the pH, temperature and specific conductance in the pumped well. The water
sample to be tested shall be collected at the pump discharge or from a disinfected tap in the pump
discharge line. In no event shall a water treatment device be installed prior to sampling.
Water quality testing, utilizing the applicable US EPA approved method for drinking water testing,
shall be conducted by a Massachusetts certified laboratory and shall include analysis for the
following parameters:
Arsenic
?
10
Chloride
Copper
Fluoride
Hardness
Iron
Lead
Manganese
pH
Sodium
Total Coliform bacteria
E. coli bacteria
Nitrate/Nitrite
In wells drilled into bedrock the Board of Health requires that in addition to the parameters listed
above, a Gross Alpha Screen and Radon test be performed. If the Gross Alpha screen detects
radiation of 15 pci/l or more, then the water must be analyzed for Radium and Uranium
concentrations.
The owner of every well used for drinking water including those serving a property which is rented
or leased shall have its water tested at a Massachusetts certified laboratory for the following
chemical and bacteriological parameters at a minimum of once a year: total coliform bacteria, e.
coli bacteria, nitrate, nitrite, pH, conductivity, sodium, and iron. All other required chemical
parameters should be tested at a minimum of every ten (10) years. The Board of Health may require
more frequent testing, or testing for additional parameters, where other water quality problems are
known or suspected to exist.
The owner of a rental property shall make results of all water quality tests available to all tenants of
the property and the Board of Health. In cases where the well water does not meet the water quality
standards outlined above, the Board of Health may require the property owner to provide an
alternative approved source of drinking water for the tenants.
Prior to selling, conveying, or transferring title to real property, the owner shall have tested the
water of every private drinking water well serving that property. A water sample from each well
shall be submitted to a Massachusetts certified laboratory for testing for the parameters listed in the
Water Quality section of this document. This water quality testing shall have been performed not
more than one (1) year prior to transfer of the property. Results of the water quality testing shall be
submitted to the Board of Health prior to property transfer.
In addition, the owner shall give copies of all available water quality test results of which he/she has
knowledge (regardless of age of results) for the private well in question to any buyer and/or broker
involved in the transfer. In the event that there is no buyer at the time the water is tested, a copy of
all water test results must be given by the owner to the buyer before the property is put under
agreement.
For irrigation wells, the Board requires annual testing for E. coli bacteria and Nitrate/Nitrite, as
accidental consumption could result in acute exposure.
?
11
The Board reserves the right to require retesting of the above parameters, or testing for additional
parameters when, in the opinion of the Board, it is necessary due to local conditions or for the
protection of public health, safety, welfare and the environment. All costs and laboratory
arrangements for the water testing are the responsibility of the applicant.
Following a receipt of the water quality test results, the well owner shall submit a Water Quality
Report to the Board, which includes:
1) a copy of the certified laboratory's test results
2) the name and contact information of the individual who performed the sampling
3) where in the system the water sample was obtained
This regulation requires that private drinking water wells meet all current Massachusetts’ Primary
and Secondary Drinking Water Standards and Guidelines adopted by the MassDEP Office of
Research and Standards (ORS). In any case where a private drinking water well does not meet such
Standards or Guidelines, as it deems necessary for the protection of public health, safety or welfare,
that the Board may take action, but not limited to, requiring the property owner to provide an
alternative source of drinking water.
IX. WELL CONSTRUCTION
Pursuant to 310 CMR 46.02 (1), no person in the business of digging or drilling shall construct a
well unless certified by the MassDEP Well Drillers Program.
Any work involving the connection of the private well to the distribution system of the residence
must conform to the local plumbing code. All electrical connections between the well and the
pump controls and all piping between the well and the storage and/or pressure tank in the house
must be made by a pump installer or certified well driller, including the installation of the pump and
appurtenance(s) in the well or house.
A physical connection is not permitted between a water supply, which satisfies the requirements of
these regulations, and another water supply that does not meet the requirements of these regulations
without prior approval of the Board.
A. General Well Design and Construction
All private wells shall be designed and constructed such that:
1) the materials used for the permanent construction are durable in the specific
hydrogeologic environment that occurs at the well site
2) no unsealed opening is be left around the well that could conduct surface water or
contaminated groundwater vertically to the intake portion of the well or transfer
water from one formation to another.
Permanent construction materials shall not leach or contribute toxic substances, taste, odors, or
bacterial contamination to the water in the well.
?
12
The driller shall operate all equipment according to generally accepted standards in the industry and
shall take appropriate precautions to prevent damage, injury or other loss to persons and property at
the drilling site.
Well construction design shall ensure that surface water does not enter the well through the opening or
by seepage through the ground surface. Construction site waste and materials shall be disposed of in
such a way as to avoid contamination of the well, any surface water or the aquifer. During any time
that the well is unattended, the contractor shall secure the well in a way as to prevent either tampering
with the well and/or the introduction of foreign material into the well.
All water used for drilling, well development, or to mix a drilling fluid shall be obtained from a
source, which will not result in contamination of the well or the water bearing zones penetrated by
the well. Water from wetlands, swamps, ponds and other similar surface features shall not be used.
Water shall be conveyed in clear sanitary containers or water lines and shall be chlorinated to an initial
concentration between 50 mg/l and 100 mg/1.All drilling equipment including pumps and down hole
tools, shall be cleaned and disinfected prior to drilling each new well or test hole.
All drilling fluids shall be nontoxic. Drilling fluid additives shall be stored in clean containers and
shall be free of material that may adversely affect the well, the aquifer, or the quality of the water to be
pumped from the well. Surfactants shall be biodegradable. The use of biodegradable organic polymers
shall, when possible, be avoided.
All wells, including those that have been hydrofractured, shall be developed in order to remove fine
materials introduced into the pore spaces or fractures during construction. One or more of the following
methods shall be used for development: overpumping, backwashing, surging, jetting, air-lift pumping.
The completed well shall be sufficiently straight so that there will be no interference with installation,
alignment, operation or future removal of the permanent well pump.
B. Well casing
Private water supply wells shall be constructed using either steel or thermoplastic well casing. The
casing shall be of adequate strength and durability to withstand anticipated formation and hydrostatic
pressures, the forces imposed on it during installation, and the corrosive effects of the local
hydrogeologic environment.
All casing used in the construction of private wells shall be free of pits, breaks, gouges, deep
scratches and other defects. If previously used casing is installed, it shall be decontaminated and
disinfected prior to installation.
Installation of water well casing shall be done in a manner that does not alter the shape, size, or
strength of the casing and does not damage any of the joints or couplings connecting sections of the
casing. A standard driveshoe shall be used when casing is installed. The drive shoe shall be either
welded or threaded to the lower end of the string of casing and shall have a beveled metal cutting edge
forged, cast, or fabricated for this specific purpose.
?
13
Upon completion of the installation procedure, the entire length of the casing above the intake shall
be watertight.
Well casing shall not be cut off below the land surface unless a pitless adapter or a pitless unit is
installed or an abandoned well is being permanently plugged. Well casing terminating above-grade
shall extend at least twelve (12) inches above the predetermined ground surface at the wellhead except
when the well is located in a floodplain. When a well is located in a floodplain, the well casing shall
extend at least two (2) feet above the level of the highest recorded flood. The top of the well casing
shall be reasonably smooth and level.
C. Well screen
A well screen is required for all drilled wells that are completed in unconsolidated formations. All
well screens shall be of Grade 304 stainless steel. Wells completed in bedrock do not require a
screen unless the bedrock formation is brittle in nature or has a potential for collapse. The well
screen aperture openings, screen length, and diameter shall be selected so as not to limit the
aquifer’s water yielding characteristics while preventing access of soil particles that would detract
from well efficiency and yield.
D. Grouting and sealing
Private wells drilled in bedrock shall be grouted from the ground surface or to the bottom of the
pitless adaptor (if present) to fifteen (15) feet into competent bedrock. Neat cement grout, sand
cement grount, or Bentonite grout shall be used. It shall have a permeability of at least 1 x 10-7 and
be emplaced using standard grouting techniques as described in the MassDEP Private Well
Guidelines, as amended.
All wells completed with the casing extending above grade shall have a surface seal designed to
eliminate the possibility of surface water flowing down the annular space between the well casing
and the surrounding backfilled materials. The surface seal shall extend to a depth below the local
frost line.
E. Wellhead completion
All wells shall be equipped with a sanitary seal or watertight cap designed to prevent surface water
and foreign matter from entering the well.
All wells except flowing artesian and dug wells shall be vented. The opening of the vent pipe shall be
covered with a 24 mesh corrosion resistant screen and shall be large enough to prevent water from
being drawn into the well through electrical conduits or leaks in the seal around the pump when the
pump is turned on. The vent pipe shall terminate in a downward position at or above the top of the
casing.
All connections to a well casing made below ground shall be protected by either a pitless adapter or a
pitless unit that complies with the most recent revision of National Sanitation Foundation Standard
Number 56, entitled "Pitless Well Adapters."
?
14
Above-grade connections into the top or side of a well casing shall be at least twelve (12) inches
above the established ground surface or two (2) feet above the level of the highest known flood,
whichever is higher. Above-grade connections shall be sealed so that they are watertight.
The ground immediately surrounding the well casing shall be sloped downward and away from the
well in all directions to eliminate the possibility of surface water ponding.
F. Disinfection
Upon completion of well construction, the well driller shall disinfect the well. If a pump is to be
installed immediately upon completion of the well, the pump installer shall disinfect the well and
the pumping equipment after the pump has been installed.
If the pump is not installed upon completion of the well, the pump installer shall, upon installation,
disinfect the well and the pumping equipment. The pump installer shall also disinfect the entire
water supply system immediately after any maintenance or repair work is done on the pump.
When a well is disinfected, the initial chlorine concentration shall be 100 mg/l throughout the entire
water column.
For newly constructed or altered wells in which the pump is not immediately installed, the chlorine
concentration used to disinfect the well shall be 100 mg/l. Upon installation of the pump, the well,
the pumping equipment, and the distribution system, if connected, shall be disinfected with a
chlorine concentration of 100 mg/l.
The disinfectant solution shall remain undisturbed in the well for a minimum of two (2) hours.
After all the chlorine has been flushed from the water supply system, a water sample shall be
collected and submitted to a Massachusetts certified laboratory. For new wells, the sample shall be
tested pursuant to Section VI of these regulations.
Only certified well drillers are authorized to physically alter, or repair a well. For wells, that have
undergone repair, a sample shall be tested for total coliform bacteria and any other parameters
deemed appropriate by the Board, prior to being put back in use.
?
15
X. DECOMMISSIONING
Abandoned wells, test holes, and borings shall be decommissioned so as to prevent the well,
including the annular space outside the casing, from being a channel allowing the vertical
movement of water.
The owner of a private well shall decommission the well if any of the following criteria are met:
1) construction of the well is terminated prior to completion of the well
2) the well owner notifies the Board that the use of the well is to be permanently
discontinued.
3) the well has been out of service for at least three (3) years
4) the well is a potential hazard to public health or safety and the situation cannot be
corrected
5) the well is in such a state of disrepair that its continued use is impractical or unsafe
6) the well has the potential for transmitting contaminants from the land surface into an
aquifer or from one aquifer to another and the situation cannot be corrected
The property owner shall ensure that that all abandoned wells and test holes or borings associated
with the well installation are properly plugged before work at the site is completed. Only certified
well drillers may plug abandoned wells, test holes, and borings.
Abandoned overburden wells or borings shall be completely filled with a low permeability grout,
which cures with a final permeability of less than 1x10-7 cm/sec. Wells shall be plugged with neat
cement grout, sand cement grout, concrete, or bentonite grout.
Regardless of the type used, the grout used for plugging shall:
1) be sufficiently fluid so that it can be applied through a tremie pipe from the bottom of
the well upward
2) remain as a homogeneous fluid when applied to the subsurface rather than
disaggregating by gravity into a two phase substance
3) be resistant to chemical or physical deterioration
4) not leach chemicals, either organic or inorganic, that will affect the quality of the
groundwater where it is applied
The plugging materials shall be introduced at the bottom of the well or boring and placed
progressively upward to a level approximately four (4) feet below the ground surface. Sealing
materials shall not be poured from the land surface into the well, borehole, or annular space being
sealed.
The well driller shall install a surface seal after the well or boring has been plugged. Before the
surface seal is placed, casing remaining in the hole shall be cut off. The remaining four (4) feet at
the top of the well or boring shall then be filled with concrete. The top of the seal shall comprise a
concrete slab above the top of the plugged well or boring. This concrete slab shall be at least six (6)
inches thick and shall be at least two (2) feet greater in diameter than the well casing or borehole
wall.
?
16
XI. ENFORCEMENT
The Board has authority to investigate suspected or known violations of these regulations and/or
violations of any Water Supply Certificate conditions. The Board may take actions, as it deems
appropriate, within its authority for the protection of public health, safety welfare, or the
environment, and to enforce any of the provisions of this regulation.
If any investigation reveals a violation of these regulations or the Water Supply Certificate
Conditions, the Board may order the private well owner to comply with the violated provision(s),
and/or take other action within its authority as the Board deems appropriate.
Any Order the Board issues shall be in writing and served in the following manner:
(a) personally, by any person authorized to serve civil process,
(b) by any person authorized to serve civic process by leaving a copy of the Order at the
property owner’s address
(c) by sending the property owner a copy of the Order by registered or certified mail,
return receipt requested, or
(d) by posting a copy of the Order in a conspicuous place on or about the premises and
by advertising it for at least three (3) out of five (5) consecutive days in one or more
newspapers of general circulation within the municipality where the private well is
located, if the property owner's last and usual place of residence is unknown or
outside the Commonwealth.
XI. HEARING
Any person to whom the Board issues an Order may request a hearing before the Board by filing with
the Board within seven (7) days after the day the Order was served a written request for a hearing.
Upon receipt of a hearing request, the Board shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall inform
the well owner in writing. The hearing shall commence within thirty (30) days from the day on which
the written request was made, unless a later time is agreed to in writing by the Board and the person
requesting the hearing. At the hearing the person requesting the hearing shall be given an opportunity
to be heard and show why the Order should be modified or withdrawn. After the close of the hearing,
the Board shall issue a written decision to sustain, modify, or withdraw the Order and shall mail a
copy of the decision, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the person who requested the
hearing. If the Board sustains or modifies the Order, it shall be carried out within the time period
allotted in the original order or in the modification.
Every notice, order, or other record prepared by the Board in connection with the hearing shall be
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the clerk of the city or town, or in the office of
the Board.
If a request for a hearing is not filed with the Board within seven (7) days after the day an Order has
been served or if after a hearing, the Order has been sustained in whole or any part, each day's
failure to comply with the order as issued or sustained shall constitute a separate violation.
?
17
XIII. APPEAL
Any person aggrieved by the final Order, Variance, Well Construction Permit, or Certificate of
Water Supply determination of the Board may appeal to any court of competent jurisdiction as
provided by the laws of the Commonwealth.
XIV. PENALTIES
Any person who violates any provision of these regulations, or who fails to comply with any final
Order of the Board, for which a penalty is not otherwise provided in any of the Massachusetts
General Laws, shall upon conviction be fined not less then ten (10) nor more than five hundred
(500) dollars. Each day's failure to comply with a final Order or any provision of this regulation
shall constitute a separate violation.
XV. VARIANCE
The Board may, grant a variance to any provision of this regulation when, in its opinion, the
enforcement would result in manifest injustice, and the applicant has demonstrated that the
equivalent degree of protection will be provided without strict application of the particular
provision(s) sought to be varied.
Every request for a variance shall be in writing shall state the specific provision of this regulation
from which variance is sought, the reasons for seeking the variance and proof of the notice required
below. The request shall also contain the information to establish manifest injustice and equivalent
degree of protection. At least ten (10) days prior submission of the application to the Board, the
applicant shall provide notice of their intent to the request a variance as follows: a) by certified
mail, return receipt requested to all abutters of the property upon which the private well will be or is
located and b) publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town or city in which the
private well will be or is located. The notice shall include at a minimum: the name and address of
the applicant, a statement of the provision(s) of this regulation from which a variance is sought, and
the reason for seeking the variance. Any grant or denial of a variance shall be in writing and shall
contain a brief statement of the reasons for approving or denying the variance. A copy of each
variance shall be conspicuously posted for thirty (30) days following its issuance and shall be
available to the public at all reasonable hours in the Office of the Town Clerk or Office of the Board
of Health. No work shall be done under any variance until thirty (30) days elapse from its issuance,
unless the Board certifies in writing that an emergency exists.
The Board may issue a variance subject to such conditions as it deems necessary to public health,
safety, welfare or the environment. Any such conditions shall be stated in writing in the Board’s
grant of the variance. The Board may revoke, modify or suspend, in whole or in part, a variance
after the property owner has been notified in writing and is afforded an opportunity to be heard,
pursuant to Section XI of these regulations.
?
18
XVI. SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of these regulations or the application thereof is held to be invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the invalidity shall be limited to said provision(s) and the remainder of these
regulations shall remain valid and effective. Any part of these regulations subsequently invalidated
by a new state law or modification of an existing state law shall automatically be brought into
conformity with the new or amended law and shall be deemed to be effective immediately, without
recourse to a public hearing and the customary procedures for amendment or repeal of such
regulation.
XVII. EFFECTIVE DATE
These regulations were adopted by vote of the [insert name of municipality], Massachusetts Board
of Health, at their regularly scheduled meeting held on ________, 20__ and are to be in full force
and effect on and after _________, 20__. Before said date, these regulations shall be published and
a copy placed on file in the Board of Health Offices and filed with the Department of
Environmental Protection, Division of Wastewater Management in Boston. These regulations or
any portions thereof may be amended, supplemented or repealed from time to time by the Board, as
provided by law and applicable regulations.
XVIII. DISCLAIMER
The issuance of a well permit shall not be construed as a guarantee or certification by the Board or
its agents that the water system will function satisfactorily or that the water supply will be of
sufficient quality or quantity for its intended use.
ARTICLE XXX
FARM PRESERVATION
Section 1
Legislative Purpose and Intent
The purpose and intent of this By-law is to state with emphasis the Right to Farm accorded to all
citizens of the Commonwealth under Article 97, of the Constitution, and all state statutes and
regulations thereunder including but not limited to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A,
Section 3, Paragraph 1; Chapter 90, Section 9, Chapter 111, Section 125A and Chapter 128
Section 1A. We the citizens of Weston restate and republish these rights pursuant to the Town’s
authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the Massachusetts
Constitution, (“Home Rule Amendment”).
This General By-law encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes agriculture-based economic
opportunities, and protects farmlands within the Town of Weston by allowing agricultural uses
and related activities to function with minimal conflict with abutters and Town agencies. This
By-law shall apply to all jurisdictional areas within the Town.
Section 2
Definitions
The word "farm" shall include any parcel or contiguous parcels of land, or water bodies used for
the primary purpose of commercial agriculture, or accessory thereto.
The words "farming" or “agriculture" or their derivatives shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
• farming in all its branches and the cultivation and tillage of the soil;
• dairying;
• production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural, aquacultural,
floricultural, viticultural, or horticultural commodities;
• growing and harvesting of forest products upon forest land, and any other forestry or
lumbering operations;
• raising of livestock including horses;
• keeping of horses as a commercial enterprise; and
• keeping and raising of poultry, swine, cattle, ratites (such as emus, ostriches and rheas)
and camelids (such as llamas and camels), and other domesticated animals for food and
other agricultural purposes, including bees and fur-bearing animals.
“Farming” shall encompass activities including, but not limited to, the following:
• operation and transportation of slow-moving farm equipment over roads within the
Town;
• control of pests, including, but not limited to, insects, weeds, predators and disease
organism of plants and animals;
• application of manure, fertilizers and pesticides;
• conducting agriculture-related educational and farm-based recreational activities,
including agri-tourism, provided that the activities are related to marketing the
agricultural output or services of the farm;
• processing and packaging of the agricultural output of the farm and the operation of a
farmer's market or farm stand including signage thereto;
• maintenance, repair, or storage of seasonal equipment, or apparatus owned or leased by
the farm owner or manager used expressly for the purpose of propagation, processing,
management, or sale of the agricultural products; and
• on-farm relocation of earth and the clearing of ground for farming operations.
Section 3
Right To Farm Declaration
The Right to Farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Weston. The abovedescribed
agricultural activities may occur on holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day
and shall include the attendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally
accepted agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may be caused to
others through the normal practice of agriculture is more than offset by the benefits of farming to
the neighborhood, community, and society in general. The benefits and protections of this Bylaw
are intended to apply exclusively to those commercial agricultural and farming operations
and activities conducted in accordance with generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover,
nothing in this By-law shall be deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing any land
use regulation, which is properly the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning law.
Section 4
Disclosure Notification
Not later than 21 days after the purchase and sale contract is entered into, or prior to the sale or
exchange of real property if no purchase and sale agreement exists, for the purchase or exchange
of real property, or prior to the acquisition of a leasehold interest or other possessory interest in
real property, located in the Town of Weston, the landowner shall present the buyer or occupant
with a disclosure notification which states the following:
“It is the policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage the
maintenance and improvement of agricultural land for the production of food, and
other agricultural products, and also for its natural and ecological value. This
disclosure notification is to inform buyers or occupants that the property they are
about to acquire or occupy lies within a town where farming activities occur. Such
farming activities may include, but are not limited to, activities that cause noise,
dust and odors. Buyers or occupants are also informed that the location of
property within the Town may be impacted by commercial agricultural operations
including the ability to access water services for such property under certain
circumstances.”
A copy of the disclosure notification shall be given on a form prepared by the Town and shall be
signed by the landowner prior to the sale, purchase, exchange or occupancy of such real
property. A copy of the disclosure notification must be filed with the Board of Selectmen or its
designee prior to the sale, purchase, exchange or occupancy of such real property. In addition to
the above, a copy of this disclosure notification shall be provided by the Town to landowners
each fiscal year by mail.
Section 5
Resolution of Disputes
Any person who seeks to complain about the operation of a farm may, notwithstanding pursuing
any other available remedy, file a grievance with the Board of Selectmen, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, or the Board of Health, in accordance with statute and appropriate bylaws
and regulations of the Town. The filing of the grievance does not suspend the time within which
to pursue any other available remedies that the aggrieved may have. The Zoning Enforcement
Officer or Board of Selectmen shall forward a copy of the grievance to the Agricultural
Commission or its agent, which shall review and facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and
report its recommendations to the referring Town authority within an agreed upon time frame.
The Board of Health, except in cases of imminent danger or public health risk, shall forward a
copy of the grievance to the Agricultural Commission or its agent, which shall review and
facilitate the resolution of the grievance, and report its recommendations to the Board of Health
within an agreed upon time frame.
Section 6
Severability Clause
If any part of this By-law is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision
shall not affect the remainder of this By-law. The Town of Weston hereby declares the
provisions of this By-law to be severable. (Effective as of May 15,
Rules and Regulations for Emergency Alarms
ARTICLE I
Definitions
For the purpose of these rules and regulations, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings except in those instances where the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.
(a) The term “Alarm Central Station” shall mean the person or company to which remote
alarm and supervisory signals devices are directed, where personnel are in attendance
at all times to supervise the circuits and, upon receiving initial direct notice of the
activation of an Alarm System initiates an Alarm Dispatch Request.
(b) The term “Alarm Dispatch Request” shall mean notification to a Dispatcher that an
Alarm System, either manual or automatic, has been activated at an alarm site, and a
request for a response thereto from the Fire Department and/or the Police
Department.
(c) The terms “Alarm System” or “Emergency Alarm System” mean an assembly of
equipment or devices or a single device such as a solid state unit which plugs directly
into a 110-volt AC line, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which the Police Department, or Fire Department, or both, are
expected to respond. Such hazards include, but are not limited to, suspected or actual
unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery at a premises,
suspected or actual fire, carbon monoxide, and medical emergency.
(d) The terms “Alarm User” or “Emergency Alarm User” mean any person or entity
other than the Town of Weston having ownership or control of a premises on which
an Alarm System is maintained within the town except for alarm systems on motor
vehicles. Excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this by-law are
persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal others within the premises in which
the alarm system is located. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal
emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside of the
premises, such system shall be within the definition of “Alarm System” as that term is
used in this by-law, and shall be subject to this by-law.
(e) The term “Chief of Police” means the Chief of Police of the Town of Weston or
his/her designated representative.
(f) The term “Dispatcher” shall mean the individual or individuals in the Police
Department or Fire Department to whom an Alarm Dispatch Request is made.
(g) The term “Disturbance of the Peace” shall mean any interruption of the peace, quiet,
and good order of a neighborhood or community, particularly by unnecessary and
distracting noises.
(h) The term “False Burglar Alarm” shall mean the activation of an Alarm System
arranged to signal a criminal offense or the presence of a hazard other than heat,
Page 1 of 6
carbon monoxide, smoke, fire, or medical emergency, but caused by negligence,
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of proper maintenance,
misuse by the Alarm User, or by a cause that cannot be determined.
(i) The term “False Fire Alarm” shall mean the activation of an Alarm System arranged
to signal the presence of heat, carbon monoxide, smoke, fire, or medical emergency,
but caused by negligence, mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack
of proper maintenance, misuse by the Alarm User, or any alarm activation thereof by
a cause other than heat, carbon monoxide, smoke or fire.
(j) The term “Fire Chief” means the Chief of the Fire Department of the Town of
Weston or his/her designated representative
(k) The term “Fire Department” shall mean the Town of Weston Fire Department or any
authorized agent thereof.
(l) The term “Master Box” shall mean an Emergency Alarm System device which
connects a protected premises directly to the Town of Weston Fire Department.
(m) The term “Police Department” shall mean the Town of Weston Police Department or
any authorized agent thereof.
ARTICLE II
Control and Curtailment of Signals Emitted by Alarm System
Section 1 – Response to Alarm Activation
(a) Every Alarm User shall submit to his Alarm Central Station the names and
telephone numbers of at least two other persons who can be reached at any time,
day or night, who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal transmitted by
an Alarm System, and who can open the premises wherein the Alarm System is
installed.
(b) No interior inspection will be performed by the Fire Department as the result of a
fire alarm activation other than for carbon monoxide or medical emergency in the
absence of exterior evidence of a hazard unless access to the interior is provided
by the Alarm User or occupant of the premises or persons designated by the
Alarm User under paragraph (a) of this section, or alternatively, the Alarm User
has purchased and installed at his own expense a lock box approved by the Fire
Department and containing a key to the premises.
(c) All Alarm Systems which use an audible horn or bell shall be equipped with a
device which will shut off such horn or bell ten (10) minutes after activation of
the Alarm System.
(d) A police officer who responds to a False Burglar Alarm shall leave at the
premises of the Alarm System a written report of such response, providing the
date and time of the False Burglar Alarm and the response thereto.
Page 2 of 6
(e) A firefighter who responds to a False Fire Alarm shall leave at the premises of the
Alarm System a written report of such response, providing the date and time of
the False Fire Alarm and the response thereto.
Section 2 –Discontinuance of Alarm Signals
(a) Any Alarm System emitting a continuous uninterrupted signal for more than one
(1) hour which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed due to the absence or
unavailability of the Alarm User or those persons designated by him under
paragraph (a) of Section 1 of this Article, and which interrupts the peace, comfort
or repose of a neighborhood or inhabitants of the area where the alarm system is
located shall constitute a Disturbance of the Peace. Upon receiving complaints
regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted signal, the Chief of Police or his
designee shall endeavor to contact the Alarm User, or members of the Alarm User
family, or those persons designated by the Alarm User under paragraph (a) of this
section in an effort to abate the disturbance. The Chief of Police shall cause to be
recorded the names and addresses of all complainants and the time each complaint
was made.
(b) In the event that contact cannot be made with the Alarm User, or members of the
Alarm User’s family, or those other persons designated by the Alarm User under
paragraph (a) of Section 1 of this Article, or if the aforesaid persons cannot or will
not curtail the audible signal being emitted by the alarm system, and if the Chief
of Police is otherwise unable to abate the nuisance, he may direct a police officer
or a qualified alarm technician to enter upon the property outside the home or
building in which the Alarm System is located and take any reasonable action
necessary to abate the nuisance.
(c) If entry upon property outside the home or building in which the Alarm System is
located is made in accordance with this section, the person so entering upon such
property 1) shall not conduct, engage in or undertake any search, seizure,
inspection or investigation while he is upon the property; 2) shall not cause any
unnecessary damage to the Alarm System or to any part of the home or building;
and 3) shall leave the property immediately after the audible signal has ceased.
After an entry upon property has been made in accordance with this section, the
Chief of Police shall have the property secured, if necessary. The reasonable
costs and expenses of abating disturbance in accordance with this section may be
assessed to the Alarm User.
(d) Within ten (10) days after abatement of a disturbance in accordance with this
section, the Alarm User may request a hearing before the Board of Selectmen and
may present evidence showing that the signal emitted by his Alarm System did
not constitute a Disturbance of the Peace at the time of the abatement; that
unnecessary damage was caused to his property in the course of the abatement;
that the costs of the abatement should not be assessed to him; or that the
requirements of this section were not fulfilled. The Board of Selectmen shall hear
all interested parties and may in its discretion, reimburse the Alarm User for the
repairs to his property necessitated by the abatement, or excuse the Alarm User
from paying the costs of the abatement.
Page 3 of 6
Section 3 – Tests of Alarms
(a) Tests of any Burglar Alarm System may be conducted with the express
permission of the Chief of Police, having first been applied for and received.
(b) Tests of any Fire Alarm System may be conducted with the express permission of
the Fire Chief, having first been applied for and received.
(c) An unauthorized test of an Alarm System constitutes a False Fire Alarm if the
Alarm System undergoing test is arranged to signal the presence of heat, carbon
monoxide, smoke or fire if such test results in an Alarm Dispatch Request; an
unauthorized test of an Alarm System arranged to signal the presence of any other
hazard constitutes a False Burglar Alarm if such test results in an Alarm Dispatch
Request.
ARTICLE III
False Alarm Cost Assessment Schedule
Fees for False Alarms responded to by the Police Department and/or the Fire Department
shall be assessed against the Alarm User as follows:
(a) For the third and fourth False Fire Alarms from an Alarm System occurring
within a twelve (12) month period beginning at midnight on the date of the first
False Alarm, the Alarm User shall be responsible to pay to the Town the sum of
one hundred dollars ($100).
(b) For each False Fire Alarm from an Alarm System in excess of four (4) False Fire
Alarms occurring within a twelve (12) month period beginning at midnight on the
date of the first False Fire Alarm, the Alarm User shall be responsible to pay to the
Town the sum of five hundred dollars ($500).
(c) For the third and fourth False Burglar Alarm from an Alarm System occurring
within a twelve (12) month period beginning at midnight on the date of the first
False Burglar Alarm, the Alarm User shall be responsible to pay to the Town the
sum of one hundred dollars ($100).
(d) For each False Burglar Alarm from an Alarm System in excess of four (4) False
Burglar Alarms occurring within a twelve (12) month period beginning at
midnight on the date of the first False Burglar Alarm, the Alarm User shall be
responsible to pay to the Town the sum of Five hundred dollars ($500).
(e) The number of False Burglar Alarms or False Fire Alarms may be adjusted based
on
(1) Evidence that a False Alarm was caused by an Act of God;
(2) Evidence that a False Alarm was caused by action of the telephone
company;
(3) Evidence that a False Alarm was caused by a power outage;
Page 4 of 6
(4) Evidence that the Alarm Dispatch Request was not a False Alarm; and/or
(5) Evidence that the response from the Police Department or Fire Department
was not in a timely fashion.
(f) All assessments hereunder shall be made payable to the Town Treasurer for
deposit in the General Fund.
(g) All assessments hereunder shall be paid within thirty (30) days of the date of
written notice thereof, with interest thereafter at the same rate as charged on tax
bills under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 59 Section 57.
(h) The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to abate any assessment under
this Article and/or any interest charges, in whole or in part.
ARTICLE IV
Fees and Notifications
(f) Each Alarm User of an Alarm System the notice of activation of which is directed
to an Alarm Central Station shall provide written notice thereof to the Police
Department, including the name, address, and telephone number of his or her
Alarm Central Station.
(g) Each Alarm User of an Alarm System installed on or after the Effective Date of
this Regulation shall pay to the Town of Weston a one-time initial fee of one
hundred dollars ($100).
(h) Master Boxes
(1) Beginning with the Effective Date of this Regulation, each Alarm User
who installs a Master Box shall pay a prior connection fee in the amount
of $150 (one hundred fifty dollars) to the Town of Weston.
(1) Beginning with the Effective Date of this Regulation, each Master Box
Alarm User shall pay to the Town of Weston an annual fee of three
hundred dollars ($300) for each box, except that no single Alarm User
shall pay more than a total of one thousand two hundred dollars ($1200)
annually. Notice of the fee due shall be sent by first class mail during the
period January 1 to February 28 in each year to the Master Box Alarm
User. Payment shall be made within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing
of the invoice, with interest thereafter at the same rate as charged on tax
bills under the provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 59, Section 57. Such fee
when paid to the Town of Weston shall be for the period April 1 to March
31 following the date of notice.
Page 5 of 6
Page 6 of 6
ARTICLE V
Penalties
(a) Violations of these Rules and Regulations shall constitute violations of the By-
Laws of the Town of Weston and shall be punishable by a fine of one hundred
dollars ($100).
(b) Each day during which the aforesaid violations continue shall constitute a
separate offense.
(c) The Board of Selectmen shall have the authority to abate any penalty under this
Article, in whole or in part.
Adopted ______________________
To be effective June 1, 2003
Douglas Gillespie
Harold Hestnes
Joan B. Vernon
Filed in the office of Town Clerk ______________, __________________, 2003
At ____________.
Elizabeth Nolan
Town Clerk
Chapter VI of the Weston Board of Health Regulations
provides guidelines for septic system design and
installations. All systems must comply with the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection Title V
CHAPTER VI – SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
PREAMBLE
This chapter was approved by the Weston Board of Health at their meeting on
December 5, 2001 in accordance with the provisions of Massachusetts General Law,
Chapter 111, section 31. Section 1.8a was amended September 18, 2002. Earlier
versions of these regulations were dated 1992, 1996 and 1999 in accordance with
changes in the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection Title 5, CMR
310 15.000. Much of Weston is located within the city of Cambridge watershed requiring
an enhanced level of wetland protection. These regulations are a more environmentally
restrictive code for the design and construction of subsurface sewage disposal systems
than required by Title V.
The requirements of Title V and other governmental agencies must be considered as
part of the design and construction process. Applicants for sewage disposal
construction permits are responsible for compliance with all such regulations, statutes,
or bylaws whenever applicable. Where the regulations adopted by the Weston Board of
Health are more conservative than those of Title V, they shall govern. In addition, all
new systems and all upgraded systems must be designed in compliance with 310 CMR
10.03 (The Rivers Act).
SECTION 1 - PERMITS
1.1 Sewage Disposal Permits - New Construction.
No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building to be used for
human occupancy unless an Application for Disposal System Construction Permit has
been submitted and a Disposal System Construction Permit has been issued by The
Weston Board of Health. The basic standards applying to all sewage disposal permits
will be in accordance with Title 5 of The State Environmental Code. No habitation of
any newly constructed building will be permitted until a Certificate of Compliance is
issued by the Board of Health,
1.2 Additional Construction.
The Town of Weston will not issue a building permit for the addition or alteration to any
building that will increase the sewage flow without first obtaining either Board of Health
approval of the existing sewage disposal system or a permit from the Board of Health
for the alteration or reconstruction of the existing system. If it is necessary to alter or
replace the system the addition shall not be occupied until a certificate of compliance is
obtained. Any existing system which is not designed in accordance with 310 CMR
15.100 through 15.293 (Title V) must be redesigned in accordance with 310 CMR
15.404, Maximum Feasible Compliance.
Applications for additional construction for which there will be no additional sewage flow
must include the results of an inspection of the existing system by a licensed septic
system inspector. The inspection must have been made within the past year. Systems
which are no longer functioning must be upgraded in accordance with 310 CMR 15.100
through 15.293 (Title V).
1.3 Time To Construct Sewage Disposal Systems.
Construction of subsurface sewage disposal systems shall not be allowed from the first
day of December through the last day of February. The Board or its agent may allow
exceptions for buildings currently in use as a residence if the Board or its agent deems
existing conditions pose a hazard to the health and safety of the occupants or the
public.
1.4 Permanent Privies.
No permanent privy shall be constructed in the Town of Weston.
1.5 Temporary Toilet Facilities.
Chemical toilets to be used more than three days require a permit from the Board of
Health. The life of the permit is six months from the date of issue. Chemical toilets shall
be located so as not to cause any annoyance to adjacent residents or pollution to any
watercourse. Toilets shall be maintained in a sanitary state and shall be removed from
the premises immediately upon completion of work on the site or termination of the
special event necessitating its use.
1.6 Disposal Works Installer's Permit.
Disposal Works Installer's Permits shall be renewable annually. Initial applicants for a
Disposal Works Installer's Permit shall submit a list of references and pass a qualifying
examination. Anyone who has not held such a permit in the Town of Weston for more
than one year shall be required to pass a repeat examination.
All installers must demonstrate knowledge of the Weston Board of Health regulations
and 310 CMR 15.00 (Title 5). Installers for commercial or large (>2000 gpd) pressure
dosing systems must be able to provide the one of the following:
a. Documentation of the successful installation of at least three pressure dosing
systems similar to the type of system to be installed.
b. A minimum of three references from other Boards of Health with regard to
pressure dosing systems similar to the type of system to be installed.
c. Demonstrate to the Board of Health’s satisfaction a complete and thorough
understanding of the system installation requirements.
The licensed installer is responsible for all aspects of a subsurface sewage disposal
installation and must be physically present at all inspections required by the Board of
Health.
1.7 Disposal Works Construction Permits Requiring A Variance.
The Board may vary either its own regulations, or Title 5, except where expressly
forbidden, when, in the opinion of the Board, strict enforcement of the requirements
would be unreasonable. Any variance granted shall maintain an acceptable level of
environmental protection consistent with the intent of state and local regulations, and
shall require the application of all appropriate regulations to the maximum extent
permitted by site conditions. Any variance granted shall be stated in writing and shall
become part of the permit itself. All such requests must be made in writing, and include
the article number and description of the state or local regulation that cannot be met and
the article and description of the state code granting local Board of Health authority to
grant that variance.
1.8 Permitting Procedure.
In order for the Board of Health to take action on an application for a permit for the
construction of sewage disposal system, it is necessary that the applicant take the
following steps:
a. All fees are due before processing or inspections can be scheduled and
performed. A full refund may be granted for soil testing if cancellation is made at
least 7 days prior to the scheduled test date. Otherwise, all fees are nonrefundable.
b. Applicant's Registered Professional Engineer or Registered Sanitarian shall
submit a Soil Test Application with the appropriate fee to the Board of Health to
schedule a soil testing date.
c. Submit one copy of the designer's plans which include all of the data listed in
Section 2 of these regulations together with the completed Application for
Disposal System Construction Permit with the appropriate fee.
d. Following Board of Health review of the plans, the applicant will be notified. If
approved, the applicant will provide the Board with three copies of the plans
which will be stamped with the Board of Health Approval and will be made
available to the applicant. The review copy will be filed. If the plans are
disapproved, the applicant will be notified in writing of the reason(s) for
disapproval. A Disposal Works Construction Permit will be granted to the system
installer (1.8-5) if the application and data submitted meet the requirements of all
applicable regulations. Approval or rejection of the application shall take place no
later than 45 calendar days from submission of a completed application. The
timing may be extended if all involved parties agree.
e. The system installer shall obtain a Disposal Works Construction Permit.
Construction shall be by firms or individuals who have obtained a Disposal Works
Installer's Permit from the Board of Health to perform such services. The installer
is responsible for constructing from a Board of Health stamped, approved plan.
The installer is also responsible for the quality of all work performed and for the
quality of the materials used in the construction of the disposal system.
Inspections in accordance with Section 4.0 shall be requested by the installer
through the Board of Health office. The installer shall notify the Board of Health at
least one working day prior to the start of construction. A preconstruction
conference may be required.
1.9 Repair Permits.
All repairs or modification of a subsurface sewage disposal system shall be reported to
the Board of Health and may require a permit from the Board of Health.
1.10 Emergency Repairs.
An emergency repair shall be defined as one requiring immediate action to prevent
sewage backup into an occupied building, sewage breaking out on the surface of the
ground, or, in the judgment of the Board of Health, one that presents imminent danger
to public health.
1.11 Life of a Disposal Works Construction Permit.
Disposal Works Construction Permits for single dwellings may be renewable by the
Board or its agents. To be considered for renewal an applicant must apply in writing at
least 60 days before expiration of the original permit to the Board who may grant a
renewal if:
a. The plan is still in compliance with applicable regulations and standards,
b. There have been no changes in topography, soil or water conditions at the site or
adjacent land which would adversely affect or prohibit operation of the sewage
disposal system, and there is no change in design affecting the volume of
sewage flow.
c. Payment of renewal fee.
1.12 Tight Tanks.
All tight tanks require permitting by the Board of Health
SECTION 2 - REQUIREMENTS FOR DESIGNING SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS
2.1 System Location.
A sewage disposal system shall be located on the same lot as the structure it serves
2. 2 Plan of Sewage Disposal System.
All plans must be stamped and signed by a Registered Professional Engineer,
Registered Sanitarian and/or Registered Land Surveyor when required. These stamps
and signatures shall serve as the certification that the plans and specifications
reasonably represent existing and proposed conditions and the plans and specifications
have been completed in accordance with local and state regulations
Plans and specifications will be accepted for review by the Board of Health only if the
plans include all the requirements of 310 CMR 15.220 as well as the following:
a. Lot or street number, street name and town atlas page and lot number
b. A locus plan from the town atlas
c. Names of abutters from recent tax map including lot and/or street
d. Name, address and telephone number of the designer
e. Date on which the plan is drawn and date of any revisions (list all revisions in title
box of plan)
f. Owner and applicant name and address
g. Existing and proposed topography and contours
h. Sufficient information to determine property boundaries and offsets
i. Location of all existing and proposed utilities including water, gas, electric, storm
drains, utility poles, irrigation systems, etc.
j. Physical site features such as ledge outcrops, stone walls, and large trees.
k. Location of all existing and proposed buildings, driveways and parking areas
l. Location of all wetland resources within 200 feet of sewage disposal system as
defined in 310CMR10.00.
m. Location elevation and results (soil description and perc. Tests) of all test holes
excavated, including those conducted beyond the perimeter of the proposed
system.
n. One or more bench mark with location and elevation
o. All existing and proposed wells within 200 feet of sewage disposal system
p. Any water supplies or tributaries within 400-feet of sewage disposal system,
together with a statement describing if the system is or is not located in a
nitrogen sensitive area.
q. Design flow calculation and system sizing
r. Final grading with sufficient detail to demonstrate proper surface drainage and
breakout requirements
s. Sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance of all components with Title 5
including septic tank, pump chamber, distribution box, leaching area, pumps and
electrical components, piping and all other system components.
t. All variances requested including both Title 5 and these regulations
u. Town of Weston electrical permit number if a pump is to be used in the system.
2.3 Hydrological Survey.
A hydrological survey to determine any impact on subsurface waters may be required
where the design flow for the subsurface sewage disposal system exceeds 2000
gallons/day or where sewage discharged to the system is non-residential, as would be
the case for research laboratories or light industry.
2.4 Garbage Grinders.
Garbage grinders are inherently destructive to soil absorption systems. Consequently,
the use of garbage grinders is discouraged. However, all residential sewage disposal
systems shall be designed for an increase of 150% over that required by title V. This
increase is to prolong the life of a septic system in the event that a garbage grinder is
used or installed in the future.
2.5 Distance Requirements.*
No part of the structural components of a leaching facility shall be located within 100
feet of a wetland as defined in M.G.L. chapter 131 section 40 (Wetland Protection Act).
A minimum distance of 100 feet shall exist between a well and a leaching facility.
No foundation wall or footing shall be located within 20 feet of a leaching facility or 10
feet of a septic tank. A minimum horizontal distance of 10 feet shall exist between all
subsurface sewage disposal components and any permanent building foundation or
footing except for a building sewer.
* In addition to this section the Weston Zoning Bylaws contain additional requirements
for the protection of floodplains and the provisions of the Weston Zoning Bylaws, the
Aquifer Protection Overlay District (pg. 21 Zoning Bylaw).
2.6 Distribution Boxes.
Distribution box access manholes shall not be more than twelve or less than six inches
below finished grade. All distribution boxes shall be capable of withstanding H-20
loading. All unused piping knockouts shall be filled with mortar.
2.7 Manholes.
All sewage disposal access manholes shall be no more than six inches beneath the
finished grade.
2.8 Leaching Trenches.
The ends of distribution pipes shall be capped or connected. A minimum depth of four
inches of clean sand shall be placed in the bottom of trenches to protect soil from
compaction during the placement of the stone, except when placed in natural sandy
soil.
2.9 Piping.
All piping shall be, at a minimum, schedule 40 PVC pipe. Pipe crossing areas subjected
to vehicular traffic shall be schedule 80 PVC pipe.
2.10 Leaching Aggregate.
There shall be a minimum of six inches of double washed stone beneath all distribution
pipes. Uncrushed gravel (natural stone) is the preferred type of aggregate. Soft
aggregate, such as shale, which brakes down or slakes over time or through limited
abrasion, shall be rejected. The Board of Health reserves the right to require any
aggregate stone to be tested, using a bucket test or grain size analysis to demonstrate
that the stone is free of fines.
2.11 Pump vents.
All systems utilizing a pump shall have filters on all vents so as to reduce potential
odors.
2.12 Use of Fill.
Systems in fill above the natural occurring grade shall not alter surface runoff patterns in
a manner so as to adversely affect any adjacent property. The design plan for any
above ground system shall include a cross sectional scaled drawing of the filled area.
No fill placed for an above ground system shall extend beyond the property boundary
without a slope easement recorded on the property deed.
A layer of low permeability soil must be placed over the side slopes of any elevated
system.
In any area of high ground water (<2 feet beneath the natural ground surface), that
requires the system to be placed above grade, the maximum allowable waste-water
loading per acre of land shall not exceed 660 gallons/day. The natural soil surfaces
must be scarified before placement of any fill material using a method acceptable to the
Board of Health. If a reserve area is designed to be placed on fill above the existing
grade the design plan shall show final slopes and extent of excavation in cross-section
and be drawn to scale.
2.13 Effluent Filters
Effluent filters shall be provided in the outlet tee of all septic tanks and grease traps.
2.14 Pressure Dosing
Pressure dosing systems shall meet the following minimum standards:
a. The minimum distal pressure head shall be 2.5 feet, with 3.0 to 4.0 feet
preferred.
b. Orifice spacing shall not exceed 36-inches.
c. Orifices shall generally be placed in the up, or 12-o’clock, position, with the
exception of those orifices necessary to drain the system, which shall be placed
in the down, or 6 o’clock position.
d. Orifices shall be shielded and shields supported.
e. The design shall include a means to pressure test the system both at start-up
and on an annual basis.
f. A duplex pump system shall be provided.
g. Stepped trenches shall not be allowed unless alternative pump cycles are
employed and all lines are at an equal elevation during each pump cycle.
h. The leaching facility shall be vented to the atmosphere.
i. All distribution lines shall be individually gated to allow for line isolation.
j. A pressure test of the system must be performed prior to use with all components
in place. The as-built plan of the system shall note the initial pressure head
achieved for each distribution line.
k. An operation and maintenance plan will be prepared and provided to the facility
owner and the Board of Health.
2.15 Vent Filters.
All vents shall have a charcoal filter.
SECTION 3 - SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
CONSTRUCTION
3.1 Protection of Excavations.
All excavations shall be protected with a substantial cover or fence when left unattended
so as not to be hazardous to people or animals. All excavations shall be immediately
backfilled to existing ground level after completion of inspection. The land owner or his
authorized agent is responsible for complying with this regulation. Failure to comply
with this regulation may result in a fine or loss of license.
3.1 Leaching Area Protection and Preparation during Construction.
The compaction of undisturbed soil by wheels of vehicles or the feet of workmen should
be avoided and care should be exercised to prevent the smearing of leaching surfaces
by trenching and excavating equipment. All leaching surfaces are to be hand raked.
Unprotected excavations that have been subjected to surface water runoff before
construction is complete, shall be judged damaged by silt and not acceptable for
construction in that condition. The bottom of leaching facilities shall be level.
3.2 Septic System Modifications for Vehicular Traffic.
When septic systems are constructed under areas subject to vehicular traffic, the septic
system shall be capable of withstanding the load from construction equipment (H-20
wheel loads). Machinery which may crush or disturb the alignment of pipe in the
disposal system shall not be allowed on any part of the disposal area while adding the
cover material. Venting will be required if the area is paved, designed for dosing, and
whenever located three or more feet below the ground surface.
3.3 Modification of Leaching Area when Constructing During Precipitation.
Work within a leaching area during periods of precipitation shall require the removal of a
minimum of four inches of soil beneath the required bottom elevation and placement of
clean sand to restore the required elevation.
3.4 As Built Drawing.
Prior to final approval of a new installation or repair of an existing system an as-built
drawing shall be submitted to the Board. The as-built shall be prepared by the design
engineer using the same scale as the approved plan.
SECTION 4 - INSPECTIONS
The following inspections are required, as a minimum:
a. All test pits, including soil descriptions, ground water determination and
percolation testing
b. The leaching area excavation prior to placement of any materials
c. Inspection of all system components prior to backfilling
SECTION 5.0 - MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
5.1 Sewage Disposal Systems with High Combined Flow (>2000 gallons/day).
The owner of or agent for a structure relying on a pressurized subsurface sewage
disposal system shall have pumps, alarms, and other equipment requiring periodic or
routine inspection and maintenance inspected and maintained in strict accordance with
DEP regulations and the manufacturer’s specifications.
5.2 Proof of Inspection.
The owner of, or agent for such structure (see 5.1) is required to give proof of inspection
and file a copy of the results of the inspection with the Board of Health.
5.3 Repair Requirement.
If the inspection shows improper functioning, the Board of Health shall be notified and
the property owner shall make all necessary repairs in accordance with existing
regulations
5.4 Use of Alternative Treatments.
The use of enzymes, degreasers, acids or other additives in any septic system is
prohibited without specific written authorization by the Board of Health.
5.5 Demolition and Removal.
If a building serviced by an individual sewage disposal system is demolished or
removed, the disposal system shall be removed or pumped and backfilled with granular
soil to eliminate the possibility of environmental damage or risk to persons or animals.
SECTION 6 - SUBDIVISIONS
6.1 Residential Subdivisions.
The residential subdivision plan shall provide for each lot in a subdivision sufficient
ground water and percolation test data to make possible a determination of the
suitability of the soils to accommodate a subsurface sewage disposal system sufficient
for a four bedroom house with a garbage disposal unit. The plan shall also include an
outline of the possible location of the sewage disposal systems.
6.2 Nonresidential Subdivision.
Nonresidential subdivision plans shall provide sufficient soil test data to make possible a
determination of the suitability of the soils to accommodate subsurface sewage disposal
systems.
6.3 Subdivision Water Supply.
Subdivision plans shall indicate the source of water supply for all buildings. Evidence of
inability to hook up to the municipal water system must be provided prior to review and
approval of individual private potable water supplies.
6.4 Proposed Subdivisions with Existing Buildings.
Any lot containing an existing building serviced by a subsurface sewage disposal
system may not be subdivided unless there is a reserve leaching area capable of
providing 100% replacement capacity for the building. The Board reserves the right to
require soil testing as proof of the reserve area suitability.
SECTION 7 - PROJECT REVIEW FEES: SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ACCOUNT
When reviewing an application for, or when conducting inspections in relation to a Title
V permit application, the Board may determine that the assistance of outside
consultants is warranted due to the size, scale, or complexity of a proposed project,
because of a projects potential impacts, or because the Town lacks the necessary
expertise to perform the work related to the permit. The Board may require that
applicants pay a "project review fee" consisting of the reasonable costs incurred by the
Board for the employment of outside consultants engaged by the Board to assist in the
review of a proposed project.
In hiring outside consultants, the Board may engage engineers, planners, lawyers,
urban designers or other appropriate professionals who can assist the Board in
analyzing a project to ensure compliance with all relevant laws, ordinances/bylaws and
regulations and current policies. Such assistance may include, but not be limited to
analyzing an application, monitoring or inspecting a project or site for compliance with
the Board's decision or regulations, or inspecting a project during construction or
implementation.
Funds received by the Board pursuant to this section shall be deposited with the
municipal treasurer who shall establish a special account for this purpose.
Expenditures from this special account may be made at the direction of the Board
without further appropriation. Expenditures from this special account shall be made
only for services rendered in connection with a specific project or projects for which a
project review fee has been or will be collected from the applicant. Accrued interest
may also be spent for this purpose. Failure of an applicant to pay a review fee shall be
grounds for denial of the permit.
At the completion of the Board's review of the project, any excess amount in the
account attributable to a specific project shall be repaid to the applicant or thee
applicants successor in interest. A final report of said account shall be made available
to the applicant.
Any applicant may take an administrative appeal from the selection of the outside
consultant to the Board of Selectmen. Such appeal must be made in writing and may
be taken only within 20 days after the Board of Health has mailed or hand delivered
notice to the applicant of the selection. The grounds for such an appeal shall be limited
to claims that the consultant selected has a conflict of interest, or does not possess the
minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications shall consist either of an
educational degree in, or related to, the field at issue, or three or more years of practice
in the field at issue or a related field. The required time limit for action upon an
application by the Board shall be extended by the duration of the administrative appeal.
In the event that no decision is made by the Board of Selectmen within one month
following the filing of such an appeal, the selection made by the Board of Health shall
stand.
Effective Date: December 17, 2001
Voted December 5, 2001
Board Members: Marie Tobin, Chair
Nick Guerina, Treasurer
Peter Taylor, Secretary