Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

SECTION 1-100
General Provisions
§ 1-101. How code designated and cited.
The ordinance embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Town of
Weymouth, Massachusetts" and may be so cited.
§ 1-102. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules
shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the Town
Council when enacting the measure:
Generally. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to effect
the purposes expressed therein or implied from what is expressed. Words
and phrases shall be construed and understood according to their common
and usual meaning unless the contrary is clearly indicated. Technical words
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood
according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning.
CHARTER — The Weymouth Home Rule Charter and any amendments to it
that may hereafter be adopted.
CHIEF EXECUTIVE — The Mayor of the Town of Weymouth, Massachusetts.
CODE — The Code of Ordinances, Town of Weymouth, Massachusetts as
designated in Section 1-101 of the Code.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — In computing the time within which an act is to
be done as provided in any ordinance or in any order issued pursuant to any
ordinance, when expressed in days, the day of the act or event after which
the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last
day of the period shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal
holiday, in which event the period shall be extended to the next day which
is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
COUNTY or THIS COUNTY — The County of Norfolk.
DAYS — When the period of time designated is less than seven days,
the word "days" shall refer to business days, not including intermediate
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays; when the period of time designated
is seven days or more, every day shall be counted.
EMERGENCY — A sudden, unexpected, unforeseen happening, occurrence,
event or condition which necessitates immediate action.
FISCAL YEAR — The financial year used by the Town, to wit: July 1 through
June 30.
FOLLOWING — Next after.
§ 1-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-102
1:3
GENDER — Words importing the feminine gender shall include the
masculine gender; words importing the masculine gender shall include the
feminine gender.
general laws — The words "general laws" (all lowercase letters) shall mean
laws enacted by the State Legislature which apply alike to all cities and
towns, to all cities, or to a class of two or more cities and/or cities and towns
of which Weymouth is a member.
General Laws — The words "General Laws" (initial letter of each word in
uppercase letters) shall mean the General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, a codification and revision of statutes enacted on December
22, 1920, and including all amendments thereto subsequently adopted.
HERETOFORE; HEREAFTER — Whenever the word "heretofore" occurs in
any ordinance it shall be construed to mean any time previous to the day
when such ordinance shall take effect; and whenever the word "hereafter"
occurs it shall be construed to mean the time after the ordinance containing
such word shall take effect.
HIGHWAY — Includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or
square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the
Town, dedicated or devoted to public use.
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more Town officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.
LOCAL NEWSPAPER — A newspaper of general circulation in the Town of
Weymouth, with either a weekly or daily circulation.
MAJORITY VOTE — A majority of those present and voting, provided that
a quorum of the body is present when the vote is taken, unless a higher
number is required by law, by Home Rule Charter or by ordinance.
MAY — The word "may" is to be construed as being permissive.
MAY NOT — The phrase "may not" or phrases of like import have a
mandatory negative effect and state a prohibition.
MGL — The Massachusetts General Laws.
MONTH — A calendar month.
MULTIPLE-MEMBER BODY — Any board, commission, committee,
subcommittee or other body consisting of two or more persons, whether
elected, appointed or otherwise constituted, but not including the Town
Council or the School Committee.
MUST — The word "must" shall be construed as being mandatory.
NUMBER — Words importing the singular number may extend and be
applied to several persons or things; words importing the plural number
may include the singular; words used in the singular include the plural and
the plural includes the singular number.
§ 1-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 1-102
1:4
OATH — The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed."
OWNER — The word "owner," applied to any property, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety,
of the whole or a part of such property.
PERSON — The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations,
corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as
to natural persons.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes all tangible and intangible property
other than real property.
PRECEDING — Next before.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
QUORUM — The word "quorum," unless otherwise required by law or the
Home Rule Charter, shall mean a majority of the members of a multiplemember
body then in office, not including any vacancies that might then
exist.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes all inherent natural resources and any manmade
improvements thereon.
REASONABLE TIME — In all cases where any ordinance shall require any
act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, such
reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean such time only as may
be necessary for the prompt performance of such duty, or compliance with
such notice.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular traffic.
SHALL — The word "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE or THIS STATE — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
STREET — Includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or
square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the
Town, dedicated or devoted to public use, and includes any way to which
the public has a right of access.
TENANT; OCCUPANT — The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a
building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part
of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TENSES — The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future
when applicable.
TOWN or THIS TOWN — The Town of Weymouth, Massachusetts.
§ 1-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-102
1:5
TOWN AGENCY — Any multiple-member body, any department, division, or
office of the Town of Weymouth.
TOWN BULLETIN BOARDS — The bulletin board in the Town Hall on
which the Town Clerk posts official notices of meetings and upon which
other official Town notices are posted, and the bulletin boards at any other
locations as may be designated Town bulletin boards by the Town Council.
TOWN OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS — Whenever reference is made to
an officer or a department, the same shall be construed as if followed by
the words "of the Town of Weymouth, Massachusetts." The words "Town
officers," when used without further qualification or description, shall mean
a person having charge of an office or department of the Town who, in the
exercise of the powers or duties of such position, exercises some portion of
the sovereign power of the Town.
WEEK — The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days; but
publication in a newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be
for a stated number of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in
each week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for
more than one day in each week; and all publications heretofore made in
accordance with the terms of this subsection are hereby validated.
WRITTEN or IN WRITING — Include any representation of words, letters or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 1-103. Applicability.
The rules of construction set forth in this ordinance shall not be applied
to any ordinance which shall contain any express provision excluding such
construction, or when the subject matter or context of such ordinance may
be repugnant thereto.
§ 1-104. References to titles, chapters, or sections.
All references to titles, chapters, or sections are to the titles, chapters and
sections of these ordinances unless otherwise specified.
§ 1-105. Conflicting provisions.
If the provisions of different chapters of these ordinances conflict with
or contravene each other, the provisions of each chapter shall prevail as
to all matters and questions growing out of the subject matter of such
chapter.
(a)
If conflicting provisions are found in different sections of the same
chapter, the provisions of the section which is last in numerical order
shall prevail.
(b)
§ 1-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 1-105
1:6
§ 1-106. When ordinances and other votes take effect.
All ordinances and other votes passed by the Town Council which are
excluded from the referendum provisions of the Home Rule Charter
(Section 7-9) shall take effect and be in force from and after their passage
by the Town Council and the approval of the Mayor, if required. All
ordinances and other votes passed by the Town Council which are subject
to the referendum provisions of the Town Charter shall take effect and be
in force from and after the 22nd day following their passage by the Town
Council and the approval of the Mayor, if required, unless a referendum
petition has been filed against said measure, in which case the effective date
shall be further suspended pending a resolution of the referendum question.
§ 1-107. Code adoption not to affect prior offenses and rights.
§ 1-108. Effect of repeal of ordinance.
§ 1-109. Violations and penalties: municipal infractions.
To the extent that any provision of this Code expressed in general terms
shall conflict with any provision expressed in specific terms, the specific
provision shall prevail.
(c)
In all cases in which provisions of this Code conflict with one another,
the provision enacted most recently in time shall be deemed to prevail
over any older provision.
(d)
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect
any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the
effective date of this Code.
(a)
The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing any
use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation
of any ordinance or ordinances of the Town in effect on the date of
adoption of this Code, except as otherwise provided.
(b)
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance (or bylaw) in
force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect.
(a)
The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty
incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed
under the ordinance repealed.
(b)
Any ordinance of the Town of Weymouth or any rule or regulation of its
officers, boards or departments, the violation of which is subject to a
specific penalty, may, in the discretion of the Town official who is the
appropriate enforcing person, be enforced in the method provided in
MGL c. 40, § 21D. The noncriminal fine for each such violation, if not
otherwise specified, shall be $50.
(a)
§ 1-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-109
1:7
§ 1-110. Violations and penalties: criminal complaint.
Any ordinance of the Town of Weymouth or any rule or regulation of its
officers, boards or departments may, in accordance with the provisions of
MGL c. 40, § 21, also be enforced by criminal complaint in the District
Court. Except as otherwise provided by law, any person found guilty of
violating any provision of this Code in a criminal proceeding in the District
Court shall be subject to a fine within the limits otherwise prescribed by
law. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate and repeat
violation once notice of the violation has been given.
§ 1-111. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Town Council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code are
severable, and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining words,
clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, because the same
would have been enacted by the Town Council without the incorporation
in this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid word, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.
"Enforcing person," as used in this section, shall mean any police officer
of the Town of Weymouth, with respect to any offense, the Inspector
of Buildings, a person designated by the Conservation Commission, the
Director of Public Health, the Director of Public Works, the Animal
Control Officer and such other officials as the Mayor may from time to
time designate, each with respect to violation of ordinances and rules
and regulations within their respective jurisdictions. Each such person
as is here designated an "enforcing person" may, with the approval
of the Mayor, appoint a deputy enforcing person to serve in his or
her absence or disability. The names of each enforcing person and
of each deputy enforcing person shall be kept on file in the office
of the Mayor and at the Weymouth Police Station. If more than one
official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such official may be an
enforcing person with respect thereto. Police officers shall in all cases
be considered enforcing persons for the purpose of this provision.
(b)
Unless otherwise provided, each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and repeat violation once notice of the violation
has been given.
(c)
§ 1-109 WEYMOUTH CODE § 1-111
1:8
Chapter 2
ELECTIONS; ELECTED TOWN OFFICERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Offices, officials and multiple-member
bodies — See Ch. 3.
Administrative organization — See Ch. 4.
Human resources — See Ch. 10.
§ 1-111 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-111
1:9

SECTION 2-100
Elections
§ 2-101. Officers to be elected.
The offices to be filled by the voters shall be a Mayor, a Town Council and a
School Committee.
§ 2-102. Eligibility for elective office.
Subject to the provisions of Charter Sections 2-1, 2-3, 3-1, 4-1 and 4-3, any
voter shall be eligible to hold any elective Town office.
§ 2-103. Date of Town election.
The biennial election for the election of Town officers and for the
determination of all other matters to be referred to voters shall be held on
the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in each odd-numbered
year.
§ 2-104. Hours polls are to be open.
The polls shall be opened for all elections at 7:00 a.m. in the morning and
shall remain open until 8:00 p.m. in the evening.
§ 2-105. Terms of office.
The term of office for all members of the Town Council shall be for two
years beginning on the first business day in January following the election
and continuing until their successors are qualified. The term of office of the
Mayor shall be for four years beginning on the first business day in January
following the election and continuing until his or her successor is qualified.
The term of office for the School Committee members shall be for four years
each beginning on the first business day of January in the year following
their election, and until their successors have been qualified. The terms of
office shall be so arranged that three such terms are to be filled at each
biennial election.
§ 2-106. Annual reports.
All department heads and division directors of the Town of Weymouth shall
prepare annual reports of their activities and shall submit these reports to
the Mayor for inclusion in the annual report of the Town, on or before such
date as the Mayor may annually establish for the filing of such reports.
§ 2-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-106
1:11

SECTION 2-200
Mayor
§ 2-201. Powers in general; salary.
The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive and Chief Administrative Officer of
the Town of Weymouth and shall have all of the power and authority that is
conferred upon the Mayor by the Weymouth Home Rule Charter.
The Mayor shall be considered to be the lawful successor to the Board of
Selectmen and shall have every power, duty, authority and responsibility
which was previously exercised by the Board of Selectmen, unless some
other provision is made in the Weymouth Home Rule Charter or this Code.
The Mayor shall receive an annual salary of $110,000.
§ 2-202. Control of activities not otherwise delegated.
§ 2-203. Authority over legal affairs.
The Mayor, after consultation with the Town Solicitor, may bring on behalf
of the Town any proceedings before any court, legislative committee,
administrative agency or other public official or agency and may answer
and defend any such proceedings brought against the Town and may cause
the Town Solicitor to appear on behalf of the Town in any such proceedings
instituted by others in which the Town has an interest. The Mayor, after
consultation with the Town Solicitor, may prosecute such suits to final
judgment, or may compromise any claims by and against the Town on such
terms as seem to the Mayor and Town Solicitor to be in the best interests of
the Town, whether or not such claims are in litigation.
The Mayor shall have authority in the name of the Town and through the
Town Solicitor to prosecute, defend or compromise any and all claims or
suits to which the Town is a party and in relation to claims and suits
whenever in the judgment of the Mayor it is reasonably necessary, except
actions otherwise provided for by statute or by ordinance.
The Mayor shall have control of all Town property which is not actually
occupied by a Town official, department or activity and shall enforce the
conditions and covenants of any lease or tenancy thereof.
(a)
In addition to such other powers and duties as are conferred upon the
office by Home Rule Charter, by these ordinances, by custom or by any
other vote of the Town, the Mayor shall have power to do any acts on
behalf of the Town which are not by law, these ordinances or some vote
of the Town delegated to some other board, committee or official, or
reserved to the voters of the Town.
(b)
The Mayor shall appoint all Town officers whose election by the voters
or appointment by some other Town board or official is not required by
law or by these ordinances.
(c)
§ 2-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-204
1:13
§ 2-204. Authority to settle worker's compensation matters.
All payments by the Town for worker's compensation shall, on the approval
of the Mayor, be charged to the Workmen's Compensation Claims Fund, or
the damages and claims account as shall in each such case be deemed to be
most appropriate.
§ 2-205. Authority to accept deeds and to be in charge of property.
The Mayor shall be authorized to accept deeds conveying an interest in
real estate to the Town. The Mayor shall notify the Town Council whenever
such acceptance occurs. All land owned by the Town which is not by vote
of the Town specifically assigned to some particular Town agency shall
be deemed to be under the authority of the Mayor. The Mayor shall have
general direction or management of the property and affairs of the Town in
all matters not otherwise provided for unless otherwise provided by law.
§ 2-206. Authority to manage Town property and affairs.
The Mayor shall have authority to sell or otherwise dispose of personal
property and any real estate of which the Town has possession or title by
following the procedures established in MGL c. 30B.
Whenever a Town agency to which any land, easement, or other right or
interest in land has been assigned determines that the land, easement, or
other right or interest in land is no longer required by the agency, it shall
notify the Mayor forthwith of such determination and shall identify, with
specificity, the land, easement, or other right or interest in land which it has
deemed to be no longer needed by the Town agency.
The Mayor, upon receipt of any such determination, shall forthwith refer the
matter to the Department of Planning and Community Development for a
report and recommendation. The Department of Planning and Community
Development shall, after study and analysis, file a report with the Mayor
containing its recommendations and the reasons for such
recommendations.
Whenever any owned land, easement, or other right or interest in land is
to be sold, the Mayor shall file a request to authorize such sale with the
Town Council. The Town Council may, by a two-thirds vote, authorize the
conveyance of such land, or a portion thereof, or the abandonment of an
easement or other right or interest in the land. The Town Council may
specify a minimum sum to be paid to the Town for such conveyance or
abandonment.
The Mayor shall advertise and otherwise give notice of the offer to convey or
abandon the land, easement, or other right or interest in land in accordance
with the provisions of MGL c. 30B and any other provisions of law as may be
applicable. If the Town Council has specified a minimum amount, the Mayor
may, for such amount or any larger amount and on such other terms and
conditions as the Mayor may deem to be proper, convey said land, or part
§ 2-204 WEYMOUTH CODE § 2-206
1:14
thereof, by deed, or declare such easement, or right, or other interest, or
part thereof, be abandoned.
§ 2-207. Policy formulation for departments.
The Mayor, acting through the department heads, shall be responsible for
the overall supervision of the departments of the Town government and for
the establishment of priorities and policies to govern the operation of the
Town departments and agencies.
§ 2-208. Chief of Staff.
Appointment; term. The Chief of Staff may be appointed by the Mayor
and shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
(a)
Duties and functions. The Chief of Staff shall in every matter be deemed
to be acting in the place of and for the Mayor, unless it is specifically
stated otherwise.
The Chief of Staff, acting only on the direction of the Mayor, shall have
the following duties:
1. Represent the Mayor as liaison with the Town Council;
Represent the Mayor at meetings of regional, state and federal
agencies, community groups, business interests and local trade and
fraternal organizations, for purposes of gathering information and/
or articulating the Mayor's point of view;
2.
Organize and summarize information and prepare it for the
Mayor's review and action;
3.
Meet with department heads regarding day-to-day business,
expediting administrative interaction between the Mayor's office
and Town departments and agencies;
4.
Serve as a liaison officer between the Town government and the
Town's residents;
5.
Be familiar with all aspects of the Town government and with the
functions of the activities of the various offices and employees of
the Town;
6.
Be familiar with the various services rendered by the Town to its
residents, in order to inform citizens of the extent of these services
and of the schedule for their performance;
7.
Complete specified research assignments with close contact to
the Massachusetts Municipal Association, the National League of
Cities, the U.S. Conference of Mayors and similar organizations,
comparing the Town's problems with problems and solutions of
other communities in the state and the nation;
8.
(b)
§ 2-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-208
1:15
§ 2-209. Acting Mayor.
§ 2-210. Other assistants to Mayor.
The Mayor may appoint such other assistants as the needs of the office may
require and as the appropriation made for such purposes may allow.
Every employee in the office of the Mayor shall be considered to be a
confidential employee and shall not be subject to the ordinary provisions of
the civil service law or the human resources provisions of these ordinances.
Meet with the Mayor, boards and commissions in normal business
meetings to explain proposals or identify means to expedite action;
9.
Work with the Clerk of the Council and the President of the Council
in preparing orders and backup material for executive department
initiatives and with committees to expedite support for committee
deliberations;
10.
Serve as spokesperson for the Mayor in responding to inquiries
made concerning operations conducted by or affecting the Town of
Weymouth;
11.
Perform other services so as to support the Mayor's role as Chief
Executive of Weymouth.
12.
Temporary absence. Whenever, by reason of sickness, absence from the
Town or other cause, the Mayor shall be unable to perform the duties
of the office for a period of more than 10 successive working days, the
President of the Town Council shall be the Acting Mayor. In the event of
the absence or disability of the President of the Town Council, the Vice
President of the Town Council shall serve as Acting Mayor.
The Mayor shall, by a letter filed with the Town Council and a copy
filed with the Town Clerk, designate a qualified Town officer or Town
employee to serve as Acting Mayor during the temporary absence of the
Mayor for periods of 10 days or less and to serve only when the needs
of the Town require and only to the extent necessary under the then
circumstances.
(a)
Powers of Acting Mayor. The Acting Mayor shall have only those powers
of the Mayor as are indispensably essential to the conduct of the
business of the Town in an orderly and efficient manner and on which
action may not be delayed. The Acting Mayor shall have no authority to
make any permanent appointment or removal from Town service unless
the disability of the Mayor shall extend beyond 60 days nor shall an
Acting Mayor approve or disapprove of any measure adopted by the
Town Council unless the time within which the Mayor must act would
expire before the return of the Mayor. During any period in which any
member of the Town Council is serving as Acting Mayor, such Councilor
shall not vote as a member of the Town Council.
(b)
§ 2-208 WEYMOUTH CODE § 2-211
1:16
§ 2-211. Authority to suspend or remove certain persons.
Whenever the Mayor desires to suspend or to remove any person from an
office or position appointed by the Mayor, such removal shall be governed,
insofar as appropriate, by the provisions of Section 3-4 of the Home Rule
Charter and Chapter 10 of these ordinances governing human resources
matters.
§ 2-211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-211
1:17

SECTION 2-300
Town Council
§ 2-301. Powers in general; salary.
Powers. The legislative powers of the Town are vested in the Town
Council. The Town Council shall exercise its legislative powers in the
manner determined by the Town Council, unless some other provision
is made by a general law or by the Home Rule Charter.
The Town Council shall provide for the exercise of any power and for
the performance of any duty or obligation which is imposed upon the
Town by law and for which no provision is made by a general law, or by
the Home Rule Charter.
The Town Council may adopt ordinances which originate with the
Mayor on any subject relating to the affairs of the Town. The Town
Council may adopt ordinances which originate with it, or are filed on
petition of voters as provided in Section 7-7 of the Home Rule Charter,
on any subject relating to the affairs of the Town except as provided in
Section 5-1 of the Home Rule Charter. All ordinances adopted by the
Town Council shall be presented to the Mayor as provided in Section
3-7 of the Home Rule Charter.
In accordance with the provisions of Sections 2-10 and 3-3 of the Home
Rule Charter, the Town Council shall review every appointment made
by the Mayor to any Town office, as a department head, or as a member
of a multiple-member body, but not including any position which is
subject to the civil service law. The Council may, by a two-thirds vote
of the full Town Council (eight members so voting), reject any such
appointment. A vote to reject must be taken within 30 days following
the date on which notice of the proposed appointment was filed with
the Clerk of the Council.
The Town Council may approve, in whole or in part, or disapprove by
rejecting, any appropriation order filed by the Mayor. The Town Council
may approve, in whole or in part, or disapprove by rejecting, any loan
authorization request filed by the Mayor.
The Town Council may adopt resolutions honoring distinguished
persons or events, requesting the Mayor to take certain action or to
cease certain actions currently being taken, to request certain other
levels of government to take certain action or to cease certain actions
currently being taken, or for any other purpose as seems worthy of the
attention of the Town Council. Resolutions adopted by the Town Council
shall not require the consent of the Mayor.
The Town Council may take such other actions, by vote or otherwise, as
may from time to time seem to be in the best interests of the Town.
In accordance with Section 2-7 of the Home Rule Charter, the Town
Council, when authorized by a majority vote, may make investigations
(a)
§ 2-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-301
1:19
§ 2-302. Meetings.
All meetings of the Town Council and of every committee or subcommittee
of the Town Council are subject to the so-called Open Meeting Law.1 All
matters which come before the Town Council will be decided by a majority
vote unless some other provision is made by general law, ordinance or the
Home Rule Charter.
A journal shall be kept in which shall be recorded, for every meeting, the
names of the Council members present, the subject acted upon, and the
votes and other official actions taken by the Town Council at each such
meeting.
Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council Chambers
the first and third Monday evenings of each month, commencing at 7:30
p.m. and shall adjourn no later than 11:00 p.m. The Clerk of the Council
shall notify the Councilors of all meetings of the Council by notice delivered
personally or by an officer or sent by mail. Whenever the first or third
Monday evening of the month is a holiday, the regular meeting shall be
held on the first or third Tuesday evening of the month at 7:30 p.m. unless
otherwise provided for by motion. During July and August, regular meetings
shall be suspended by a majority vote of the Council. The Council may, by
majority vote, dispense with any regular meeting, or change the day and
hour of holding or adjournment of any regular meeting. No Town Council
meeting shall be scheduled on the eve of a preliminary or final election in
into the affairs of the Town and into the conduct and performance of any
Town agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer
oaths and require the production of evidence. The Town Council may
require the Mayor, any Town officers, agencies or Town employees to
appear before it and to produce such information as the Town Council
may require in relation to the municipal services, functions, powers, or
duties which are within the scope of responsibility of such person or
agency and which are also within the jurisdiction of the Town Council.
Composition. The Town Council is comprised of 11 members. Five of the
members, known as "Councilors-at-Large," are nominated and elected
by and from the voters at large. The six remaining members, known as
"District Councilors," are nominated and elected from the six districts
into which the Town is divided, in accordance with Section 7-5 of the
Home Rule Charter.
(b)
Compensation. The Town Council shall receive an annual salary as
follows:
Councilors $7,500
Chair Budget/Management $8,500
Council President $9,500
(c)
1. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 to 25.
§ 2-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 2-302
1:20
the Town of Weymouth. These meetings will be held on the first Monday
following said election.
Executive session may be entered only after the Council has first convened
in open session for which notice has been appropriately posted. The
President shall cite the reason for going into executive session and indicate
whether the Council shall leave executive session for the purpose of
adjournment or return to open session. The President shall ask for a roll call
vote of the Council. The vote of each member is entered into the minutes,
with a majority necessary to initiate executive session.
§ 2-303. Town Auditor.
Election; term of office. The Council shall choose a Town Auditor to
serve for a term of three years and until a successor is chosen and
qualified.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Town Auditor shall from time to time
throughout the year examine, or cause to be examined, the books and
accounts of all officers and agencies of the Town which are entrusted
with the receipt, custody or expenditure of money, including original
bills on which money has been or may be paid from the Town treasury,
the documentation submitted by the agency requesting payment of any
such bills supporting payment, warrants for the payment of bills and the
canceled checks on file in the office of the Treasurer. The Town Auditor
shall, at least once in every fiscal year, verify, or cause to be verified,
the cash balance of each such officer and agency by the actual count of
the cash on hand and by reconciliation of bank balances.
The Town Auditor shall keep the Town Council President fully informed
as to the results of this activity and, not less frequently than quarterly,
shall make a detailed report summarizing the results of this overview
to the Budget/Management Committee of the Town Council. All reports
to the full Council shall be made through the Budget/Management
Committee of the Town Council.
The Town Auditor shall conduct, or cause to be conducted, financial
and performance audits following government auditing standards as
promulgated by the Comptroller General of the United States.
The Town Auditor shall make periodic reports to the Town Council
in such detail and with such frequency as the Town Council shall, by
ordinance, by rule or by other vote, direct.
The Town Auditor shall review each request which is made to the Town
Council by the Mayor for the transfer of funds or for a supplementary
appropriation.
When the proposed Capital Improvement Program is submitted to the
Town Council by the Mayor, as required by Home Rule Charter Section
6-10, the Town Auditor shall review the proposed Capital Improvement
Program.
(b)
§ 2-302 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-303
1:21
§ 2-304. Town Clerk.
The Town Auditor shall review the annual budget when the same is
submitted to the Town Council by the Mayor, as required by Home Rule
Charter Section 6-5.
The Town Auditor shall manage the day-to-day operations of the office
staff under the jurisdiction of the Town Council, except for the staff
managed by the Town Clerk.
The Town Auditor shall attend all meetings of the Town Council unless
excused by the President of the Town Council. The Town Auditor shall
attend all meetings of the Town Council Budget/Management
Committee unless excused by the Chair of such Committee. The Town
Auditor shall attend other meetings of committees as requested by the
President of the Town Council.
Salary. The salary of the Town Auditor shall be incorporated into the
Town's classification system. The Town Auditor shall receive as
additional compensation the same sick days, holidays, vacation days,
personal days and other benefits as are afforded to other municipal
employees generally.
(c)
Election; term of office. The Town Council shall elect a Town Clerk to
serve for a term of three years and until a successor is chosen and
qualified.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Town Clerk shall be the head of the agency
known as the "Office of the Town Clerk." The Town Clerk may also serve
as the Clerk of the Council for a term of two years and until a successor
is chosen and qualified.
The office of the Town Clerk is the primary agency responsible for
serving the public through the provision of public records, vital
statistics and general information, taking great care in preserving
and maintaining official records of the Town and making them
readily accessible to the public.
1.
The Office of the Town Clerk is the keeper of vital statistics of the
Town and of ancient and public records.
2.
The Town Clerk records and preserves original birth, marriage and
death records, and is responsible for the maintenance, disposition
and preservation of municipal archival records.
3.
The Town Clerk is the custodian of the Town Seal and the official
records of the Town.
4.
The Town Clerk administers the oath of office to elected and
appointed officers, notifies the Office of the Mayor whenever the
resignation of any official appointed by the Mayor is received, and
5.
(b)
§ 2-303 WEYMOUTH CODE § 2-304
1:22
§ 2-305. Publication of ordinances.
Every proposed ordinance, appropriation order or loan authorization
[except emergency ordinances as provided in Section 2-9(a) of the Home
furnishes copies of the open meetings and conflicts of interest laws
to elected and appointed officers.
The Town Clerk, as Chair of the Board of Registrars of Voters,
supervises the registration of voters and the maintenance of street
lists and lists of voters.
6.
The Town Clerk supervises the conduct of all elections held in the
Town.
7.
The Town Clerk serves as Chief Election Officer for all elections,
prepares ballots, voting lists for all precincts (currently 18 voting
precincts), hires and trains wardens and precinct workers for the
polls and is responsible for the extra workers for morning
deliveries of election materials to the polls and for extra workers
for election nights.
8.
The Town Clerk serves as Chair of the Municipal Board of Licensing
Commissioners.
9.
The Town Clerk posts meeting notices for agencies and
departments of the Town and other governmental bodies and
notifies the Town Council of such meetings.
10.
The Town Clerk is the custodian of books, reports, and laws
received from the commonwealth, and custodian of the rules,
regulations and minutes of multiple-member bodies.
11.
Pursuant to MGL c. 40A, the Zoning Act, the Town Clerk receives
copies of applications and petitions to the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Appeals.
12.
The Town Clerk keeps the legislative record of the Town Council,
and notifies the Director of Municipal Finance of the Town Council
votes authorizing appropriations and assessments.
13.
The Town Clerk issues such licenses, certificates and permits as
may be provided by law, including those for marriage, birth, death,
raffles, bazaars, businesses, and dogs.
14.
The Town Clerk records state and federal tax liens, and Uniform
Commercial Code filings.
15.
Salary. The salary of the Town Clerk shall be incorporated into the
Town's classification system. The Town Clerk shall receive as additional
compensation the same sick days, holidays, vacation days, personal
days and other benefits as are afforded to other municipal employees
generally.
(c)
§ 2-304 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-305
1:23
Rule Charter] shall be published once in full in a local newspaper, and in
any additional manner as may be provided by ordinance, at least 10 days
before its final passage. After final passage it shall be posted on the Town
bulletin board and otherwise published as may be required by ordinance;
provided, however, that whenever a proposed ordinance or codification of
ordinances or other measure would exceed in length more than 10 column
inches of ordinary newspaper notice print, then in lieu of publication in
a local newspaper, the same may be published and made available at the
office of the Town Clerk in booklet or pamphlet form, and if so published and
available at least 10 days before its final passage shall be deemed sufficient
notice. Whenever the Town Council provides for publication in a booklet
or pamphlet in lieu of the newspaper publication, it shall, at least 10 days
before final passage, publish in a local newspaper a general summary of
the proposed ordinance, or ordinances, and a notice stating the times and
places at which copies of the booklet or pamphlet may be obtained by the
public.
Every publication of a proposed ordinance, appropriation order or loan
authorization shall bear this disclaimer: "This publication is subject to the
disclaimer set forth at length in Section 2-305 of the Code of Ordinances."
Each time the statement "This publication is subject to the disclaimer set
forth at length in Section 2-305 of the Code of Ordinances" appears in a
publication, it shall be understood such reference is intended to give notice
to the public that the following disclaimer is applicable:
§ 2-305 WEYMOUTH CODE § 2-305
1:24
This
document
is
published
for
the
benefit
of
the
public,
solely
for
purposes
of
information
and
to
make
the
public
aware
of
the
general
nature
of
certain
subject
matter
the
Town
Council
may
consider
at
a
future
meeting.
This
publication
is
not
intended
to
suggest
that
the
measure
will
§ 2-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-305
1:25
be
adopted
in
this
precise
form,
that
it
will
be
adopted
with
amendments,
or
that
it
will
be
adopted
at
all.
Notwithstanding
any
amendments
which
may
be
made
to
this
proposal
by
the
Town
Council,
it
will
not
be
published
again
before
final
enactment
unless
at
least
three
Councilors
§ 2-305 WEYMOUTH CODE § 2-305
1:26
vote
to
require
such
publication
before
final
enactment.
§ 2-305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-305
1:27

SECTION 2-400
School Committee
§ 2-401. Powers in general; salary.
The School Committee shall have all powers which are conferred on School
Committees by general laws and such additional powers and duties as may
be provided by the Home Rule Charter, by ordinance, or otherwise and not
inconsistent with said grant of powers conferred by general laws.
The powers and duties of the School Committee shall include the following:
To elect a Superintendent of the Schools, who shall be charged with the
day-to-day administration of the school system, subject only to policy
guidelines and directives adopted by the School Committee and, upon
the recommendation of said Superintendent, to establish and appoint
Assistant or Associate Superintendents as provided in MGL c. 71, § 59.
1.
To make all reasonable rules and regulations for the management of
the public school system and for conducting the business of the School
Committee as may be deemed necessary or desirable.
2.
To adopt and to oversee the administration of an annual operating
budget for the School Department, subject to appropriation by the
Town Council.
3.
The Weymouth School Committee shall receive an annual salary as
follows:
School Committee members $3,000
Chair of the School
Committee
$4,000
The School Committee shall have general charge and superintendence
of all school buildings and grounds and shall furnish all school
buildings with proper fixtures, furniture and equipment.
4.
§ 2-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 2-401
1:29
Chapter 3
OFFICES, OFFICIALS AND MULTIPLE-MEMBER BODIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative organization — See Ch. 4.
§ 2-401 WEYMOUTH CODE § 2-401
1:30
SECTION 3-100
Standard Provisions
§ 3-101. Officers, other officials and multiple-member bodies.
Town officers and other officials. This chapter (Chapter 3) describes
all current standing Town officers and other officials of the Town. The
Weymouth Town Council may establish additional standing officers and
other officials of the Town, upon the request of the Mayor, by the
enactment of an ordinance amending this chapter and creating said
offices or other positions. All ordinances establishing standing offices
and other positions shall specify their authorities and responsibilities.
(a)
Standing multiple-member bodies. This chapter (Chapter 3) describes
all current standing multiple-member bodies of the Town. The
Weymouth Town Council may establish additional standing multiplemember
bodies of the Town, upon the request of the Mayor, by the
enactment of an ordinance amending this chapter and creating said
standing multiple-member body. All ordinances establishing standing
multiple-member bodies shall specify the following: membership, term
of office, authorities and responsibilities.
The Town Council may from time to time, by vote, establish advisory
multiple-member bodies to assist it in carrying out its legislative
responsibilities. Whenever the Town Council establishes such a
committee, it shall advise the Mayor in writing that it has done so;
included in such notice shall be the names and residence addresses
of the persons appointed. The Mayor may from time to time establish
advisory multiple-member bodies to assist the Office of the Mayor in
carrying out its executive and administrative responsibilities. Whenever
the Mayor establishes such a committee, the Office of the Mayor shall
advise the Town Council in writing that it has done so; included in
such notice shall be the names and residence addresses of the persons
appointed for such action as the Town Council deems necessary or
advisable in accordance with Home Rule Charter Section 2-10.
(b)
Town residency required. Unless some other provision is made in a
particular case, all members of multiple-members bodies shall at all
times be residents of the Town of Weymouth; provided, however,
nonresidents who hold a Town office or Town employment may serve as
a member of a multiple-member body as a representative of the Town
office or Town employment held. Any person who, during the term of
office as a member of a multiple-member body, moves from the Town
and becomes a resident of another municipality shall be deemed to have
resigned as a member of the multiple-member body.
(c)
To have no power to direct agency. Unless some other provision is made
in a particular case, no multiple-member body shall have any power
or authority over any of the day-to-day activities of the agency within
which it serves but shall be advisory only.
(d)
§ 3-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-101
1:31
§ 3-102. Terms of office.
§ 3-103. Council review of certain appointments.
The Mayor shall submit to the Town Council the name of each person the
Mayor desires to appoint to a Town office, as a department head, or as a
member of a multiple-member body, but not including any position which
is subject to the Civil Service Law. The Town Council shall refer each such
name as is submitted to a standing committee of the Town Council, which
shall investigate each such candidate for appointment and may make a
report, with recommendations, to the full Town Council. Said report shall
be made not less than seven days nor more than 21 days following such
referral. The committee may require any person whose name has been
referred to appear before the committee, or before the Town Council, to
give such information relevant to such appointment as the committee, or
the Town Council, may require.
Appointments made by the Mayor shall become effective on the 30th day
following the date on which notice of the proposed appointment was filed
with the Clerk of the Council, unless eight members of the Town Council
shall, within said 30 days, vote to reject such appointment, or unless the
Town Council has sooner voted to affirm the appointment. Rejection by
the Town Council shall require a two-thirds vote of the full Council (eight
Compensation. Unless some other provision is made in a particular
case, all members of multiple-member bodies shall serve without
compensation.
(e)
Multiple-member bodies. The terms of office of multiple-member bodies
are arranged so that as nearly 1/3 of the terms as possible shall expire
each year. A vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority for the
remainder of the unexpired term. The term for each office is three
years, except as noted. Appointments are effective on the first day of
July, and expire on the 30th day of June, or when a successor has
been appointed and qualified. The appointing authority shall annually
evaluate all persons subject to reappointment. Persons may be
reappointed to successive terms, but no member shall have a right to
be reappointed. Members of multiple-member bodies may be removed
for cause, subject to an investigation and hearing by the appointing
authority, pursuant to the Home Rule Charter Section 3-4. Whenever a
new multiple-member body is established, the initial appointments shall
be to terms of office of such varying lengths as will serve to create the
overlapping terms described in the first sentence of this subsection.
(a)
Town officers and officials. Except as may otherwise be required by
the Civil Service Law, appointments made by the Mayor shall be for
indefinite terms. All persons categorized as department heads shall,
subject to the consent of the Mayor, appoint all assistants, subordinates
and other employees of the agency for which such person is
responsible.
(b)
§ 3-101 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-103
1:32
members so voting). The question on rejection of any appointment made
by the Mayor shall not be subject to the procedure of Charter objection
provided in Home Rule Charter Section 2-9(b).
Persons who are appointed to serve as members of a multiple-member body
by virtue of a Town office or Town employment, which they have otherwise
acquired or attained, shall not be subject to Council review as provided in
this section.
§ 3-104. Multiple-member body internal organization.
Each multiple-member body shall, at a minimum, annually elect from its
membership, a Chair, Vice Chair and Clerk. Multiple-member bodies may
further elect a Treasurer and such other officer or officers as are deemed
necessary or as may be required by statute. The annual organization and
election shall occur in July of each year, or immediately following the
annual appointment of members by the appointing authority. Each multiplemember
body shall, forthwith following its annual organization and election
of officers, file a report in the office of the Town Clerk on a form approved
by the Town Clerk.
The Chair shall preside over all meetings of the multiple-member body
and shall be its official representative in all proceedings before the Town
Council, with the Mayor, with other officials of the Town and with the public.
The Vice Chair shall perform the Chair's functions, in the absence of the
Chair.
The Clerk shall be responsible for the certification of the minutes of the
meetings of the multiple-member body, observance of the public records
law, and maintenance of other records of the multiple-member body. In
addition to the records required to be kept by MGL c. 66, § 5A, the Clerk
shall, quarterly, prepare a statistical summary of the attendance record of
each member of the multiple-member body, a copy of which shall be filed
with the Town Clerk and a copy of which shall be filed with the Mayor.
§ 3-105. Time and place of meetings.
The Clerk of each multiple-member body shall be responsible for notifying
the Town Clerk and the Mayor of the regularly scheduled meetings and
all special meetings for the ensuing fiscal year. The notification shall also
include the location where each meeting will be held. The Town Clerk shall
ensure posting of all meeting schedules, consistent with the Open Meeting
Law.2
§ 3-106. Authority to establish subcommittees.
Each multiple-member body may, by a majority vote of its membership,
establish subcommittees for the purpose of addressing a particular issue or
issues. A report of the activities of any such subcommittee shall regularly be
2. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
§ 3-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-106
1:33
made to the full multiple-member body. Each subcommittee so established
shall observe laws relevant to the keeping of public records, the Open
Meeting Law, and any other laws as prescribed by the Weymouth Town
Charter, by ordinance or by state law.
§ 3-107. Meetings with Mayor.
The delivery of services to the public requires coordination and cooperation
amongst the various departments, divisions and programs within the Town.
At the administrative and operational branch level, managers shall seek
to identify those areas of concern where it is believed that the various
departments and divisions can assist each other in the accomplishment of
their mission.
The Mayor shall strive to meet, as necessary, with each of the officers
and employees listed in this chapter to discuss their activities, seeking
coordination of activities to mitigate duplication of services where possible.
The Mayor, in meetings with the officers and employees, shall develop
action programs, evaluate program completion, review management,
financial, personnel and legal issues.
The chair of each multiple-member body shall annually, upon election,
meet with the Mayor for the purpose of defining an appropriate reporting
relationship during the ensuing fiscal year. The meeting should review the
following minimum areas: frequency and method of reporting, official or
officials responsible for reporting, transmittal of monthly and quarterly
summaries of actions taken by the multiple-member body and the role of the
Mayor in development of policies of interest to the multiple-member body.
§ 3-108. Filing of minutes.
Certified copies of the minutes of all meetings of all multiple-member bodies
shall be filed with the Town Clerk within five days following the meeting at
which said minutes shall have been approved. The minutes of all executive
sessions of multiple-member bodies shall be filed with the Town Clerk
within five days following the date the minutes of those meetings have
been made public. This filing of minutes of meetings with the Town Clerk is
for the convenience of the public. Such filing shall not be construed to be
the official records of the multiple-member body. The official records shall
continue to be maintained in the custody of the person designated pursuant
to MGL c. 66, § 6.
§ 3-109. References to statutes.
The references to state statutes which are contained in the sections of this
chapter which follow (describing the powers, duties and responsibilities of
the Town agencies) are provided for the purpose of describing the broad
scope of the authority and responsibility which may be exercised by the
Town of Weymouth with respect to each particular matter.
§ 3-106 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-109
1:34
The references to statutes and the enumeration is not to be construed in
any way as intended to impose a limitation on the ability of the Town,
pursuant to Article 5 of the Home Rule Charter and MGL c. 43B, § 20,
to reassign powers, duties and responsibilities among and between Town
agencies generally. The actual operating entities for the performance of
functions and the delivery of services by the Town shall be as defined and
enumerated in Chapter 4 of these ordinances; in the event of any conflict
between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of Chapter 4, the
provisions of Chapter 4 shall control.
§ 3-109 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-109
1:35

SECTION 3-200
Multiple-Member Bodies
§ 3-201. Zoning Appeals, Board of.
§ 3-202. Assessors, Board of.
Establishment. The Mayor shall appoint five regular voting members
and four associate members to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Mayor
shall strive to appoint a balanced mix of professional experience or
educational background from the following fields: architecture, civil/
structural engineering, law, building/construction, real estate
development, business or the environment. Two members shall be
citizens-at-large. In the case of an unfilled vacancy or inability to
participate on the part of a member of the Board, the Chairman shall
designate one of the associate members to take the place of such
member.
(a)
Terms of office. The term of office shall be for two years and shall expire
consistent with § 3-102(a).
(b)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Board of Zoning Appeals hears and
decides individual cases brought by persons seeking land use relief; all
as provided for in MGL c. 40A, §§ 7, 9, 17, and the Zoning Ordinances
of the Town.3
(c)
Compensation. The regular members of the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall receive an annual salary of $1,500, and the Chair shall receive
an additional sum of $500 per year. Alternate members of the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall receive the sum of $35 for every meeting at which
they sit as a member of the Board, up to a maximum of $1,500 per year.
(d)
Establishment. There shall be a Board of Assessors which shall consist
of three regular members and one alternate member. The Mayor shall
appoint the members of the Board of Assessors per MGL c. 41, §§ 1 and
24.
(a)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Board of Assessors shall annually,
and in accordance with the general laws and the recommendations of
the State Department of Revenue, make a fair cash valuation of all of
the estate, both real and personal, subject to taxation within the Town.
The Board of Assessors shall annually provide to the Mayor and Town
Council its recommendations regarding the percentage of the local tax
levy to be borne by each class of property. The Board of Assessors
shall annually determine the annual tax rate necessary to meet all
sums voted by the Town. The Board of Assessors shall hear and decide
all questions relating to the abatement of taxes levied. The Board of
Assessors shall have all of the other powers, duties and responsibilities
(b)
3. Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 3-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-202
1:37
§ 3-203. Construction Steering Committee.
given to Boards of Assessors by MGL c. 59 generally, except as may be
otherwise provided in Chapter 4 of these ordinances.
Compensation. The regular members of the Board of Assessors shall
receive an annual salary of $1,500, and the Chair shall receive an
additional sum of $500 per year. Alternate members of the Board of
Assessors shall receive the sum of $35 for every meeting at which they
sit as a member of the Board, up to a maximum of $1,500 per year.
(c)
Establishment. There shall be a Construction Steering Committee
which shall consist of seven members, including: the Mayor, the
Director of Public Works, the Director of Planning and Community
Development, the Director of Municipal Licenses and Inspections, the
Maintenance Director of the School Department, or their designees.
Members shall serve by virtue of their office, and two persons shall be
appointed by the Mayor for terms of three years each, arranged so that
the terms of office expire in different years. One member of the School
Committee or a designee shall replace the Director of Planning and
Community Development whenever there is planning or construction of
new, remodeled or renovated school buildings.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. Whenever any construction,
reconstruction or remodeling of any municipal or school building or
other Town of Weymouth facility is proposed to be undertaken, the
proposed project shall be referred to the Construction Steering
Committee. The Construction Steering Committee shall evaluate the
proposal and shall file a report, including its recommendations, with
the Mayor. The Construction Steering Committee shall be responsible
for any construction, reconstruction or remodeling work which is
authorized to be undertaken, including site acquisition, site
preparation, designer selection, schematic design, preliminary design,
bid preparation, bid award, and supervision of construction.
The Construction Steering Committee may, in appropriate
circumstances, establish an advisory committee to represent the
ultimate user of the building or other facility to assist the Construction
Steering Committee in making decisions which will best reflect the
needs of the ultimate user. Members of any such committee as may be
established shall be appointed by the Mayor.
The Construction Steering Committee shall make a continuing review
of all plans and proposals for capital improvements to municipal
buildings and other facilities, including all proposals made by or on
behalf of the School Committee, and shall evaluate and assign priorities
to each such proposed project.
Nothing in this section shall be construed or interpreted to mean that
by establishing this committee the executive powers of the Mayor have
in any manner been diminished; specifically, reserved to the Mayor
(b)
§ 3-202 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-203
1:38
§ 3-204. Capital Planning Committee.
§ 3-205. Cemetery Commission.
§ 3-206. Conservation Commission.
is the authority to award all contracts and to approve all payments,
subject only to the appropriation of funds by the Town Council.
Establishment. The Planning Board as established by § 3-217 of these
ordinances shall also be the Capital Planning Committee. The Director
of Municipal Finance or a designee of the Director of Municipal Finance
shall serve as an advisory member of the Committee without the right
to vote.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Capital Planning Committee shall
study proposed capital outlays involving any individual piece of
equipment, complete systems consisting of a number of pieces of
equipment and related items, extraordinary maintenance and repairs of
a single structure, piece of equipment or land use with an aggregate
cost of a minimum of $25,000 and a useful life of three years or more.
All officers, boards and committees, including the School Committee,
shall, by October 1 of each year, give to such Committee, on forms
prepared by the Department of Municipal Finance, information
concerning all capital projects anticipated by them as needing Town
Council action during the ensuing six years. The Committee shall
consider the relative need, timing and cost of these expenditures and
the effect each will have on the financial needs of the Town.
The Capital Planning Committee shall prepare an annual report
containing a capital budget of proposed outlays for the following five
years, with explanations of each item contained therein.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a Cemetery Commission consisting of five
members which shall, in conjunction with the Director of Public Works,
exercise the powers provided in MGL c. 114, § 22 through 27. The
Cemetery Commission shall consist of the Veterans' Agent, one member
of the Historical Commission and three Town residents.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Cemetery Commission shall serve in
an advisory capacity to the Director of Public Works. The Cemetery
Commission shall have the authority, in conjunction with the Director of
Public Works, to adopt regulations affecting the operation and conduct
of the Town cemeteries as provided in MGL c. 114.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a Conservation Commission consisting of
five members which shall exercise the powers provided in MGL c. 40,
§ 8C.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Conservation Commission is
established to protect, promote and enhance the quantity and quality
(b)
§ 3-203 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-206
1:39
§ 3-207. Contributory Retirement Board.
of the natural resources within the Town, especially wetlands, wildlife
and water resources, through planning, acquisition, land management,
regulation, scientific research and public education. The Conservation
Commission may conduct researches into its local land areas and shall
seek to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for
similar purposes.
The Conservation Commission may receive gifts, bequests or devises
of personal property or interests in real property in the name of the
Town, subject to approval of the Mayor. The Conservation Commission
may receive monetary gifts for development of a conservation fund, and
expend the same, subject to the General Laws and the approval of the
Mayor.
The Conservation Commission is responsible for the implementation
of the provisions of MGL c. 131, § 40, in protecting floodplains, water
bodies and other wetlands within the Town, and the Wetlands
Protection Ordinance4 and other ordinances and regulations as
directed.
The Conservation Commission may adopt policies and promulgate land
management plans for properties of the Town held for conservation
purposes. Such land management plans shall attempt to integrate
certain active and passive public uses while protecting natural
resources. The Conservation Commission, as a division of the
Department of Planning and Community Development, shall receive
staff support from the Department and coordinate activities with the
Director of Planning and Community Development per MGL c. 40, § 8C,
and MGL c. 131, § 40.
Compensation. The regular members of the Conservation Commission
shall receive an annual salary of $1,500, and the Chair shall receive an
additional sum of $500 per year.
(c)
Establishment. There shall be a Contributory Retirement Board which
shall consist of five members. The Director of Municipal Finance (or a
designee of the Director) shall serve, by virtue of office, as a member of
the Board; one member shall be appointed by the Mayor; two members
shall be elected by the members in or retired from service of such
system from among their number; and the fifth member, who shall not
be an employee or retiree or official of the Town of Weymouth, shall be
chosen by the other members. The terms of all members shall be for
three years.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Contributory Retirement Board shall
have the powers and duties provided in MGL c. 32, § 20(5), and shall
be responsible for the management of the retirement system for the
(b)
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 7, Section 7-300, Wetlands Protection.
§ 3-206 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-207
1:40
§ 3-208. Cultural Council.
§ 3-209. Disabilities, Commission on.
§ 3-210. Elder Services, Board of.
Town of Weymouth, subject to the requirements of MGL c. 32 and to
the oversight of the Commissioner of Public Employee Retirement as
provided in MGL c. 32, § 21, and otherwise.
Establishment. There shall be a local Cultural Council which shall
consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor for terms of two
years each. No member shall be appointed so as to serve more than
three consecutive terms per MGL c. 10, § 35C.5
(a)
Authority and responsibility. A local Cultural Council may decide the
distribution of arts lottery funds or other funds that may be available to
it and may also conduct other activities to promote and encourage the
arts per MGL c. 10, § 35C.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a Commission on Disabilities consisting
of nine members per MGL c. 40, § 8J. The members of the Commission
shall be appointed by the Mayor. A majority of the persons appointed
shall consist of persons with disabilities, one member shall be a
member of the immediate family of a person with a disability, and one
member shall be either an elected or appointed official of the Town. The
members of the Commission may appoint two alternates.
(a)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Commission on Disabilities seeks
to research local problems of people with disabilities as well as to
advise and assist municipal officials and employees in ensuring
compliance with state and federal laws and regulations that affect
people with disabilities. The Commission shall: coordinate or carry out
programs designed to address the problems of people with disabilities
in coordination with programs of the Massachusetts Office on
Disability; review and make recommendations about policies,
procedures, services, activities and facilities of departments and boards
of the Town as they affect people with disabilities; provide information,
referrals, guidance and technical assistance to individuals, public
agencies, businesses and organizations in all matters pertaining to
disability; and coordinate the activities of other local groups organized
for similar purposes. The Commission may draft rules and regulations
concerning disabled persons' needs and issues for consideration by the
Mayor.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a Board of Elder Services to consist of
seven members appointed by the Mayor.
(a)
5. Editor's Note: MGL c. 10, § 35C, was repealed by St. 1989, c. 653, § 14. See now MGL c. 10,
§ 58.
§ 3-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-210
1:41
§ 3-212. Health, Board of.
§ 3-213. Historical Commission.
§ 3-214. Trustees of the Public Library, Board of.
§ 3-215. Licensing Commissioners, Board of.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Board of Elder Services shall
advocate for the needs of the elderly people residing in the Town of
Weymouth. The Board of Elder Services shall make continuing surveys
of the elderly population to better determine their needs, problems
and concerns. It shall perform a needs assessment in order to develop
criteria for programs and supportive services and participate in
programs offered by the Commonwealth's Department of Elder Affairs
per MGL c. 40, § 8B.
(b)
Establishment. The Mayor shall appoint a Board of Health which shall
consist of five members.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Board of Health shall have the
authority, on the recommendation of the Director of Public Health, to
adopt regulations affecting the public health in the manner provided in
MGL c. 111, § 31.
(b)
Compensation. The regular members of the Board of Health shall
receive an annual salary of $1,500, and the Chair shall receive an
additional sum of $500 per year.
(c)
Establishment. The Mayor shall appoint a Historical Commission which
shall consist of seven members per MGL c. 40, § 8D. The Mayor may
also appoint no more than six alternative members of the Commission
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 8D. [Amended 4-18-2017 by Ord. No.
17-014]
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Historical Commission shall act for
the preservation, promotion and development of the historical assets of
the Town. The Commission shall have such additional powers, duties
and responsibilities as are given Historical Commissions by MGL c. 40,
§ 8D.
(b)
Establishment. The Mayor shall appoint a Board of Trustees of the
Public Library consisting of seven members.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Board of Trustees of the Public Library
shall represent the interests, issues, and concerns of the library to the
Mayor and other agencies of the Town government and to the public.
The Board of Trustees of the Public Library shall establish a written
policy for the selection of library materials and the use of materials and
facilities in accordance with the standards adopted by the American
Library Association.
(b)
§ 3-210 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-215
1:42
§ 3-216. Memorial Committee.
§ 3-217. Planning Board.
Establishment. There shall be a Board of Licensing Commissioners
consisting of five members, as follows: the Town Clerk, the Inspector of
Buildings, the Director of Public Health, the Fire Chief and the Police
Chief (or persons performing similar duties under any other title) shall
serve by virtue of their offices, and without additional compensation as
the members of the Board of Licensing Commissioners. The Town Clerk
shall serve as Chair of the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Board of Licensing Commissioners
shall have the power to issue licenses for innholders and common
victuallers; the powers of a Board of Licensing Commissioners
appointed under MGL c. 138, § 4, shall be the licensing authority for
the purposes of MGL c. 138 and MGL c. 140 and shall have all of the
other powers with respect to licenses which prior to the adoption of
the Home Rule Charter were exercised by the Board of Selectmen.
The Board of Licensing Commissioners may grant licenses relating to
alcoholic beverages under MGL c. 138 and those licenses under MGL c.
140 which are not, by the provisions of said chapter, placed within the
jurisdiction of another municipal officer or agency, and it shall have all
the powers and duties of a licensing authority under said chapters.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a Memorial Committee which shall
consist of nine members, including the Mayor, one member of the
School Committee (designated annually), one member of the Town
Council (designated annually), the Director of Public Works, the Chair
of the Historical Commission, and four other persons appointed by the
Mayor.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Memorial Committee may recommend
to the Mayor, or Town Council, or other appropriate authority whenever
any school or other public building, portion of a building, public way,
intersection, bridge, traffic circle or other open space, or parts thereof,
are to be named or renamed.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a Planning Board which shall consist of
five members, who shall serve for terms of five years.
(a)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Planning Board shall exercise the
powers provided in MGL c. 41, §§ 70 through 72, and MGL c. 41, §§ 81A
through 81J, as amended.
The Planning Board shall make careful studies of the resources,
possibilities and needs of the Town and shall make plans for the
development of the Town. The Planning Board shall make, and may
from time to time amend and perfect a comprehensive or master plan,
setting forth in graphic and textual form policies to govern future
growth and development in the Town. The Planning Board shall monitor
(b)
§ 3-215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-217
1:43
§ 3-218. Recreation Commission.
§ 3-219. Tree Board.
and report on progress made by the Town implementing the
recommendations of the master plan and other plans and studies
prepared by the Board.
The Planning Board shall have the power to regulate the subdivision of
land within the Town by the adoption of rules and regulations governing
such development and the administration of such rules and regulations
upon the application of landowners for the subdivision of land in
Weymouth. The Planning Board shall have the authority to delegate the
approval of plans submitted under MGL c. 41, § 81P, to the Director of
Planning and Community Development.
The Planning Board shall be responsible for surveying the growth and
other needs of the Town and the physical conditions and adequacy
of all public buildings and facilities. The Planning Board shall from
time to time meet with representatives of Town agencies to learn and
understand the capital needs of each such agency.
The Planning Board shall consider the relative need, the timing, the
estimated cost, and the proposed method of financing of each capital
expenditure proposed. The Planning Board shall prepare and annually
revise, update and extend a five-year capital outlay program which
forecasts the projected capital expenditure needs for the five fiscal
years next ensuing, in accordance with Section 6-10 of the Home Rule
Charter. The capital improvement plan shall annually be submitted to
the Mayor for assistance in the Mayor's preparation of the Capital
Improvement Program.
The Planning Board shall make an annual report, giving information
regarding the condition of the Town and any plans or proposals for
its development and estimates of their costs. The Planning Board shall
have all of the other powers and duties Planning Boards are given by
general law, by the Charter, by ordinance or otherwise.
Compensation. The regular members of the Planning Board shall
receive an annual salary of $1,500, and the Chair shall receive an
additional sum of $500 per year.
(c)
Establishment. There shall be a Recreation Commission to consist of
five members in accordance with MGL c. 45, § 2.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Recreation Commission shall serve
in an advisory capacity concerning the operation of public parks and
recreation programs, but it shall have no authority over the day-to-day
operations of the Recreation Division. The specific powers of a Park
Commission as provided in MGL c. 45, § 5 et seq. shall be vested in the
Mayor and may be assigned by the Mayor to any other Town agencies.
(b)
§ 3-217 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-219
1:44
§ 3-220. Voters, Registrars of.
§ 3-221. Waterfront Committee.
Establishment. There is hereby created and established a Tree Board
which will consist of three members: the Director of Public Works, the
Administrative Assistant to the Director of Public Works, and the Town
Arborist.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the Tree
Board to study, investigate, counsel, and develop and/or update
annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation,
pruning, planting, removal or deposition of trees and shrubs in parks,
along streets, and in other public areas. Such a plan will be presented
semi-annually to the Mayor.
(b)
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall appoint a Board of
Registrars of Voters to consist of three persons, appointed for terms of
three years each. The Town Clerk shall serve ex officio in accordance
with MGL c. 51, § 15.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Board of Registrars of Voters shall
supervise the qualification of persons to vote, certify the signatures on
nomination papers and petitions, and shall hold hearings and decide
disputes with regard to any of the foregoing matters in accordance with
MGL c. 51 through c. 55, generally.
(b)
Establishment. The Waterfront Committee shall consist of nine
members. The Harbormaster shall serve by virtue of office as a member
of the Committee. In making other appointments to the Committee,
the Mayor shall, to the fullest extent possible, appoint persons who
demonstrate a keen interest in the Weymouth waterfront and shall
seek representation from the following waterfront interest groups:
commercial fishing, recreational boating, environmental advocacy and
waterfront residential neighborhoods, and shall, specifically, assure
liaison with the Back River Committee by designating one member of it
to serve as a member of the Waterfront Committee. The Committee may
also wish to designate a representative from the State Coastal Zone
Management Office as a nonvoting ex officio member.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Waterfront Committee is established
to:
Promote, preserve and protect the interests of the Weymouth
waterfront;
1.
Review and update the policies and recommendations contained in
the Weymouth Waterfront Plan;
2.
Educate the public to the intrinsic value and natural beauty of the
Weymouth waterfront.
3.
(b)
§ 3-219 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-221
1:45
§ 3-222. Weymouth Housing Authority.
The Waterfront Committee shall review activities within the coastal
and tidal waters of the Town, to include the Fore and Back Rivers
and bounded by the projection boundary lines of neighboring
towns; provided, however, its review of coastal and tidal land shall
be limited to comment on those land activities which directly
impact the use of said waters. The review of activities shall be
coordinated through the Department of Planning and Community
Development.
Specific duties and responsibilities of the Committee shall
include:
1. Review and update the policies and recommendations
contained in the Weymouth Waterfront Plan;
2. Recommend appropriate ordinances, rules, policies, guidelines
and regulations consistent with the Waterfront Plan;
3. Assist in the orderly placement or arrangement of existing and
future moorings in cooperation with the Harbormaster;
4. Assist in the coordination of all public and private agencies,
committees, commissions, boards, etc., and any private entities
which have interest or jurisdiction in the waterfront area;
5. Review and comment on land and water use activities proposed
to take place within coastal and tidal area. Town agencies
shall send copies of relevant applications/proposals to the
Waterfront Committee;
6. Work in association with other Town agencies and the Mayor in
making applications for, receiving and administering grants or
subsidized funding from any governmental or private entity;
7. Investigate all accepted financial options for raising revenues
for the planning, construction or financing of any waterfront
project;
8. Recommend the expenditure of funds to the Mayor from the
Town Waterways Fund;
9. Prepare an annual report for the Mayor for publication.
Composition. The Housing Authority shall be managed, controlled and
governed by five members, appointed as provided in this section, of
whom three shall constitute a quorum. Membership on the Weymouth
Housing Authority shall be restricted to residents of the Town.
Four members of the Weymouth Housing Authority shall be appointed
by the Mayor for terms of five years each such that the terms of each
member will expire in a different year.
One member of the Weymouth Housing Authority shall be appointed
by the Department of Housing and Community Development (of the
(a)
§ 3-221 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-222
1:46
commonwealth) for a term of five years which expires in a different year
than any member appointed by the Mayor.
One of the four members of the Weymouth Housing Authority appointed
by the Mayor shall be a resident of the Town and shall be a
representative of organized labor who shall be appointed by the Mayor
from a list of not less than two nor more than five names, representing
different unions submitted by the Central Labor Council, AFL-CIO and
the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, Chauffeurs,
Warehousemen and Helpers of America of the Town or of the district
within which the Town is included. If no such list of names is submitted
within 60 days after a vacancy occurs, the Mayor may appoint any
representative of organized labor to the authority.
One of the four members of the Weymouth Housing Authority appointed
by the Mayor shall be a tenant in a building owned and operated by
or on behalf of the local Weymouth Housing Authority who shall be
appointed by the Mayor from lists of names submitted by each duly
recognized Town-wide and project-wide tenants' organization in the
Town. A tenants' organization may submit a list which contains not less
than two nor more than five names to the Mayor, who shall make the
selection from among the names so submitted; provided that, where no
public housing units are owned and operated by the Weymouth Housing
Authority and no such units are owned and operated on behalf of the
Weymouth Housing Authority, the Mayor shall appoint any tenant of
the Weymouth Housing Authority from lists submitted in accordance
with this section. If no list of names is submitted within 60 days after
a vacancy occurs, the Mayor shall appoint any tenant to the Authority.
The Mayor shall notify in writing tenant organizations as specified
herein not less than 90 days prior to the expiration of the term of a
tenant member. Whenever a vacancy occurs in the term of a tenant
member for any reason other than the expiration of a term, the Mayor
shall notify in writing the tenant organizations specified herein within
10 working days after the vacancy occurs. The Mayor shall make an
appointment within a reasonable time after the expiration of 60 days
after said notice.
Vacancies, other than by reason of expiration of terms, shall be filled for
the balance of the unexpired term, in the same manner as the original
appointment. Every member, unless sooner removed, shall serve until
the qualification of his successor.
Authorities and responsibilities. The Weymouth Housing Authority shall
make careful studies of the housing needs within the Town and shall
provide such programs to make available housing for families of low
income and for elderly persons of low income as it deems to be
necessary or desirable and it may make studies and investigations
relative to community development, including desirable patterns for
land use and community growth. The Housing Authority shall have all
of the powers, duties, authorities and responsibilities as are afforded to
such entities under MGL c. 121B.
(b)
§ 3-222 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-223
1:47
§ 3-223. Weymouth Redevelopment Authority.
§ 3-224. Weymouth Youth Coalition.
§ 3-225. Community Events Committee.
Composition. The Weymouth Redevelopment Authority shall be
managed, controlled and governed by a board consisting of five
members.
Four members of the Weymouth Redevelopment Authority shall be
appointed by the Mayor for terms of five years each such that the terms
of each member will expire in a different year.
One member of the Weymouth Redevelopment Authority shall be
appointed by the Department of Housing and Community Development
(of the commonwealth) for a term of five years which expires in a
different year than any member appointed by the Mayor.
(a)
Authorities and responsibilities. The Weymouth Redevelopment
Authority shall make careful studies surveys and plans relative to
community development, including desirable patterns for land use and
community growth and to determine what areas within the Town
constitute decadent, substandard or blighted areas. The
Redevelopment Authority shall have all of the powers, duties,
authorities and responsibilities as are afforded to such entities under
MGL c. 121B.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a seven-member Youth Coalition, which
shall consist of: the Mayor, the Superintendent of Schools, the Chief
of Police, the Director of Health, the Division of Youth and Family
Services, or their designees, and two community members appointed
by the Mayor. In addition, the Committee may, by majority vote, solicit
stakeholders in youth activities, such as parents of school-aged
children, concerned citizens, members of the clergy and other agencies
dedicated to youth concerns, to participate as nonvoting members of
the coalition.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Coalition shall meet to address youth
concerns in a community-based manner, with particular focus on the
prevention of substance abuse, violence and other high-risk behavior.
The membership of the Coalition shall make every effort to include
input and representation from the widest possible range of citizenry of
the Town.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a nine-member Community Events
Committee which shall consist of the Mayor, the Director of
Administrative Community Services or their designees and seven
members of the community.
(a)
§ 3-223 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-225
1:48
§ 3-226. Scholarship Fund Committee.
§ 3-227. Community Preservation Committee.
Authority and responsibility. The Community Events Committee shall be
charged with planning and conducting annual and special Town events
as assigned by the Mayor.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a Scholarship Fund Committee that
consists of nine members, including the Superintendent of Schools or
his or her designee and eight citizens, which shall exercise the powers
provided in MGL c. 60, § 3C.
(a)
Authority and responsibility. The Scholarship Fund Committee shall
select worthy recipients of and amounts of financial aid from the
scholarship fund to be distributed. The Scholarship Fund Committee
shall establish a procedure for determining, at least on an annual basis,
the amounts or percentages of the funds that shall be authorized for
distribution.
(b)
Miscellaneous.
All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be under the
jurisdiction of the Mayor; the Town Treasurer shall be the
custodian of said special fund and interest earned upon the
Scholarship Fund shall remain therewith and shall be used for the
purpose of said fund.
1.
The Committee may recommend an annual operating budget to the
Mayor for his consideration as part of the Mayor's annual budget
preparation.
2.
The Scholarship Committee is authorized to expend, with the
approval of the Mayor, its budget as is appropriated in the annual
budget of the Town of Weymouth.
3.
The Scholarship Committee may distribute financial aid from both
interest and principal of the special fund without further
appropriation.
4.
(c)
Placement on tax bills. The Tax Collector may designate a place on the
Town's municipal tax bills and/or motor vehicle excise tax bills whereby
a taxpayer may donate an amount to the Scholarship Fund.
(d)
Establishment. There shall be a Community Preservation Committee,
in accordance with Chapter 267 of the Acts of 2000, Massachusetts
Community Preservation Act,6 which shall consist of nine members:
one member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the
Commission; one member of the Planning Board as designated by the
Board; one member of the Historical Commission as designated by
(a)
6. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 44B.
§ 3-225 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-227
1:49
the Commission; one member of the Housing Authority, established
under MGL c. 121B, as designated by the Authority; one member of the
Recreation Commission as designated by the Commission; one member
of the Town Council as designated by the Town Council President;
and three citizens not currently holding elected or appointed office
appointed by the Mayor. Any vacancy shall be filled by the respective
board, commission, Housing Authority, Town Council President or
Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term.
Terms of office. The term of office shall be for two years. In the event
that a designee of a multiple-member body no longer serves on the
board he or she represents on the Community Preservation Committee,
that position shall be vacant and filled by the appropriate multiplemember
body.
(b)
Authority and responsibility. The Community Preservation Committee
shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of the Town regarding
community preservation. The Committee shall consult with the Mayor,
Town Council, and existing municipal boards, including the
Conservation Commission, the Historical Commission, the Planning
Board, the Recreation Commission and the Housing Authority, or
persons acting in those capacities or performing like duties, in
conducting such studies. As part of its study, the Committee shall
annually hold one or more public informational hearings on the needs,
possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community
preservation possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted
publicly and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
By October 1 of each year, the Community Preservation Committee
shall give to the Capital Planning Committee information on all capital
projects anticipated by it as needing Town Council action during the
ensuing six years. Such submittal should include all recommendations
for the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space; for the
acquisition, preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of historic
resources; for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for
recreational use; for the creation, preservation and support of
community housing; and for the rehabilitation or restoration of open
space, land for recreational use and community housing that is
acquired or created as provided in this section. With respect to
community housing, the Community Preservation Committee shall
recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or
construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
Twenty-one days before the date the Mayor is required to submit a
proposed Town budget to the Town Council, the Community
Preservation Committee shall submit its budget to the Mayor. The
budget may include a recommendation to set aside for later spending
funds for specific purposes that are consistent with community
preservation but for which sufficient revenues are not then available in
the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose
(c)
§ 3-227 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-227
1:50
or to set aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are
consistent with community preservation.
For each fiscal year, at least 10% of the estimated annual fund revenues
must be appropriated or reserved for acquisitions and initiatives in
each of the following categories:
1. Open space, not including land for recreational purposes;
2. Community housing;
Historic resources.
Annual appropriations for the administrative and operating
expenses of the Community Preservation Committee may not
exceed 5% of the year's estimated annual Community Preservation
Fund revenues.
3.
§ 3-227 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-227
1:51

SECTION 3-300
Appointed Town Officers
§ 3-301. Accountant, Town.
§ 3-302. Animal Control Officer.
§ 3-303. Animals, Inspector of.
§ 3-304. Assessor, Principal.
Establishment. There shall be a Town Accountant, appointed by the
Director of Municipal Finance as authorized by MGL c. 41, § 55.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Town Accountant shall examine the books and
accounts of all officers and committees entrusted with the custody
or expenditure of money. The Town Accountant shall have all of the
other powers, duties and responsibilities which are given to Town
Accountants by general laws, except the powers of the office which are
associated with auditing, including those described in MGL c. 41, §§ 50,
51, 53, and 54, which powers shall be assigned to the Office of Town
Auditor established by Home Rule Charter, Section 2-8(a).
(b)
Establishment. The Chief of Police shall, annually, appoint an Animal
Control Officer.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Animal Control Officer shall be responsible
for the enforcement of all laws relating to dogs, including but not
limited to MGL c. 140, §§ 136A through 174E, and all ordinances of the
Town further regulating animals. The Animal Control Officer shall, in
addition, have all of the powers of a Field Driver and Pound Keeper,
as provided in MGL c. 49, §§ 22 to 41, the authority to take up stray
beasts as provided in MGL c. 134 and every other enabling authority as
may be. In addition, the Animal Control Officer shall be responsible for
the taking up, confinement and disposition of wild animals which are
disturbing the public peace or providing a threat to public safety. The
Animal Control Officer shall coordinate and cooperate, as necessary,
with the various humane societies that are active in Weymouth and the
surrounding area.
(b)
Establishment. The Mayor shall, annually, appoint an Animal Inspector
in accordance with MGL c. 129, § 15.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Animal Inspector shall make regular and
thorough inspections of all neat cattle, sheep, swine and other
domesticated animals within the limits of the Town, and, if he knows
or has reason to suspect any are infected with or have been exposed
to any contagious disease, he may order their quarantine. The Animal
Inspector shall have all of the other powers, duties and responsibilities
given to Animal Inspectors by MGL c. 129, §§ 15 through 25.
(b)
§ 3-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-304
1:53
§ 3-305. Buildings, Inspector of.
§ 3-306. Burial Agent.
§ 3-307. Civil Defense/Emergency Management Director.
Establishment. The Director of Municipal Finance shall appoint a
Principal Assessor.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Principal Assessor shall appraise real and
personal property in the Town; perform field measurements and
inspections of residential and commercial buildings, including new
buildings, additions, major alterations, demolition and partial
construction; inspect land and land changes resulting from map
changes, deed transfers and subdivision changes; using appropriate
appraisal techniques, make estimates of market value of properties;
keep apprised of all deed transfers and check deeds for ownership.
The Principal Assessor maintains a record file system on permanent
properties, including collected data and calculated cost with
depreciation, current market and assessed valuation considered. The
Principal Assessor performs other related duties, as required.
(b)
Establishment. The Inspector of Buildings shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Inspector of Buildings shall appoint such
number of officers, technical assistants, inspectors, clerks and other
employees as shall be necessary to conduct the business of said division
and as authorized by the Mayor.
The Inspector of Buildings shall keep a record of the business of said
division, submit to the Mayor a yearly report of such business, ascertain
all facts and make all returns which shall be required by law or other
matters connected with his department and enter upon the premises
wherein any fire has occurred, if necessary in accordance with MGL c.
143, § 3, and MGL c. 40A, § 7.
(b)
Establishment. The Veteran's Services Director shall also be the Burial
Agent as provided in MGL c. 115, § 7.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Burial Agent shall cause to be interred the
body of any veteran or adult dependent of a veteran who dies without
sufficient means of defraying funeral expenses and the body of any
dependent child of a veteran if the veteran and his wife, or the veteran's
widow are without sufficient means to defray the expense in accordance
with MGL c. 115, §§ 7 and 8.
(b)
Establishment. The Director of Administrative and Community Services
shall appoint a Civil Defense/Emergency Management Director in
accordance with C. 639, § 13, Acts of 1950, and federal and state
emergency management guidelines.
(a)
§ 3-304 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-307
1:54
§ 3-308. Constables.
§ 3-309. Fence Viewers.
§ 3-310. Field Driver and Pound Keeper.
Powers and duties. There shall be an Emergency Management Division
under the supervision of an Emergency Management Director.
The Emergency Management Division seeks to maximize survival of
persons and preservation of property in the Town in the event of a
natural or man-made disaster by effective planning and by making
use of all manpower, equipment, available shelter protection and other
resources during an actual emergency.
The Emergency Management Division provides planning, resources,
communications and recovery services in support of emergencies in
the Town, adjacent communities, and the commonwealth. The Division
functions as the Emergency Preparedness Department consistent with
the C. 639 of the Acts of 1950 and is responsible for coordinating and
planning all disaster emergency functions and services within the Town
amongst all municipal and nonmunicipal agencies and departments.
The Department updates and exercises a plan of pre-emergency actions
known as the Comprehensive Emergency Management Plan and the
Superfund Amendment and Reauthorization Act of 1980, Title III Plan;
mitigates emergencies; assists in responses to hazardous materials
incidents and administers cost recovery and other reimbursement
programs.
(b)
Establishment. The Mayor may from time to time appoint, for terms
not exceeding three years, as many constables as is deemed to be
necessary in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 91A.
(a)
Powers and duties. Constables may serve writs, warrants and processes
in civil and criminal matters as authorized by law. They shall have the
power of sheriffs to require aid in the execution of their duties. They
shall serve all warrants and other processes directed to them by the
Mayor for notifying of meetings or for other purposes in accordance
with MGL c. 41, § 94.
(b)
Establishment. The Mayor shall, annually, appoint two or more Fence
Viewers in accordance with MGL c. 49, § 1.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Fence Viewers shall be responsible for the
enforcement of MGL c. 49, §§ 1 through 21, and may determine when
a partition fence is required. They shall have all of the other powers,
duties and responsibilities which are given Fence Viewers by general
laws.
(b)
§ 3-307 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-310
1:55
§ 3-311. Fire Chief and Fire Department.
§ 3-312. Harbormaster and assistants.
§ 3-313. Public Health, Director of.
Establishment. The Chief of Police may appoint a Pound Keeper for each
pound and one or more Field Drivers for the Town in accordance with
MGL c. 49, § 22.
(a)
Powers and duties. Every Field Driver shall take up horses, mules,
asses, neat cattle, sheep, goats or swine going at large in the public
ways, or on common and unimproved land and not under the care of
a Pound Keeper. Beasts so taken up by a Field Driver shall forthwith
be impounded and while so impounded shall be furnished with suitable
food and water in accordance with MGL c. 49, §§ 22 through 41.
(b)
Establishment. The Mayor shall, subject to the Civil Service Law and
rules, appoint a Fire Chief who shall be the appointing authority for the
Department in accordance with MGL c. 48, § 42.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Fire Chief shall have full charge of
extinguishing fires, shall be in immediate control of all Town property
used by the Department, and of the officers and firefighters, who shall
obey his orders. According to MGL c. 48, §§ 42A through 55, the Fire
Chief has other extensive authority relative to fire prevention, pursuant
to the provisions of MGL c. 148 and CMR 527.
(b)
Establishment. The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Mayor, shall
appoint a Harbormaster and such number of Assistant Harbormasters
as may be deemed necessary in accordance with MGL c. 102, § 19.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Harbormaster shall be responsible for the
operation of all vessels in the harbor in conformity with MGL c. 102,
§§ 17 through 28, and all Town ordinances adopted in relation to the
harbor.
(b)
(a) Establishment. The Mayor shall appoint a Director of Public Health.
Powers and duties. The Director of Public Health shall be responsible
for the performance of all public health related functions and activities
of the Town and shall coordinate the local public health program with
programs conducted by the commonwealth and with others. The
Director of Public Health shall be responsible for the enforcement
within the Town of all local ordinances and rules and regulations
affecting the public health and of all state statutes and state rules and
regulations (CMR) affecting the public health. The Director of Public
Health shall have all of the other powers, duties and responsibilities
which are given to Boards of Health by general laws (see MGL c. 111,
§§ 26 through 32, and MGL c. 111 through c. 114, generally) (except the
power to promulgate health regulations) and shall have such additional
(b)
§ 3-310 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-313
1:56
§ 3-314. Human Resources, Director of.
§ 3-315. Gas Piping and Gas Appliances, Inspector of.
§ 3-316. Library Services, Director of.
§ 3-317. Lockup, Keeper of the.
powers, duties, authority and responsibility as may be provided in the
Town ordinances.
Establishment. The Department of Human Resources shall be headed
by a Director of Human Resources who shall be appointed by and who
shall be responsible to the Mayor or designee. [Amended 6-21-2016
by Ord. No. 16-092]
(a)
Powers and duties. The Director of Human Resources shall be
responsible for the supervision and coordination of all activities of the
Department of Human Resources in accordance with state statutes,
Town ordinances, and rules and regulations (Home Rule Charter,
Section 5-6).
(b)
Establishment. The Inspector of Buildings shall appoint an Inspector of
Gas Piping and Gas Appliances, who shall be a licensed plumber or a
licensed gas fitter in accordance with MGL c. 143, § 3O.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Inspector of Gas Piping and Appliances shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the rules and regulations adopted
by the Gas Regulatory Board under MGL c. 25, § 12H.7 The Inspector
of Gas Piping and Appliances shall have all of the other powers, duties
and responsibilities as are given such inspectors by MGL c. 143, § 3O.
(b)
Establishment. The Director of Library Services shall be appointed by
and be responsible to the Mayor or designee. [Amended 6-21-2016
by Ord. No. 16-092]
(a)
Powers and duties. The Director of Library Services shall be in full
charge of the Public Library and any of its branches as may from
time to time be established. The Director shall be in full charge of all
personnel assigned to the library and shall oversee the purchase or
other acquisition of all books, periodicals, art objects and every other
item or thing contained in the library collection. The Director shall be
responsible for the care and custody of all library facilities and shall
procure all equipment for the library operations. The Director shall
prepare and monitor budgets for the public libraries.
(b)
Establishment. The Chief of Police shall annually appoint a Keeper of
the Lockup in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 35.
(a)
7. Editor's Note: MGL c. 25, § 12H, was repealed by St. 1977, c. 843, § 2.
§ 3-313 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-317
1:57
§ 3-318. Wood and Bark, Measurers of.
§ 3-319. Municipal Finance, Director of.
§ 3-320. Municipal Licenses and Inspections, Director of.
§ 3-321. Parking Clerk.
Powers and duties. The Keeper of the Lockup shall have the care and
custody of the Town lockup and of all persons who are committed to the
lockup in accordance with MGL c. 40, §§ 34 through 37, inclusive.
(b)
Establishment. The Mayor shall annually appoint one or more
Measurers of Wood and Bark in accordance with MGL c. 94, § 296.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Measurers of Wood and Bark shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the laws relating to the sale of wood
and bark within the Town in accordance with MGL c. 94, §§ 296 through
303, inclusive.
(b)
Establishment. The Department of Municipal Finance shall be under
the direct control and supervision of a Director of Municipal Finance
who shall be appointed by and who shall be responsible to the Mayor.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Director of Municipal Finance shall be
responsible for the supervision and coordination of all activities of the
Department of Municipal Finance in accordance with state statutes,
Town ordinances, administrative code, rules and regulations. The
Director of Municipal Finance shall serve, ex officio, as the Mayor
may from time to time specify, as the Town Treasurer, Collector, or
Treasurer-Collector (see Home Rule Charter Section 5-4).
(b)
Establishment. The Department of Municipal Licenses and Inspections
shall be under the direct control and supervision of a Director of
Municipal Licenses and Inspections who shall be appointed by and
who shall be responsible to the Mayor or designee. The Director of
Municipal Licenses and Inspections shall serve for an indefinite term.
The Director of Municipal Licenses and Inspections shall be a person
especially fitted by education, experience and training to perform the
duties of the office. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092]
(a)
Powers and duties. The Director of Municipal Licenses and Inspections
shall be responsible for the supervision and coordination of all activities
of the Department of Municipal Licenses and Inspections in accordance
with state statutes, Town ordinances, rules and regulations. The
Director of Municipal Licenses and Inspections shall also perform the
duties of Inspector of Buildings or of any other position within the
Department as the Mayor may from time to time specify (see Home
Rule Charter, Section 5-7).
(b)
§ 3-317 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-321
1:58
§ 3-322. Planning and Community Development, Director of.
§ 3-323. Plumbing, Inspector of.
§ 3-324. Police Chief and Police Department.
§ 3-325. Public Works, Director of.
Establishment. The Director of Municipal Finance shall designate or
appoint a Parking Clerk in accordance with MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Parking Clerk shall supervise and coordinate
the processing of parking notices in the Town in accordance with MGL
c. 90, §§ 20A through 20E.
(b)
Establishment. The Department of Planning and Community
Development shall be under the direct control and supervision of a
Director of Planning and Community Development who shall be
appointed by and who shall be responsible to the Mayor or designee.
The Director of Planning and Community Development shall serve for
an indefinite term. The Director of Planning and Community
Development shall be a person especially fitted by education,
experience and training to perform the duties of the office. [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092]
(a)
Powers and duties. The Director of Planning and Community
Development shall be responsible for the supervision and coordination
of all activities of the Department of Planning and Community
Development in accordance with state statutes, Town ordinances, rules
and regulations (see Home Rule Charter, Section 5-5).
(b)
Establishment. An Inspector of Plumbing shall be appointed by the
Inspector of Buildings in accordance with MGL c. 142, § 11.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Plumbing Inspector shall be responsible for
the enforcement of all rules and regulations regarding the installation,
alteration and repair of all plumbing in the Town in accordance with
MGL c. 142, §§ 11 through 13; and MGL c. 142, generally.
(b)
Establishment. The Mayor shall, subject to the Civil Service Law and
rules, appoint a Police Chief who shall be the appointing authority for
the Police Department.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Chief of Police shall be in immediate control of
all Town property used by the Department, and of the police officers,
who shall obey his orders. The Police Department shall have full charge
of keeping the peace and the enforcement of all laws in accordance with
MGL c. 41, §§ 97 and 98.
(b)
Establishment. The Department of Public Works shall be under the
direct control and supervision of a Director of Public Works who shall
be appointed by and who shall be responsible to the Mayor or designee.
(a)
§ 3-321 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-325
1:59
§ 3-326. Purchasing Agent.
§ 3-327. Weights and Measures, Sealer of.
§ 3-328. Shade Tree Management and Pest Control, Superintendent
of.
§ 3-329. Shellfish Constable; Deputy Shellfish Constables.
The Director of Public Works shall serve for an indefinite term. The
Director of Public Works shall be a person especially fitted by
education, training and previous experience and training to perform the
duties of the office. [Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092]
Powers and duties. The Director of Public Works shall be responsible
for the supervision and coordination of all activities of the Department
of Public Works in accordance with state statutes, Town ordinances,
administrative code, rules and regulations (see Home Rule Charter,
Section 5-3).
(b)
Establishment. The Director of Municipal Finance shall appoint a
Purchasing Agent in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 103.
(a)
Power and duties. The Purchasing Agent shall purchase all supplies for
the Town and for every department thereof, except in the case of an
emergency. All purchases or contracts for purchases shall be based on
competition as required by MGL c. 30B, c. 149 and c. 7.
(b)
Establishment. The Director of Municipal Licenses and Inspections
shall appoint one or more Sealers of Weights and Measures in
accordance with MGL c. 98, § 34.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Sealer of Weights and Measures shall test,
adjust and seal all devices used for the weighing and measuring of
commodities and shall be responsible for the enforcement of all laws
relating to weights and measures in accordance with MGL c. 98, §§ 34
through 56C.
(b)
Appointment. The Director of Public Works shall appoint a
Superintendent of Shade Tree Management and Pest Control in
accordance with MGL c. 132, § 13.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Superintendent of Shade Tree Management
and Pest Control shall be responsible for the suppression of the public
nuisances named in MGL c. 132, § 11.
(b)
Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint for terms of three years a person
or persons, qualified by training and experience in the field of
shellfishery management, as Shellfish Constables or Deputy Shellfish
Constables. The Mayor shall notify the Director of the Division of
Marine Fisheries and the Director of the Division of Law Enforcement
(a)
§ 3-325 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-329
1:60
§ 3-330. Town Solicitor.
forthwith of the appointment of a Shellfish Constable or Deputy
Shellfish Constable in accordance with MGL c. 130, § 98.
Powers and duties. Shellfish Constables and Deputy Shellfish
Constables shall, subject to the appointing authority, initiate, promote
and manage shellfisheries and shall make or cause to be made such
studies as may be necessary to enhance the value of such shellfisheries
and shall enforce all statutes, ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations
relative to shellfish in Weymouth. Shellfish Constables and Deputy
Shellfish Constables shall, for the enforcement of MGL c. 130, §§ 31, 37,
41, 43 and 44, have the authority granted to Natural Resource Officers,
subject to written rules and regulations of the Commissioner of the
Department of Fisheries, Wildlife and Environmental Law Enforcement.
In the performance of their duties, a Shellfish Constable or a Deputy
Shellfish Constable may request any person such Constable or Deputy
Constable has cause to believe is engaged in unlawful shellfishing,
is in unlawful possession of shellfish, or is in possession of shellfish
unlawfully taken, to display forthwith for inspection all shellfish in his
or her possession, and such Constable or Deputy Constable may arrest
without a warrant any person refusing or failing to comply with such
request.
(b)
Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint a Town Solicitor who shall serve
an indefinite term of office.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Town Solicitor shall be responsible for all legal
affairs of the Town and shall personally provide, or shall personally
supervise the provision by others of, all legal services necessary for the
proper and efficient conduct of the Town's affairs. Further, the Town
Solicitor shall:
Supervise the drawing, revision and/or approve all contracts,
deeds, bonds and other legal instruments relating to the Town;
1.
Prosecute and defend all suits to which the Town or any of its
officers or any administrative personnel in their official capacity
are a party, or wherein any right, privilege, property, estate, act
or franchise of the Town may be affected or brought into question,
before any court, board of commissioners, or committee of the
General Court of this commonwealth;
2.
Under the direction of the Mayor, represent the Town before any
committee of the Legislature, administrative board or other public
official in any matter wherein the Town has an interest;
3.
Furnish all legal advice to the Mayor, Town Council, and all elected
or appointed Town officers, departments, boards and committees
pertaining to the discharge of their official duties. All requests
for legal opinions, other than routine day-to-day questions, shall
4.
(b)
§ 3-329 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-330
1:61
be made in writing to the Town Solicitor and routed through the
Mayor's office for purposes of administrative control;
The Town Solicitor shall have charge of and perform, under the
direction of the Mayor, any and all other legal business of the Town
except as otherwise provided, including:
Prosecution of cases. The Mayor, as provided in Home Rule
Charter, Section 2-203,8 may instruct the Town Solicitor to
prosecute any case of violation of Town ordinances or to defend
any proceeding brought against any officer, employee, board or
committees of the Town for acts done in the discharge of his/
her/its official duties.
a.
Employment of assistants. The Town Solicitor, in the discharge
of legal duties, may employ assistants and outside counsel,
but, except as otherwise expressly authorized by the Mayor,
the Town Solicitor shall be responsible for the acts of any
assistants and outside counsel so employed, and such
assistants shall be paid by the Town Solicitor.
b.
Representation of all Town departments. The Town Solicitor
shall represent all Town departments, boards and committees
in the conduct of their official duties, and the salary therefor
shall cover all work performed, except that for the School
Department, the examination of titles to real estate, all legal
work in the preparation or conduct of litigation and hearings,
either before administrative committees, boards, courts or
other tribunals, and except work done in connection with the
laying out, establishment, construction and maintenance of
sewerage, water, drainage or road systems.
c.
Settlement of claims. The Mayor, as provided in Home Rule
Charter, Section 2-203,9 shall have full authority as agent of
the Town, with the advice and consent of the Town Solicitor,
to prosecute, defend, to compromise and settle all claims and
suits pending to which the Town is a party and in relation to
claims and suits.
d.
Assignment of police. The Chief of Police, at the request of
the Town Solicitor and by order of the Mayor, shall assign a
competent police officer to the legal department to act under
the Town Solicitor in the investigation of all claims against the
Town and to assist the Town Solicitor in the preparation for
trial and in the trial of any hearings or litigation to which the
Town is a party.
e.
5.
8. Editor's Note: So in original; this section does not appear in the Charter.
9. Editor's Note: So in original; this section does not appear in the Charter.
§ 3-330 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-330
1:62
§ 3-331. Treasurer-Collector.
§ 3-332. Tree Warden.
§ 3-333. Veterans' Graves Officer.
§ 3-334. Veterans' Services Director.
Approval of legal bills. The Town Solicitor shall approve all
bills or charges against the legal department before final
presentation for approval and payment.
f.
Appointment of special counsel. No Town officer or agency,
unless specifically authorized to do so by the Mayor, shall
employ, advise with or consult any attorney or counselor at law,
other than the Town Solicitor, or his designee, with regard to
its duties or to any Town business. Whenever it is determined
that the services of a legal specialist are necessary or
desirable, the Town Solicitor shall select such counsel after
consultation with the Mayor and the office or agency involved.
g.
Establishment. There shall be a Treasurer-Collector appointed by the
Director of Municipal Finance.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Treasurer-Collector so appointed shall have
all the powers, perform the duties and be subject to the liabilities
and penalties now or hereafter conferred or imposed by law on Town
Treasurers and Collectors.
(b)
Establishment. There shall be a Tree Warden appointed by the Director
of Public Works.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Tree Warden shall have the care and control of
all public shade trees, shrubs and growths in the Town, except those
within a state highway. The Tree Warden shall enforce all provisions
of law relative to the protection and preservation of shade trees in
accordance with MGL c. 87.
(b)
Establishment. The Mayor shall appoint a resident of the Town of
Weymouth who shall be a veteran as defined in MGL c. 4, § 7, Clause
43, as a Veterans' Graves Officer for a term of five years.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Veterans' Graves Officer shall be responsible
to see that every veteran's grave is suitably kept and cared for in
accordance with MGL c. 115, § 9.
(b)
Establishment. The Director of Administrative and Community Services
shall appoint a Veterans' Services Director in accordance with MGL c.
115, § 10.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Veterans' Services Director shall furnish
information, advice and assistance to veterans relative to employment,
(b)
§ 3-330 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-334
1:63
§ 3-335. Wire Inspector.
§ 3-336. Department of Asset Management, Director of. [Added
5-7-2018 by Ord. No. 18-055]
education, medical care, pensions and other benefits to which they are
or may be entitled in accordance with MGL c. 115, §§ 10 through 14.
The Veterans' Services Director shall also serve as the Burial Agent and
Veterans' Graves Officer as otherwise provided in these ordinances.
Establishment. The Inspector of Buildings shall appoint a Wire
Inspector in accordance with MGL c. 166, § 32.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Wire Inspector shall supervise every wire over,
under or in streets or buildings and every wire within a building which
is designed to carry electricity in accordance with MGL c. 166, § 32.
(b)
Establishment. The Department of Asset Management shall be under
the direct control and supervision of a Director of Asset Management
who shall be appointed by and who shall be under the general direction
of and be responsible to the Mayor, the Superintendent of Schools, or
their designees. The Director of Asset Management shall serve for an
indefinite term. The Director of Asset Management shall be a person
especially fitted by education, experience, and training to perform
duties of the office.
(a)
Powers and duties. The Director of Asset Management shall be
responsible for the supervision and coordination of all activities of the
Department of Asset Management in accordance with state and federal
statutes, Town ordinances, rules and regulations.
(b)
§ 3-334 WEYMOUTH CODE § 3-336
1:64
Chapter 4
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Elections; elected Town officers — See Ch. 2.
Offices, officials and multiple-member
bodies — See Ch. 3.
Financial regulations — See Ch. 5.
Human resources — See Ch. 10.
§ 3-336 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-336
1:65

SECTION 4-100
Administrative Organization
§ 4-101. Mayor to be Chief Executive and Administrative Officer.
The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of the
Town government.
§ 4-102. Departmental organization.
§ 4-103. Standard provisions.
The following standard provisions shall apply to all Town agencies, whether
established by the Charter, by ordinance, or by administrative rule or
regulation arising out of the authority of the Charter:
Departments established. The administrative service of the Town shall
be divided into the following departments: [Amended 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-092; 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-011]
Municipal Finance Department
Administrative and Community Services Department
Department of Human Resources
Department of Municipal Licenses and Inspections
Planning and Community Development Department
Public Works Department
Health Department
Police Department
Fire Department
Department of Information Technology
Department of Libraries
Department of Asset Management
(a)
Purpose. It is the intention of this provision to assemble similar and
related activities and functions of the Town into consolidated
departments in order to attain the efficiencies and economies of scale;
to reduce or eliminate duplication and overlapping of services,
responsibilities and functions; and to improve the communication and
coordination between and among the various offices and agencies of
the Town. It is the further intention of this provision that the director
of each department shall be authorized to assign responsibilities and
functions between and among personnel within the department from
time to time without regard to the lines of responsibilities which have
previously been associated with the agencies herein consolidated.
(b)
Titles. The head of each department of the Town government shall be
termed "Director."
(a)
§ 4-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-103
1:67
§ 4-104. Duties of directors of departments, division heads, and
officers.
Appointments. The director of each department of the Town
government shall be appointed by the Mayor for an indefinite term of
office. The appointment of directors (department heads) by the Mayor
shall be subject to review by the Town Council as provided in Home
Rule Charter Section 2-10.
A department director shall be a person especially qualified by
education, training and previous experience to perform the duties of
the office.
Division heads shall be appointed by the directors of departments, with
the consent of the Mayor.
The director of a department may serve as the head of one division
within the department. The director may appoint the head of a division
within the department to serve simultaneously as the head of another
division within the department. Such person so appointed, or so
serving, shall possess all of the qualifications for the position which may
be prescribed by law, by Charter, by ordinance, by rule, or otherwise.
Directors of departments shall, subject to the consent of the Mayor,
appoint all assistants and subordinates and other employees of the
agency for which such person is responsible.
(b)
Temporary director of department. The Mayor may, as provided in
Home Rule Charter Section 3-5, designate the head of one of the
divisions within the department, or some other Town officer or
employee, or any other person to serve as temporary head of a
department for periods not to exceed 90 days. If at the expiration of
90 days following the date a director of a department position has
become vacant and the Mayor has not appointed a standing director
of the department, the Mayor may grant one thirty-day extension of
the temporary appointment. If at the expiration of 90 days following
the date a director of a department position has become vacant the
Mayor has not appointed a standing director of the department, the
Mayor shall designate one of the division heads to be the director of the
department.
(c)
Removal. The Mayor may, by following the removal procedure
established in Home Rule Charter Section 3-4(a), remove a director of
a department from office.
A director of a department may, for cause, by following the removal
procedure established in Home Rule Charter Section 3-4(b), and in
Chapter 10 of these ordinances, remove a division head from office.
A division head may, for cause, remove a subordinate by following the
removal procedure established in Home Rule Charter Section 3-4(b),
and in Chapter 10 of these Ordinances.
(d)
§ 4-103 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-104
1:68
§ 4-105. Duties of directors of departments.
The Director of each department shall have the following specific powers
and duties:
In general. Every director of a department, division head, Town officer
and Town employee shall perform all duties required of the position by
state law, by the Charter and ordinances of the Town, and such other
duties as may be required by the Mayor and persons appointed by the
Mayor.
(a)
Department directors are responsible to the Mayor or designee. All
division heads and Town officers shall report to the Mayor or designee,
through their respective director of department. [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092]
(b)
Inaugurate sound practices. The directors of departments, Town
officers and the heads of divisions shall keep themselves informed as to
the latest practices in their particular fields and shall inaugurate, with
the approval of the Mayor, such new practices as appear would be of
benefit and service to the citizens and taxpayers of Weymouth.
(c)
Reports to Mayor. The directors of departments shall submit reports of
the activities of their departments to the Mayor with such frequency
and in such form as may be required by the Mayor. The directors
of departments shall render an annual report of the activities and
operations of the department for which each is responsible to the
Mayor on or before August 1 of each calendar year. Town officers and
division heads shall assist their respective department directors by
preparing and filing such reports with them as may be requested or
required of them to enable the director of a department to so report.
(d)
Maintain records. The directors of departments shall establish and
maintain systems of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient
detail to furnish all information necessary for the proper control of
departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to
the Mayor.
(e)
Maintain equipment. The directors of departments, Town officers and
the heads of divisions shall be responsible for the proper maintenance
of all Town property and equipment used in their departments, offices
and divisions.
(f)
Cooperation with Town Auditor. The directors of departments, Town
officers and the heads of divisions and every other employee of the
Town shall cooperate fully with the Town Auditor whenever the Auditor
makes any request for any information relevant to the duties of such
person.
(g)
Provide coordination and direction to the divisions within the
department to ensure consistent administration and the efficient
delivery of services to citizens and taxpayers;
(a)
§ 4-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-105
1:69
§ 4-106. Submission of reorganization plans by Mayor.
Any plan presented by the Mayor to the Town Council which purports to
be a reorganization plan under Home Rule Charter Section 5-1 which does
not contain a proposed ordinance in which are incorporated amendments,
revisions or repeals of this article and any other articles or provisions of
this Code of Town Ordinances as will accomplish the desired reorganization
shall not be deemed to be a reorganization plan within the meaning of said
Charter Section 5-1.
Each proposed reorganization plan, when filed by the Mayor with the Town
Council, shall bear an identifying number and shall be accompanied by a
detailed statement of the Mayor in explanation of the reasons underlying
the submission of the proposed plan and the goals and objectives expected
to result from the implementation of the plan.
Forthwith upon its receipt of a proposed reorganization plan from the
Mayor, the Town Council shall provide for a notice to be prepared for
publication in a local newspaper which shall describe the scope of the
proposal and the time and place, not less than seven days nor more than 14
days following such publication, the Town Council will hold a public hearing
concerning the proposed reorganization plan.
A reorganization plan shall become effective on the 61st day following the
day it was submitted to the Town Council unless the Council has voted to
disapprove the plan.
Meet with the Mayor to develop goals and objectives for each of the
divisions within the department and to measure and evaluate the
performance of functions by each constituent agency within the
department;
(b)
Meet with the division heads and other subordinate officers and
employees of the department to explain the goals and objectives set by
the Mayor for each such division and agency and to arrive at methods
by which such goals and objectives might be achieved;
(c)
Monitor the level of services provided in other communities to ensure
the Town of Weymouth provides the highest and best level of service
possible to its citizens and taxpayers consistent with the needs of the
Town and its ability to pay;
(d)
Assist division heads in the development of annual operating budgets
and capital outlay requests;
(e)
Prepare and submit to the Mayor, within the guidelines provided by
the Mayor and within the time schedule established by the Mayor, a
proposed annual operating budget and capital outlay request covering
all divisions and offices within the department for which the director is
responsible.
(f)
§ 4-105 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-106
1:70
SECTION 4-200
Departments
§ 4-201. Municipal Finance, Department of.
Establishment. There shall be a Department of Municipal Finance
which shall be responsible for the management of the fiscal and
financial affairs of the Town and for the supervision and coordination
of all activities of all Town agencies in relation to any fiscal or financial
matter.
(a)
Scope of Department activities. The Department of Municipal Finance
shall be responsible for and shall include the following functions:
Coordination of all financial services and activities of the Town
government;
1.
Maintenance of all accounting records and other financial
statements for all offices and agencies of the Town government;
2.
3. The payment of all financial obligations on behalf of the Town;
4. The receipt of all funds due to the Town from any source;
5. Maintenance of all property valuation records and systems;
The rendering of advice, assistance and guidance to all other Town
offices and agencies in any matter relating to financial or fiscal
affairs;
6.
The monitoring throughout the fiscal year of the expenditure of
funds by Town offices and agencies, including the periodic
reporting on the status of all accounts with recommendations
concerning fiscal and financial policies to be implemented by such
offices and agencies;
7.
Coordination of all financial transactions associated with the
procurement of all goods, supplies and materials by Town offices
and agencies with the central procurement procedures established
pursuant to MGL c. 30B.
8.
(b)
Director of Municipal Finance. The Department of Municipal Finance
shall be headed by a Director of Municipal Finance who may also be
referred to as the Chief Financial Officer (or CFO).
The Director of Municipal Finance shall appoint, subject to the consent
of the Mayor, a Treasurer, a Collector, a Town Accountant, a Purchasing
Agent and a Principal Assessor. The Mayor shall appoint the members
of the Board of Assessors.
Said Treasurer, Collector, Town Accountant, Purchasing Agent and
Principal Assessor shall have such powers and duties as may be vested
in those offices expressly by general or special law, but shall otherwise
(c)
§ 4-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-201
1:71
report to and be under the direction and supervision of the Director of
Municipal Finance.
The powers and duties of said Director of Municipal Finance shall
include the following: coordination, administration, and supervision of
all financial services and activities; assistance in all matters related to
municipal financial affairs; implementation and maintenance of uniform
systems, controls, and procedures for all financial activities in all
departments, including the School Department, and including, but not
limited to, maintenance of all financial and accounting data and
records; implementation and maintenance of uniform budget guidelines
and procedures; assistance in development and preparation of all
department budgets and spending plans; review of all contracts and
obligations; monitoring of the expenditure of all funds, including
periodic reporting to appropriate agencies of the status of accounts;
establishment of a spending plan for each department; and the
allotment of funds on a periodic basis as provided in Home Rule Charter
Section 6-8. In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to
any other department or office, it shall be the duty of the Director
of Municipal Finance to promote, secure, and preserve the financial
interests of the Town.
The Director of Municipal Finance shall from time to time, subject to
the approval of the Mayor, promulgate rules and regulations governing
any subject within the jurisdiction of the Department of Municipal
Finance as are necessary to implement the provisions of this section.
Operating divisions. The Department of Municipal Finance shall consist
of the following divisions:
Division of Collections and Treasury Management. The Division
of Collections and Treasury Management, headed by a Town
Treasurer-Collector, shall receive and take charge of all money
belonging to the Town, pay all bills and warrants (including payroll)
properly executed by the Town officials, and it shall collect all
accounts due to the Town from any source. Upon receipt of a tax list
and warrant from the Board of Assessors, it shall collect the taxes
and make a return thereon to the Board of Assessors. The Town
Treasurer-Collector shall, according to the order of the authorized
officers of the Town, pay out and make all disbursements of funds
on behalf of the Town. Except as otherwise provided, the Town
Treasurer-Collector shall have all of the other powers, duties and
responsibilities which are given to Town Collectors and to Town
Treasurers by general law.
1.
Division of Accounting. The Division of Accounting, headed by a
Town Accountant, shall be responsible for the following:
Maintenance of accounts for all financial transactions of the
Town;
a.
b. Pre-audit of all purchase orders, receipts and disbursements;
2.
(d)
§ 4-201 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-201
1:72
c. Preparation of payrolls;
d. Preparation of warrants for the payment of all bills of the Town;
Preparation of periodic reports on the status of departmental
receipts and expenditures;
e.
Maintenance of central grant and contract files.
The Division of Accounting shall assist all Town agencies in
keeping the books and accounts of all offices and agencies
entrusted with the custody or expenditure of money. The
Division of Accounting shall provide the Town Auditor,
appointed by the Town Council, free access to all of its books,
accounts, bills, vouchers and other records of financial
transactions as may be necessary for the performance of the
auditing and oversight functions of the Town Council. The
Division of Accounting shall, at least once in each fiscal year,
verify the cash balances of all Town offices and agencies
by actual count of the cash and by reconciliation of bank
balances. The Division of Accounting shall prepare all
warrants for the expenditure of Town funds before any
payment is made by the Division of Collections and Treasury
Management. Except as otherwise provided, the Town
Comptroller shall have all of the other powers, duties and
responsibilities which are given to Town Accountants and
Town Auditors by general law, including the authorization to
report matters of fraud, waste, improper or illegal activity to
the Mayor.
f.
Division of Assessing. The Assessing Division shall be under the
charge of an officer known as the Principal Assessor.
The Principal Assessor shall have all the powers and perform the
duties of Assessors in cities and towns in accordance and in
compliance with the general laws, except as Subsection (c) above
shall otherwise provide. Said Principal Assessor shall review every
application for exemption or abatement of taxes and shall report
his or her findings to the Board of Assessors.
There shall be in the Assessing Division a Board of Assessors,
consisting of three regular members and one alternate member
appointed by the Mayor. The members of said Board of Assessors
shall serve for terms of three years each so arranged that the term
of one regular member shall expire each year.
It shall be the duty of said Board of Assessors to review the findings
of the Principal Assessor on applications for exemptions or
abatements of taxes, and to grant or deny all such applications
after such hearing as said Board of Assessors deems proper.
The Division of Assessing shall be responsible for the following:
3.
§ 4-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-201
1:73
§ 4-202. Department of Administrative and Community Services.
[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092]
a. Establish the valuation of all real and personal property;
b. Maintain records substantiating all assessments made;
Prepare and issue commitments for the collection of property
taxes and motor vehicle excise taxes by the Office of the
Collector;
c.
Act on abatement and exemption applications filed with it and
represent the Town in proceedings before the Appellate Tax
Board.
d.
Division of Procurement and Purchasing. The Division of
Procurement and Purchasing shall be under the management and
control of a Town Purchasing Agent.
The Division of Procurement and Purchasing shall be responsible
for purchasing all supplies, material and equipment for all offices
and agencies of the Town to the extent provided in MGL c. 41,
§ 103, and for the purposes of MGL c. 30B, the Town Purchasing
Agent shall be the chief procurement officer of the Town. The Town
Purchasing Agent may delegate any of the powers and duties of the
Office of Chief Procurement Officer to one or more procurement
officers to serve specific Town offices or agencies in the manner
provided in MGL c. 30B, § 19.
4.
Establishment. There shall be a Department of Administrative and
Community Services which shall be responsible for the coordination
and management of all administrative and community service related
activities of the Town, including but not limited to programs or services
provided to specific groups of persons, including senior citizens, youth,
veterans, the disabled and others, services provided to the public
generally, including educational, recreational or cultural programs.
(a)
Scope of Department activities. The Department of Administrative and
Community Services shall be responsible for and shall include the
following functions: [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-011]
(1) Emergency management services;
(2) Commission on Disabilities;
(3) Elder services;
(4) Recreation;
(5) Veterans' services;
(6) Youth and family services;
(7) Community events; and
(b)
§ 4-201 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-202
1:74
(8) Cultural Council.
Director of Administrative and Community Services. The Department of
Administrative and Community Services shall be headed by a Director
of Administrative and Community Services.
The Director of Administrative and Community Services shall have the
following powers and duties:
Shall be deemed to be deputy and backup to the Mayor's Chief
of Staff and shall be the coordinator of all matters under the
jurisdiction of the Mayor that are not specifically assigned to some
other person or office;
1.
Ensure compliance with all guidelines and policies issued or
promulgated by the office of the Mayor and participate in the
development of such guidelines and policies;
2.
Provide control over certain Town offices and agencies and serve in
the capacity of a department head for such departments, divisions,
offices and agencies as the Mayor may from time to time direct
within the Department of Administrative and Community Services;
3.
Prepare and monitor budgets for offices and agencies assigned by
the Mayor.10
4.
(c)
Operating divisions. The Department of Administrative and Community
Services shall consist of the following divisions:
Emergency Management/Civil Defense. The Emergency
Management/Civil Defense Division shall be headed by a Director
of Emergency Management/Civil Defense as required by MGL, Acts
of 1950, c. 639, § 13. The Emergency Management/Civil Defense
Division shall provide the resources, manpower, coordination and
management required for the mitigation, response and recovery
phases of emergency management.
1.
2. (Reserved)11
Commission on Disabilities. The nine-member Commission on
Disabilities shall advocate and provide referral services for the
disabled community and coordinate municipal programs for the
community.
3.
Elder Services. The Elder Services Division shall be headed by
a Director of Elder Services and shall include a Board of Elder
Services as provided in § 3-210 of these Ordinances. The Director
4.
(d)
10.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (c)5, which provided that the Director of Administrative
and Community Services was responsible for the maintenance and care of Town buildings
under the jurisdiction of the divisions and agencies within the Department, was repealed
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-011.
11.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (d)2, Maintenance of Town Buildings, was repealed
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 18-011.
§ 4-202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-202
1:75
§ 4-202.1. Asset Management, Department of. [Added 4-2-2018 by
Ord. No. 18-011]
shall be appointed by and responsible to the Director of
Administrative and Community Services. The Elder Services
Division shall plan and coordinate social, educational, financial
advisory and wellness programs and services to senior citizens.
Recreation. The Recreation Division shall be headed by a Director
of Recreation and shall include a five-member Recreation
Commission as provided in § 3-218 of these Ordinances. The
Recreation Division shall offer programs and services that
encourage participation in recreation and cultural activities,
promote the safe utilization and general conservation of the open
space, water, conservation and recreational resources, land and
facilities available in the community.
5.
Veterans' Services. The Veterans' Services Division shall be headed
by a Director of Veterans' Services who shall, except as otherwise
provided in these Ordinances, have all of the powers given by
MGL c. 115 to a veterans' agent, a veterans' burial officer, and
a veterans' graves officer in addition to those of a Director of
Veterans' Services. The Veterans' Services Division shall be
responsible for the delivery of every service to which a veteran
is or may be entitled under the provisions of federal and state
law. The Director of Veterans' Services shall assist veterans and
their survivors in researching information and shall assist in the
development and completion assistance of appropriate applications
to secure benefits to which they are or may be entitled under
federal and state law.
6.
Youth and Families. The Youth and Family Services Division shall
be headed by a Director of Youth and Families Services, who shall
plan and provide social service programs to the youth of Weymouth
and their families and shall be responsible for the operation and
coordination of activities and programs conducted at the
Weymouth Teen Center. There shall be a Youth Coalition as
provided in § 3-224 of these Ordinances.
7.
Community Events. The Community Events Division shall be
headed by the Director of Administrative and Community Services.
There shall be a Community Events Committee as provided in
§ 3-225 of these Ordinances and a local Cultural Council as
provided in § 3-208. The Community Events Division shall be
responsible for the implementation and oversight of annual and
special municipal events held in the Town of Weymouth, as
assigned by the Mayor. The Cultural Council shall be responsible
for the disbursement of annual grant awards.
8.
Establishment. There shall be a Department of Asset Management
that shall be responsible for the management, planning, operation,
(a)
§ 4-202 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-202.1
1:76
§ 4-203. (Reserved)12
§ 4-204. Human Resources, Department of.
maintenance, and care of all buildings, grounds, and facilities,
including for all Town and School departments. The Department shall
operate in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws,
and possess the responsibilities of all school assets under the
Superintendent and School Committee as delegated to this Department
in accordance with section 4.5(3) of the Charter. [Amended 5-7-2018
by Ord. No. 18-054]
Scope of Department activities. The functions of the Department of
Asset Management shall include but are not limited to those
enumerated below:
Responsible for the proper protection and preservation of
municipal buildings, grounds, and facilities, which shall include all
grounds, fixtures, systems, and equipment;
1.
Responsible for the implementation of short-term and long-term
planning and improvements of municipal facilities, as described
above;
2.
Responsible for coordination of grounds, construction, and
landscaping improvements or maintenance activities;
3.
Establish procedures for maintenance, repair, and replacement of
municipal facilities;
4.
Establish and coordinate facilities' usage, fee structure,
maintenance, scheduling, construction, and capital planning with
other applicable Town Departments;
5.
Establish employees' duties and provide administrative oversight,
management, budget, and technical direction to the Department's
personnel.
6.
(b)
Director of Asset Management. The Department of Asset Management
shall be under the management and control of a Director, who shall
work under the general direction of and be responsible to the Mayor,
the Superintendent of Schools, or their designees.
(c)
Establishment. All Town departments and all positions in the Town
service, except for elected officials and employees appointed by the
School Committee, shall be subject to the provisions of this section,
in pursuance of the provisions of MGL c. 41, §§ 108A and 108C. To
the extent that any provision of an approved collective bargaining
agreement conflicts with any provisions of this section with respect to
(a)
12.Editor’s Note: Former § 4-203, Community Services, Department of, was repealed
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092.
§ 4-202.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-204
1:77
employees covered under such labor agreement, the provisions of the
approved collective bargaining agreement shall prevail.
The general purpose of this section is to establish a system of public
personnel management based on merit that meets the social, economic
and program needs of Town government. It is the intent of the section
to provide a means to recruit, select and develop and maintain a
responsive work force. All personnel actions in the Town service shall
be made without regard to sex, race, religion, color, age, handicap,
political affiliation or other non-job-related factors, and shall be based
solely on merit and fitness.
Scope of Department activities. The Department of Human Resources
shall be responsible for and shall include the following functions:
Study, develop, establish and coordinate uniform personnel
practices and procedures for Town departments;
1.
Provide advice and assistance to individual employees on all
personnel matters;
2.
Develop and administer a recruitment and placement program
designed to fill vacant positions in the Town with the best-qualified
persons;
3.
Provide advice and assistance to the Mayor, department heads,
supervisors and elected and appointed officials on all personnel
matters, including position classifications, pay administration,
recruitment and placement, employee relations, performance
evaluation, disciplinary action, employee grievances and employee
training;
4.
Develop and maintain a position classification system for all
nonunion personnel, which shall include the assignment and
utilization of personnel in all departments, and make
recommendations to such departments for changes that may be
necessary to effect the proper classification and assignment of
personnel in such duties as will permit the Town to receive
maximum benefits from the skills and capabilities of such
personnel;
5.
Administer the position classification program providing for the
classification of all positions, other than those filled by popular
elections, into groups and classes doing substantially similar work
or having substantially equal responsibilities so as to ensure the
payment of equitable compensation;
6.
Provide advice and assistance to supervisory personnel of all levels
in planning, developing and conducting training programs;
7.
Standardize forms and records to be used in the Town's personnel
administration program, other than those forms and records whose
8.
(b)
§ 4-204 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-204
1:78
format is regulated by statute or by state agency or agencies
authorized by law to exercise oversight over specific elements of
personnel management;
Provide guidance to appointing authorities on civil service law,
furnish information regarding civil service examinations, render
assistance to all departments in civil service matters, and perform
liaison duties between Town departments and the Division of
Personnel Administration of the commonwealth;
9.
Assist and participate (to the extent requested by the Mayor) in
the negotiation, implementation, and administration of the Town's
collective bargaining agreements;
10.
Recommend to the Mayor and Town Council the enactment of
such ordinances as are considered necessary to implement and
administer the Town's personnel administration program;
11.
Maintain a centralized, secure location for the individual personnel
records of all Town employees. Said record shall contain all the
vital statistics and other pertinent data for each and every person
employed by the Town. It shall be the duty of each department head
and every other supervisory person to provide to the Director of
Human Resources such records and reports as the Director may
require;
12.
Study, develop, establish and coordinate an occupational safety
program for the Town as required by state and federal laws;
13.
In conjunction with the Town's Equal Employment Affirmative
Action Office, coordinate an affirmative action and equal
employment opportunity program for the Town;
14.
Provide a central point for information, coordination and
processing of all employee benefit programs, including group
insurance, Weymouth retirement system, teacher's retirement
system, "tax shelter" plans, workers' compensation claims,
unemployment compensation, etc.
15.
Director of Human Resources.
Establishment. The Department of Human Resources shall be
headed by a Director of Human Resources who shall be appointed
by and who shall be responsible to the Mayor or designee.
[Amended 6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092]
1.
Powers and duties. The Director of Human Resources shall direct
the administrative and technical activities of the Department and
shall have the following specific powers and duties:
Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of
effective personnel management within the several
a.
2.
(c)
§ 4-204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-204
1:79
§ 4-205. Municipal Licenses and Inspections, Department of.
departments in Town government, and make the services and
facilities of the Department available to all Town departments;
b. Advise the Mayor in human resource planning and utilization;
Administer the personnel management system of Town
government under the Mayor;
c.
Establish and maintain records of all employees in Town
service;
d.
Apply and carry out the provisions of this section, the
Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual and perform any
lawful acts which may be necessary or desirable to carry out
the purposes and provisions of applicable laws and regulations;
e.
Provide advice and services to the Mayor in all matters
pertaining to personnel management, to the extent of available
resources.
f.
Personnel code. The Director of Human Resources, subject to the
approval of the Mayor, is empowered and authorized by this section
to establish a personnel code, consisting of personnel policies and
regulations for the maintenance of a public personnel management
system, based on merit.
3.
Continuing review. The Department of Human Resources, in
conjunction with the Office of the Mayor, shall initiate reviews and
evaluations of the operation of the personnel system for conformance
with the provisions of this section. Such reviews shall be scheduled
as often as the Mayor believes it is necessary. Classification reviews
shall be conducted as often as is necessary to reflect changes in the
classification as established or to establish new classifications as
warranted. Studies of compensation and fringe benefits in effect for
comparable positions outside of the service of the Town shall be
conducted at the direction of the Mayor.
The Mayor, following consultation with the Director of Human
Resources, shall make recommendations to the Town Council for
adjusting compensation and fringe benefits in conformance with such
studies.
(d)
Establishment. There shall be a Department of Municipal Licenses
and Inspections which shall be responsible for the coordination and
management of licensing and inspection related activities of the Town
and for the coordination of all activities of all other Town agencies in
relation to any licensing or inspectional service. [Amended 6-21-2016
by Ord. No. 16-092]
(a)
§ 4-204 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-205
1:80
Scope of Department activities. The Department of Municipal Licenses
and Inspections shall be responsible for and shall include the following
functions:
Issue all licenses as provided in MGL c. 138 and c. 140 and
supervise the conduct of the operations so licensed and discipline
any violations of laws, ordinances, rules or regulations affecting the
operations licensed;
1.
Coordinate all inspectional functions carried out by any municipal
agency, or by any officer or employee of the Town;
2.
Maintain in a central place all records relating to inspections,
having a common index;
3.
Coordinate the enforcement of any provision of state statute, Code
of Massachusetts Regulations, Town ordinance, rule or regulation
of the Town which is subject to enforcement by any officer or
employee of the Town;
4.
Develop a single application form to be used in the Department
which will indicate each and every review or inspection which
might be necessary;
5.
Render advice, assistance and guidance to all other Town offices
and agencies in any matter relating to Town inspectional services;
6.
Render advice, assistance and guidance to all members of the
public relating to Town licensing and inspectional services and
develop "user friendly" systems for the convenience of the public.
It is the intention of this provision that all inspections performed
by or under the authority of the Inspector of Buildings, Health
Department, Historic Districts Commission, Inspector of Gas
Piping and Gas Appliances, Plumbing Inspector, Sealer of Weights
and Measures, Wire Inspector, Zoning Enforcement Officer, Fire
Chief and every other local inspection as may otherwise be
authorized is to be coordinated through the Department of
Municipal Licenses and Inspections.
7.
(b)
Director of Municipal Licenses and Inspections. The Department of
Municipal Licenses and Inspections shall be headed by a Director of
Municipal Licenses and Inspections who shall also be the Inspector of
Buildings. The Director shall be a member of the Board of Licensing
Commissioners.
The Director of Municipal Licenses and Inspections shall have the
following specific powers and duties:
Assure the keeping of a full and complete inventory of all
inspectional services performed by any officer or employee of the
Town;
1.
(c)
§ 4-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-205
1:81
Establish common files, by property address, which will be
accessible to all persons performing inspectional services for the
Town and in which records of all inspections performed by any
Town officer or employee shall be kept;
2.
Provide common services for all inspectional personnel and "onestop
shopping" for consumers of Town inspectional services.
3.
Operating divisions. The Department of Municipal Licenses and
Inspections shall consist of the following divisions:
Licensing Division. The Licensing Division shall be headed by the
Board of License Commissioners established by Home Rule Charter
Section 5-7(3) and shall be the licensing authority for all licenses
required or authorized to be issued by or under the authority of
MGL c. 138 and c. 140 and such additional licenses as may be
required or authorized by Town ordinance.
1.
Division of Building Inspections. The Division of Building
Inspections shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR)
pertaining to buildings and other structures (the State Building
Code). For administrative purposes, Fence Viewers shall be
considered to be within the Building Inspections Division. The
Inspector of Buildings shall also be the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
2.
Division of Plumbing Inspection. The Division of Plumbing
Inspection shall be responsible for the enforcement of all
provisions of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR)
applicable to plumbing.
3.
Division of Gas Fittings and Gas Appliances Inspection. The
Division of Gas Fittings and Gas Appliances Inspection shall be
responsible for the enforcement of all provisions of the Code of
Massachusetts Regulations (CMR) applicable to gas fittings and
gas appliances.
4.
Division of Electrical Inspections. The Division of Electrical
Inspections shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR)
applicable to electrical wires and electrical fixtures.
5.
(d)
Affiliated agencies. The following offices shall coordinate the
inspectional functions under their control through the Director of
Municipal Licenses and Inspections and shall, in cooperation with such
officer, arrange for the maintenance of such common records at a
central facility as may be needed, necessary, reasonable or advisable.
Nothing in this section shall be construed in any way as to authorize
the Director of Municipal Licenses and Inspections to interfere in the
conduct of any inspection being conducted by an affiliated agency,
which shall be solely responsible for the inspections conducted by and
under the authority assigned to it. Conversely, the affiliated agencies
(e)
§ 4-205 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-205
1:82
§ 4-206. Planning and Community Development, Department of.
shall make a good faith effort to coordinate their inspectional functions
utilizing the Director of Municipal Licenses and Inspections for such
purposes to the maximum extent possible.
Division of Health and Sanitation Inspection. The Division of Health
and Sanitation Inspection shall be responsible for the enforcement
of all provisions of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations
promulgated by the Department of Public Health of the
Commonwealth (the so-called "State Sanitary Code") which are
subject to enforcement by local government officials and to adopt
from time to time, subject to the approval of the Mayor, such
additional regulations as are necessary or desirable to protect
the public health of the citizens of Weymouth and to enforce all
regulations so promulgated. A Sealer of Weights and Measures
shall, for administrative purposes, be within the Division of Health
and Sanitation.
1.
Division of Environmental Inspection. The Division of
Environmental Inspection shall be responsible for enforcement of
all provisions of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations
promulgated by the Department of Environmental Protection of
the commonwealth which are subject to enforcement by local
government officials and the enforcement of provisions of
Weymouth's ordinances or any local rules or regulations relating to
similar matters. The Conservation Commission, or other authority
exercising substantially similar powers and duties, shall have
authority to adopt and from time to time to revise or amend,
subject to the approval of the Mayor, rules or regulations deemed
necessary or desirable to protect the environment of Weymouth
and to enforce all regulations so promulgated.
2.
Division of Fire and Fire Safety Inspection. The Division of Fire
and Fire Safety Inspection shall be responsible for the enforcement
of all provisions of the Massachusetts General Laws and the Code
of Massachusetts Regulations designed to protect the public from
fire, explosion and similar dangers, whether promulgated by
federal, state or local authority but which are subject to
enforcement by fire chiefs, other fire officers and by local fire
departments.
3.
Establishment. There shall be a Department of Planning and
Community Development which shall formulate, under the direction of
the Mayor, a coordinated economic and community development policy
for the Town of Weymouth. The Department shall provide a mechanism
for the establishment of communication and for the coordination of
efforts between and among official Town agencies, other quasi-public
agencies concerned with development in the Town, private developers
and the office of the Mayor in order to provide the opportunity for
(a)
§ 4-205 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-206
1:83
timely governmental response to development issues, problems and
opportunities.
Scope of Department activities. The Planning and Community
Development Department shall be responsible for the coordination of
all planning and development related activities of the Town
government.
(b)
Director of Planning and Community Development. The Planning and
Community Development Department shall be headed by a Director of
Planning and Community Development.
Powers and duties. The Director of Planning and Community
Development shall have the following specific powers and duties:
Coordinate all planning and community development related
activities of the Town;
a.
Administer the Town agencies and functions assigned to this
Department;
b.
Coordinate all land acquisition and land management
proposals and all economic development planning;
c.
Prepare and maintain a comprehensive or master plan which
shall set forth in both graphic and textual forms policies to
govern the future development of the Town;
d.
Maintain a central records library and storehouse for all data,
reports, records, statistics and every other planning and
development related materials as may be related to the Town,
whether written, printed or otherwise reproduced and whether
on magnetic tape for audio or visual retrieval or stored in
computer-related form;
e.
Oversee the Community Development Office to ensure
applications made by the agency for funds are consistent and
in conformance with the comprehensive or master plan and
to monitor the administration of any grants received for
compliance with the Town's plan and the grantor's
requirements and conditions;
f.
Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations governing any
subject within the jurisdiction of the Department of Planning
and Community Development as are necessary to implement
these provisions;
g.
Provide administrative oversight of the Department of
Municipal Licenses and Inspections.
h.
1.
(c)
Operating divisions/offices. The Department of Planning and
Community Development shall consist of the following divisions and
offices:
(d)
§ 4-206 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-206
1:84
Planning Division. The Planning Division shall consist of a Planning
Board, as provided in § 3-217 of these ordinances.
The Planning Division shall make careful studies of the resources,
possibilities and needs of the Town and shall make careful plans for
the development of the Town.
The Planning Board shall have the power to regulate the
development of land within the Town, as authorized by MGL c.
41, §§ 81A through 81J, by the adoption, administration and
enforcement of subdivision rules and regulations.
The Planning Board shall report to the Town Council its
recommendations for all amendments and revisions of the Zoning
Ordinance as is provided in MGL c. 40A, § 5.
1.
Economic and Community Development Division. The Economic
and Community Development Division is responsible for creating a
business environment which is conducive to improving investment
and job creation within the community.
The Economic and Community Development Division shall be
responsible for the development and improvement of the
residential and commercial neighborhoods of the Town. It shall
seek to create safe and affordable housing, stimulate economic
development, provide public improvements, create opportunity for
arts and culture and deliver public services for the benefit of those
in need.
2.
Appeals Division. The Appeals Division shall consist of a Board of
Zoning Appeals as provided in § 3-201 of these ordinances and in
the Zoning Ordinance.13
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide individual cases
for variances and special permits, as provided for in MGL c. 40A,
§§ 7, 9, 12, 14, 15 and 17, and the Zoning Ordinance of the Town.
3.
Conservation Division. The Conservation Division shall consist of
a Conservation Commission as provided in § 3-206 of these
ordinances.
The Conservation Commission is established to protect, promote
and enhance the quantity and quality of the natural resources
within the Town, especially wetlands, wildlife and water resources,
through planning, acquisition, land management, regulation,
scientific research and public education.
The Conservation Commission may receive gifts, bequests or
devises of personal property or interests in real property in the
name of the Town, subject to approval of the Mayor. The
4.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 4-206 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-206
1:85
§ 4-207. Public Works, Department of.
Conservation Commission may receive monetary gifts for
development of a Conservation Fund, and expend the same, subject
to the General Laws and the approval of the Mayor.
The Conservation Commission is responsible for the
implementation of the provisions of MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A.
The Conservation Commission may adopt policies and promulgate
land management plans for properties of the Town reserved for
conservation purposes.
Other multiple-member bodies. The Department shall provide
administrative support to the Historical Commission, Fair Housing
Commission, Waterfront Committee and such others as may from
time to time be assigned to the Department by the Mayor.
5.
Establishment. There shall be a Department of Public Works, headed
by a Director of Public Works, which shall be responsible for the
performance of all public works related activities of the Town.
(a)
Scope of Department activities. The Department of Public Works shall
assume all of the duties and responsibilities related to public works
activities that, prior to the adoption of the Home Rule Charter, were
performed by or under the Tree Warden, Board of Public Works,
Director of Public Works, Playground and Recreation Commission, and
Board of Selectmen.
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of all equipment and vehicles belonging to the
Department and of all other Town equipment and vehicles which are
assigned to it for maintenance and repair.
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the planning,
design and construction of all assigned public works improvement
projects.
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for all of the
services of a Tree Warden as described in MGL c. 87 and for all of
the services of a Superintendent of Shade Tree Management and Pest
Control as described in MGL c. 132.
(b)
Director of Public Works. The Department of Public Works shall be
headed by a Director of Public Works.
Powers and duties. The Department of Public Works shall be under
the direct control and supervision of a Director of Public Works. The
Director of Public Works shall be responsible for the supervision and
coordination of all activities of the Department of Public Works in
accordance with state statutes, Town ordinances, administrative codes,
rules and regulations.
(c)
§ 4-206 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-207
1:86
§ 4-208. Health, Department of.
Operating divisions/offices. The Department of Public Works shall
consist of the following divisions and offices:
Highway Division. There shall be a Highway Division which shall
include maintenance and repair, sweeping, snow and ice removal
and control of all public streets, roads, ways and sidewalks of the
Town, including the storm drainage system included therein and
the coordination, collection and disposal of rubbish and trash.
1.
Water and Sewer Division. There shall be a Water and Sewer
Division which shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair
of the water supply and distribution system of the Town and all
appurtenances relating to said system and for the maintenance and
repair of the sanitary sewer system and for the water supply and
distribution system of the Town and all appurtenances relating to
said system, including its connection to the Massachusetts Water
Resources Authority for treatment and disposal of sewage.
2.
Cemetery Division. There shall be a Cemetery Division that shall be
responsible for the care and management of all public cemeteries
and burying grounds in the Town of Weymouth. A Cemetery
Commission, as provided in § 3-205 of these ordinances, shall assist
the Director of Public Works in setting policies governing the
operation of Town cemeteries.
3.
Grounds, Fields and Parks Division. There shall be a Grounds,
Fields and Parks Division which shall be responsible for the care
and maintenance of all grounds surrounding public buildings and
other facilities, parks and recreation areas of the Town and such
other landscaped areas as may from time to time be assigned to its
care.
4.
Forestry Division. There shall be a Forestry Division which shall
include the Tree Board, the Tree Warden and Superintendent of
Shade Tree Management and Insect Pest Control Services in
accordance with MGL c. 132, § 13.
5.
Motor Vehicle Maintenance Division. There shall be a Motor
Vehicle Maintenance Division which shall be responsible for the
maintenance and ordinary repair of motor vehicles and equipment
belonging to the Town.
6.
Engineering Division. There shall be Engineering Division, headed
by a Town Engineer, which shall be responsible for performing
all engineering services for all Town offices and agencies. Such
engineering services as may be required may be performed directly
by employees of the Engineering Division or by consulting
engineers under the supervision of the Division as may from time
to time be needed and necessary.
7.
(d)
§ 4-207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-208
1:87
§ 4-209. Police Department.
Establishment. There shall be a Health Department that shall be
responsible for the administration and implementation of all healthrelated
services conducted under existing public health laws,
regulations or Town ordinances.
(a)
Scope of Department activities. The Department of Health shall be
responsible for the following duties:
In coordination with the Department of Municipal Licenses and
Inspections, the Health Department shall be responsible for the
issuance of health permits or licenses required under state and
local laws;
1.
Preparation of draft health regulations for submission to the Board
of Health and Mayor for promulgation as rules and regulations;
2.
Documentation of investigations and mandatory municipal
inspections and related inspections and responding to complaints,
inquiries and referrals from the public;
3.
Coordination of vaccine-related activities used in the prevention
of pathogenic disease, review of immunization records of school
children and review of school programs;
4.
Coordination and implementation of various community health
clinics for the public;
5.
Implementation of services in the areas of septic management and
tobacco control;
6.
Oversight of the disease vector control program in cooperation
with outside professionals such as exterminators, consultants,
mosquito control and the Animal Inspector.
There shall be a Board of Health as established by § 3-212 of
these ordinances.
7.
(b)
Director of Public Health. The Health Department shall be headed by a
Director of Public Health. The Director shall be a member of the Board
of Licensing Commissioners. The Director of Public Health shall, with
the consent of the Mayor, appoint a physician or medical doctor who
shall be medical advisor to the Department, to the Director and to the
Mayor.
The Director of Public Health shall from time to time, subject to the
consent of the Mayor, propose such rules and regulations regarding
the public health deemed to be needed or desired to protect the public
health.
(c)
Scope of authority. There shall be a Police Department responsible for
programs of crime prevention, crime detection and for traffic safety and
(a)
§ 4-208 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-209
1:88
enforcement of rules and regulations governing the operation of motor
vehicles and the use of ways by pedestrians. The Police Department
shall be responsible to maintain, keep and preserve the public peace
and order.
Scope of Department activities. The functions of the Police Department
shall include but are not limited to those enumerated below:
Crime prevention: preserve the public peace, prevent crime, and
detect and arrest offenders;
1.
Traffic enforcement: administer and enforce laws regulating,
directing, controlling and restricting the movement of vehicular
and pedestrian traffic, and the general use of the streets by
vehicles and the public;
2.
Training: operate a training program to maintain and improve the
competency and efficiency of the members of the Department;
3.
Investigations: prepare reports on inquiries and investigations
made by officers of the Department to follow up various crimes and
other offenses against the public peace committed within the Town.
4.
(b)
The following services shall be contained within the Police Department
and be subject to the general supervision and oversight of the Chief of
Police:
1. (Reserved)14
Harbor Division. The Harbor Division shall be headed by a
Harbormaster (see § 3-312 of these ordinances). The Harbor
Division shall be responsible for the operation of all vessels in the
harbor in conformity with MGL c. 102, §§ 17 through 28, and all
Town ordinances adopted in relation to the harbor.
2.
Animal Control Division. The Animal Control Division shall be
headed by an Animal Control Officer as provided in § 3-302 of these
ordinances. The Animal Control Division shall be responsible for
the enforcement of all laws relating to dogs, including but not
limited to MGL c. 140, §§ 136A through 174E, and all ordinances of
the Town further regulating animals.
3.
(c)
Chief of Police. The Police Department shall be headed by a Police Chief
who shall be responsible to maintain, keep and preserve the public
peace and order. The Police Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, in
accordance with the provisions of the Civil Service Law. The Chief of
Police shall be a member of the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Police Department under
the direction of the Mayor. All members of the Police Department shall
(d)
14.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection (c)1, School Traffic Supervisors, was repealed 6-5-2017
by Ord. No. 17-074.
§ 4-209 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-209
1:89
§ 4-210. Fire Department.
be under the immediate supervision, direction, and control of the Police
Chief. It shall be the duty of the Police Chief, under the supervision
of the Mayor, to preserve order and to see to the enforcement of the
ordinances and laws of the municipality and all statutes applicable
therein. The Chief of Police shall have such other powers and perform
such other duties as are now or may hereafter be prescribed.
Powers and duties. The Police Chief shall be accountable to the
Mayor and shall have the following duties:
a. Administer the affairs of the Police Department;
Have general authority and control over all division staff and
oversee the proper fulfillment of all tasks and duties assigned
to the Department;
b.
Prescribe such rules and regulations as he deems necessary or
expedient for the proper operation of the Police Department
and to that end keep himself informed of the latest
administrative practices;
c.
Take all personnel actions, including hiring, assigning and
reassigning employees, including supervisory personnel,
within the Police Department, and shall supervise the
performance of all personnel assigned to the Department.
d.
1.
Scope of authority. The Fire Department shall be responsible for
providing fire protection services in the Town, including fire safety
programs, fire suppression and extinguishing fires.
(a)
Scope of Department activities. The functions of the Fire Department
shall include but are not limited to those enumerated below:
Fire extinguishment: take all necessary steps for the
extinguishment of fires within the Town, including utilization of all
necessary personnel and equipment therefor, the destruction of any
building or structure and the removal of any obstruction for the
purpose of checking or extinguishing any such fire;
1.
Public alarm boxes: establish the location, relocation or removal of
all public fire alarm boxes;
2.
Training: provide for and administer a program for the training of
firefighters;
3.
Records: maintain a record of all fires which occur within the Town
requiring the services of the Fire Department;
4.
Investigations: investigate the causes of all fires and provide for
written reports of all suspected arsons;
5.
(b)
§ 4-209 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-210
1:90
§ 4-211. Information Technology, Department of.
Inspections: inspect all buildings and structures as provided for by
the so-called State Fire Code (MGL c. 148 and 527 CMR), and for
the issuance and renewal of certificates of occupancy.
6.
7. Other services: provide rescue and emergency medical service.
Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor in
accordance with the provisions of the Civil Service Law. The Fire Chief
shall be a member of the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
Powers and duties. The Fire Chief shall be accountable to the
Mayor and shall have the following duties:
a. Administer the affairs of the Fire Department;
Have general authority and control over all division staff and
oversee the proper fulfillment of all tasks and duties assigned
to the Fire Department;
b.
Prescribe such rules and regulations as he deems necessary
or expedient for the proper operation of the Fire Department
and to that end keep informed of the latest administrative
practices;
c.
Take all personnel actions, including hiring, assigning and
reassigning employees, including supervisory personnel,
within his Department and shall supervise their performance;
d.
Coordinate all emergency preparedness functions of the Town
to be compatible with the functions of the federal and state
governments and adjacent political subdivisions;
e.
Establish policies for effective use of workforce resources and
facilities to deal with any major natural disaster or nuclear
incident;
f.
Provide for emergency functions to prevent and minimize the
effects of disasters on persons and provide for the emergency
repair of damage to public facilities resulting from enemy
attack, fire, flood, tornado, earthquake, or other natural
causes.
g.
1.
(c)
Establishment. There shall be a Department of Information Technology
which shall be responsible for the development, enhancement and
support of the Town's computing and telecommunications
infrastructure and software applications. The Department shall also
provide the systems and services necessary for the Town's departments
and users to fulfill their stated goals and objectives.
(a)
Scope of activities. The Department of Information Technology shall
be responsible for the development, management and ongoing
(b)
§ 4-210 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-211
1:91
§ 4-212. Public Libraries, Department of.
maintenance and support of all Town computing and
telecommunications activities, including oversight responsibility over
all Town technical initiatives.
Chief Information Officer. The Department of Information Technology
shall be headed by a Chief Information Officer.
Powers and duties. The Chief Information Officer shall have the
following specific powers and duties: [Amended 6-21-2016 by
Ord. No. 16-092]
Provide strategic direction, consulting and/or oversight for all
computing and telecommunications initiatives;
a.
Provide administrative, management and technical direction to
the Department's personnel;
b.
Provide the systems and services required by the Town
according to priorities set by the Mayor.
c.
1.
(c)
Establishment. There shall be a Department of Public Libraries which
shall be responsible for the management of the public library system.
(a)
Scope of Department activities. The Department of Public Libraries
shall provide intellectual, cultural and recreational interests through
the public libraries by offering print and nonprint formats, including upto-
date technology, programs and workshops.
(b)
Director of Library Services. The Department of Public Libraries shall
be headed by a Director of Library Services who shall be appointed by
and be responsible to the Mayor or designee. The Director of Library
Services shall have the following powers and duties: [Amended
6-21-2016 by Ord. No. 16-092]
Shall be in full charge of the public library system and of its
branches as may from time to time be established;
1.
2. Shall be in full charge of all personnel assigned to the library;
Shall oversee the purchase or acquisition of all books, periodicals,
art objects and every item or thing contained in library collections.
3.
(c)
Operating divisions. The Department of Public Libraries shall have the
following divisions:
Division of Children and Youth Services: provides services for
children from infancy through middle school by providing materials
and programs for self-enrichment and for discovering the pleasures
of reading and learning;
1.
(d)
§ 4-211 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-212
1:92
Division of Adult Services: PROVIDES current and high-interest
materials in a variety of formats for persons of all ages pursuing
cultural, educational and recreational interests;
2.
Division of Reference Services: provides timely, accurate and useful
information through information services, research, interlibrary
loan and cooperative reference services for those pursuing jobrelated,
educational or independent learning objectives.
3.
The Department shall include a Board of Library Trustees as provided
in § 3-214 of these ordinances. The seven members of the Board of
Trustees of the Public Library system serve in an advisory capacity and
may provide library policy recommendations.
(e)
§ 4-212 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-212
1:93
Chapter 5
FINANCIAL REGULATIONS
§ 4-212 WEYMOUTH CODE § 4-212
1:94
SECTION 5-100
Financial Regulations
§ 5-101. Written contracts required.
Every officer or board in charge of a department and every committee
of the Town, when authorized to do any public work or to purchase any
supplies, materials or property or erect, construct or repair any building,
the estimated cost of which exceeds $10,000, shall make a written contract
therefor which shall be filed with the Director of Municipal Finance.
§ 5-102. Exception for emergencies.
The Mayor may exempt a purchase or contract from any or all of the
provisions of the preceding section when, in the opinion of the Mayor, an
emergency exists requiring immediate action on such purchase or contract
to protect the health or safety of persons or property, or when no reasonably
suitable substitute can be obtained for the article or service to be purchased
or contracted for. Evidence indicating that such an emergency exists or that
no reasonable substitute for a purchase or service can be obtained shall be
furnished to the Mayor and to the Director of Municipal Finance, in writing,
by the officer, board or committee making such purchase or contract and
shall be kept on file with other records of such transactions.
§ 5-103. Written contracts for unclassified positions to be filed with
Director of Municipal Finance.
All contracts for services of employment to the Town of Weymouth (for
positions not classified under the Human Resources Department or under
the direction of the School Department) shall be in writing and filed with
the Director of Municipal Finance.
§ 5-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-103
1:95

SECTION 5-200
Appropriated Monies
§ 5-201. Exclusive use of appropriated money.
No money appropriated for general or special purpose shall be applied
to any other use unless by vote of the Town Council and pursuant to the
provisions of the Home Rule Charter, these ordinances and law.
§ 5-202. Procurement of supplies and services.
No officer, department head or committee authorized to expend money
shall make purchases of supplies or materials or contract for services to be
rendered to the Town without following the rules and regulations governing
such matters as may be promulgated from time to time by the Director of
Municipal Finance.
§ 5-203. Transportation allowance.
The Mayor shall be empowered to establish for each fiscal year a mileage
allowance for transportation expenses for all Town employees.
§ 5-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-203
1:97

SECTION 5-300
Miscellaneous Financial Provisions
§ 5-301. Purchasing and other procurements.
All purchases and procurements shall be made in accordance with the
procedures established in MGL c. 30B. Notwithstanding the establishment
of any office or agency with a specific responsibility to purchase and
procure goods and services for the Town of Weymouth, it shall be
understood that the Mayor shall retain authority over every purchase and
procurement.
§ 5-302. Trust funds.
The Town Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds given or bequeathed
to the Town for any purpose and shall manage and invest such sums in
the same manner and with the same restrictions as apply to how other
municipal funds are managed and invested. The Town Treasurer shall file
a report annually with the Office of the Mayor, a copy of which shall be
printed in the Annual Town Report, which shows the beginning balance
in each fund, the interest earned during the year just ended, the amount
expended (and unless an account is given elsewhere, the purposes for which
such funds were expended) and the ending balance in each such account.
§ 5-303. Employee off-duty work details.
All money received by the Town as compensation for work performed by
one of its employees on an off-duty work detail shall be deposited in the
Town treasury and kept in a fund separate from other municipal funds.
As provided in MGL c. 44, § 53C, the funds in such account may be used,
without further appropriation, to compensate Town employees for such
services. A surcharge of 10% shall be added to the fee charged by the
municipal agency for the service, which shall be paid by the person
requesting the service. This fee shall be to cover the cost of administering
the fund.
§ 5-304. Disposal of surplus property.
Personal property. Subject to such regulations regarding the disposition
of surplus property as may be promulgated by the Director of Municipal
Finance, the disposal of surplus personal property shall be governed by
the provisions of MGL c. 30B, § 15.
(a)
Real property. Subject to such regulations regarding the disposition
of real property as may be promulgated by the Director of Municipal
Finance, the disposal of surplus real property shall be governed by the
provisions of MGL c. 30B, § 16.
(b)
§ 5-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-305
1:99
§ 5-305. Fees and charges by municipal agencies.
Any municipal agency which is otherwise authorized to issue a license,
certificate or permit, or to render a service or to perform work for a person
or class of persons, may from time to time fix a reasonable fee for the
license, certificate, permit or for rendering the service or for performing the
work in the manner provided in MGL c. 40, § 22F.
No municipal agency shall establish a fee or charge pursuant to this section
without the prior review and consent of the Mayor, or, if the agency is
appointed by the School Committee, without the consent of the School
Committee.
§ 5-306. Licenses and permits of delinquent taxpayers.
The Town may deny any application for, or revoke or suspend a building
permit or any local license or permit, including renewals and transfers,
issued by any board, officer, department for any person, corporation or
business enterprise who or which has neglected or refused to pay any local
taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, including
amounts assessed under the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D, or with respect
to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject of such license or
permit and which activity, event or matter is to be carried out or exercised
on or about real estate the owner of which has neglected or refused to
pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or any other municipal
charges.
Notice to Town agencies of tax delinquency. The Treasurer-Collector or
other municipal officials responsible for records of all municipal taxes,
assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter
referred to as the "Treasurer-Collector," shall annually furnish each
department, board, commission or division, hereinafter referred to as
the "licensing authority," that issues licenses or permits, including
renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation or business
enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the "party," that has neglected
or refused to pay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or
other municipal charges for not less than a twelve-month period and
that such party has not filed in good faith a pending application for an
abatement of such tax or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax
Board.
(a)
Written notice to be given before suspension or revocation take effect.
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or
permit, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name
appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the
Treasurer-Collector or with respect to any activity, event or other
matter which is the subject of such license or permit and which activity,
event or matter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or
exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose name
appears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the
Treasurer-Collector; provided, however, that written notice is given
(b)
§ 5-305 WEYMOUTH CODE § 5-306
1:100
to the party and the Treasurer-Collector, as required by applicable
provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier
than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for
denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to any party.
Hearing. The Treasurer-Collector shall have the right to intervene in
any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation
or suspension. Any findings made by the licensing authority with
respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension shall be made
only for the purpose of such proceedings and shall not be relevant to
or introduced in any proceeding at law, except for any appeal from
such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license or permit
denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued
or renewed until the licensing authority receives a certificate issued by
the Treasurer-Collector that the party is in good standing with respect
to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other
municipal charges payable to the Town as of the date of issuance of said
certificate.
(c)
Payment agreement. Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter
into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to
issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit,
and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the
satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with
said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of
said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given
notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
(d)
Waiver. The Mayor may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if
he or she finds there is no direct or indirect business interest by the
property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his
immediate family, as defined in MGL c. 268B, § 1, in the business or
activity conducted in or on said property.
(e)
Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following licenses and
permits granted under the Massachusetts General Laws:
Citation Permit or License
MGL c. 48, § 13 Open burning
MGL c. 85, § 11A15 Bicycle permits
MGL c. 101, § 33 Sales of articles for charitable purposes
MGL c. 149, § 69 Children's work permits
MGL c. 140, § 21E Clubs, associations dispensing food or
beverages licenses
MGL c. 140, § 137 Dog licenses
MGL c. 131, § 12 Fishing, hunting, trapping licenses
(f)
15.Editor's Note: This section of state law was repealed by St. 2008, c. 525, § 2.
§ 5-306 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-306
1:101
§ 5-307. Due dates for payments to Town; interest on unpaid
balances.
Unless some other provision is made by law which permits a longer time for
payment, all bills for the payment of any sum due to the Town of Weymouth,
for whatever purpose, shall be due on the 31st day following the date such
bill has been issued.
Interest shall be added to any balance which remains unpaid after such 31st
day at the same rate as is provided in MGL c. 59, § 57.
§ 5-307a. Tax title agreements.
§ 5-308. Acceptance of gifts, grants and bequests.
Any municipal agency may accept grants, gifts, or bequests of funds from
any other level or unit of government, from a charitable entity, from a
private corporation, or from an individual or group of individuals when
such funds are to be expended for purposes within the jurisdiction of said
municipal agency.
A municipal agency may expend up to $5,000 annually, in the aggregate,
from the funds in any such account, with the approval of the Mayor, for
the purposes as specified in the gift or grant or bequest. Sums in excess of
$5,000 may be expended only with the approval of the Town Council.
The Treasurer/Collector shall maintain a list of all such funds as may be
established pursuant to this section, which listing shall be kept in a place
convenient for public examination during regular office hours. A summary
of the receipts and disbursements in each account so established shall be
published annually in the Town Report.
This section is designed to implement and apply the provisions of MGL c.
44, § 53A.
Citation Permit or License
MGL c. 207, § 28 Marriage licenses
MGL c. 140, § 181 Theatrical events, public exhibition permits
Pursuant to provisions of MGL c. 60 and c. 62A,16 the Treasurer of
the Town of Weymouth ("Town") shall enter into a written payment
agreement ("agreement") with any person(s) entitled to redeem
ownership of parcels of real estate ("redeemer") which have been taken
by the Town as a result of nonpayment of real estate taxes.
(a)
(b) The provisions of this section of the Code shall expire on June 30, 2011.
16.Editor's Note: MGL c. 62A, Simplified Method of Computing Individual Income Taxes, was
repealed by St. 1972, C. 590.
§ 5-306 WEYMOUTH CODE § 5-308
1:102
Chapter 6
PRESERVATION OF PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER
§ 5-308 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 5-308
1:103

SECTION 6-100
Alcoholic Beverages and Marijuana
§ 6-101. Public consumption of alcohol.
§ 6-102. Public consumption of marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol or
marijuana-infused products.
Definitions. The following words as used in this section, unless the
context otherwise requires, shall have the following meanings:
BEACH — Any beach under the care and control of the Town and
beaches within the limits of the Town to which the public has a right of
access.
PARK — Any public park under the care and control of the Town of
Weymouth.
PLAYGROUND — Any playground under the care and control of the
Town of Weymouth.
PRIVATE PARKING AREAS — Any private parking area throughout the
Town to which the public has the general right of access.
PUBLIC PARKING AREAS — Any public parking area under the care
and control of the Town of Weymouth.
PUBLIC WAYS — All ways to which the public has a right of access.
TOWN FOREST — Any Town forest under the care and control of the
Town of Weymouth.
(a)
Consumption in public places without permission prohibited. No person
shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages, as defined in MGL c.
138, § 1, while on, in or upon the public ways and places set forth in
Subsection (a), above, or places to which members of the public have
access as invitees or licensees, or a park, Town forest, public parking
area or playground, or any beach under the care and control of the
Town or on any beach within the limits of the Town to which the public
has a right of access, or on private land or place without the consent of
the owner or person in control thereof.
(b)
Evidence of violation. Possession of an open can, bottle or other
container, which upon analysis by the Police Department is determined
to contain an alcoholic beverage as defined in MGL c. 138, § 1, shall be
prima facie evidence of drinking or consuming said alcoholic beverage.
All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of this section shall be
seized and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against the
person or persons summoned before the court.
(c)
Arrest without warrant; penalty. A police officer may arrest without
a warrant anyone who violates this section. Whoever violates any
provision of this section shall be liable to a penalty of $100 for each
violation.
(d)
§ 6-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-102
1:105
Prohibition. No person, whether in or upon a vehicle, motor vehicle,
conveyance or in or upon any bus or other passenger conveyance
operated by a common carrier, or on foot, shall burn, smoke, ingest,
or otherwise use or consume marihuana (marijuana),
tetrahydrocannabinol or marihuana (marijuana) infused products, as
defined in MGL c. 94C, § 1, as amended, and 105 CMR 725.004, while
in or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, footway, passageway, stairs,
bridge, park, playground, beach, recreation area, boat landing, public
building, schoolhouse, school grounds, cemetery, parking lot, or any
area owned by or under the control of the Town of Weymouth; or in any
place accessible to the public, or on private land or place without the
consent of the owner or person in control thereof.
(a)
Enforcement. This section may be enforced through any lawful means
in law or in equity by the Mayor, or duly authorized agents, or any
police officer of the Town of Weymouth, including, but not limited to,
enforcement by criminal indictment or complaint pursuant to MGL c.
40, § 21, or by noncriminal disposition pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D.
Whoever is found in violation of this section shall, when requested by
an official authorized to enforce this section, state his true name and
address to said official. The fine for a violation of this section shall be
$300 for each offense. Any penalty imposed under this section shall be
in addition to any civil penalty imposed under MGL c. 94C, § 32L.
(b)
Seizure of controlled substances. All controlled substances being used
in violation of this section shall be seized, held, and disposed of in
accordance with MGL c. 94C, § 47A.
(c)
Severability. If any provision of this section is determined to be invalid
or unenforceable by final judgment or order of a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall continue in effect to the
extent permitted by law.
(d)
§ 6-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-102
1:106
SECTION 6-200
Signage
§ 6-201. Posting of signs prohibited.
Posting of signs prohibited. No person, unless required by law so to do,
shall make any marks, letters, figures of any kind or place any sign,
advertisement or placard (political or otherwise) upon or against any
wall, fence, utility pole, post, ledge, stone, tree, building or structure
in the Town without the permission of the owner thereof, nor upon any
sidewalk or in or upon any public way or upon any property of the Town
without the consent of the Mayor or the designee of the Mayor.
(a)
Penalties. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine of $50.
(b)
§ 6-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-201
1:107

SECTION 6-300
Numbering of Buildings
§ 6-301. Identification; location; responsibilities.
Determination of numbers by Town Engineer. The Town Engineer shall
determine and designate the numbering of all houses, buildings or
structures within the Town of Weymouth.
(a)
Responsibility of owners. It shall be the responsibility of each owner
or occupant of each house, building or structure within the Town of
Weymouth to place thereon the number designated by the Town
Engineer. No person shall affix or suffer to remain on any house,
building or structure a street number other than the one designated by
the Town Engineer.
(b)
Size, color, location and visibility of said numbers.
1. House numbers shall be a minimum of three inches in height;
In order to be visible from the road, street or way, the number shall
be of contrasting color and shall be reasonably visible to persons or
vehicles approaching from either direction upon said road, street
or way;
2.
The number shall be affixed to the street-facing side of the house,
building or structure;
3.
If the numbers are unidentifiable from the road, street or way, or
the house, building or structure is greater than 100 feet from the
road, street or way, a post with the numbers affixed thereto shall
be placed by the owner at the entrance of the driveway leading to
the house, building or structure.
4.
(c)
New buildings. New buildings shall be identified in accordance with
this section before a certificate of use and occupancy is issued therefor.
(d)
Numbering violation. Any person found to be in violation of this section
shall be served by the Fire Department, Police Department or
Department of Public Works with a warning of violation and provided 30
days for the satisfactory correction thereof. At the end of the thirty-day
period, and for each thirty-day period thereafter where the violation
continues, a notice of violation shall be issued.
(e)
Penalty. The penalty for any violation of this section shall be $50. Upon
notice of violation, an owner shall correct each violation within 30 days.
Each thirty-day period of noncompliance shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(f)
§ 6-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-301
1:109

SECTION 6-400
Firearms and Explosives
§ 6-401. Possession or use of explosives prohibited.
No person shall have in his or her possession, or use, or explode any
combustible or explosive composition or substance or any other article
that was prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect
by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation. This prohibition is
intended to include every item or device within the scope of the prohibition
contained in MGL c. 148, § 39. The penalty for violation of this section shall
be $100.
§ 6-402. Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions.
No person, except a police officer in the performance of his or her duties,
shall discharge any gun, firearm or cannon in any street or way or any other
place in the Town of Weymouth except in defense of life or property. The
Town Council, with the consent of the Mayor, may provide for exceptions
to this restriction for the purpose of celebrating a patriotic or historical
occasion. The penalty for violation of this section shall be $100.
§ 6-403. Restrictions on hunting at Back River and Great Esker
Park.
Hunting, use of bow and arrow, employment of steel leg-hold traps and
discharging of firearms, except by law enforcement officers in the
performance of their duties, shall be prohibited on that portion of Townowned
property consisting of approximately 237 acres, commonly known
as "Back River and Great Esker Park," as described by a deed between
the United States of America and the Town of Weymouth, dated October
24, 1966, and recorded at the Norfolk County Registry of Deeds in Book
4390, Page 670. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine of $100 for each violation.
§ 6-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-403
1:111

SECTION 6-500
Burglar Alarm Systems
§ 6-501. Operating restrictions; definitions.
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given
herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future; words used in the plural number
include the singular number; and words in the singular number include
the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely
directory.
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices
or a single device, such as a solid-state unit which plugs directly into
a 110V AC line, arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring
urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. Fire
alarm systems and alarm systems which monitor temperature, smoke,
humidity or any other condition not directly related to the detection of
an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery at
a premises are specifically excluded from the provisions of this section.
The provisions of Subsection C of this section shall apply to all users.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or negligence of
the user of an alarm system or his employees or agents; or any signal
or oral communication transmitted to the Police Department when in
fact there has been no unauthorized intrusion, robbery or burglary or
attempt thereat. For the purposes of this definition, activation of alarm
systems by acts of God, including but not limited to power outages,
hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and similar weather or atmospheric
disturbances, shall not be deemed to be a false alarm.
(a)
Control and curtailment of signals permitted by alarm systems.
Every alarm user shall submit to the Police Chief the names and
telephone numbers of at least two other persons (aka "key
holders") who are authorized to respond to an emergency signal
transmitted by an alarm system and who can open the premises
wherein the alarm system is installed. It shall be incumbent upon
the owner of said premises to immediately notify the Weymouth
Police Department of any changes in the list of authorized
employees so named in the business listing to respond to alarms.
1.
All alarm systems which use an audible horn or bell shall be
equipped with a device that will shut off such bell or horn within 15
minutes after activation of the alarm system. All alarm systems in
the Town of Weymouth must have a shut-off device installed.
2.
Any alarm system emitting a continuous and uninterrupted signal
for more than 15 minutes between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. which
cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed due to the absence or
3.
(b)
§ 6-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-501
1:113
unavailability of the alarm user or those persons designated by
him under Subsection (b)(1) of this section and which disturbs the
peace, comfort or repose of a community, a neighborhood or a
considerable number of inhabitants of the area where the alarm
system is located shall constitute a public nuisance. Upon receiving
complaints regarding such a continuous and uninterrupted signal,
the Police Chief shall endeavor to contact the alarm user or
members of the alarm user's family or those persons designated by
the alarm user under Subsection (b)(1) of this section in an effort
to abate the nuisance. The Police Chief shall cause to be recorded
the names and addresses of all complainants and the time each
complaint was made.
No alarm system which is designed to transmit emergency
messages or signals of intrusion to the Police Department will be
tested until the Police Dispatcher has been notified.
4.
Penalties.
Upon receipt of three or more false alarms within a calendar year,
the Police Chief may order the user to discontinue the use of
the alarm, or may disconnect any direct connections to the Police
Department.
1.
The user shall be assessed $50 as a false alarm service fee for each
false alarm in excess of three occurring within a calendar year. The
Police Chief shall notify the alarm user either by certified mail or by
service in hand by a police officer of such violation, and said user
shall submit payment to the Town Treasurer within 15 days of said
notice for deposit to the general fund.
2.
(c)
§ 6-501 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-501
1:114
SECTION 6-600
Fire Alarm Systems
§ 6-601. Permit and operating requirements.
Permit required; responsibility for system; applicability; duration:
Persons, organizations or other legal entities residing or having
a place of business in the Town who seek to utilize or maintain
private fire alarm signal systems directly to the Fire Department
shall apply for and obtain an annual permit for same from the Fire
Department. Said permit shall be issued by the Fire Chief or his
designee upon satisfactory inspection of the system;
1.
The responsibility and cost for said system shall be that of the
permit holder;
2.
The permit holder shall maintain the system in proper working
condition in order for said permit to remain valid and the system to
remain connected to the Fire Department;
3.
Said permits shall be issued on a fiscal-year basis or for the balance
thereof.
4.
(a)
Fee schedule. The initial installation permit fee and the annual permit
fee shall be established by the Fire Chief in accordance with § 5-305.
(b)
Violations and penalties. Anyone violating the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of $50 for each day that said violations exist.
(c)
§ 6-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-601
1:115

SECTION 6-700
Nondomesticated Animals and Domesticated Animals
[Amended 11-30-2015 by Ord. No. 15-090]
§ 6-701. Animals at large.
§ 6-702. Displaying nondomesticated animals for entertainment.
No person shall suffer any horse, cattle, other grazing animals or fowl
kept or controlled by him to permit the same to run at large or pasture
upon any of the streets, sidewalks, ways, or other places within the
Town, either with or without a keeper; provided that this ordinance
shall not affect the rights of any person to use land within the limits of
such way adjoining his own premises.
(a)
Definitions: The definitions contained in MGL c. 140, § 136A, MGL c.
131, MGL c. 131A, and regulations promulgated thereunder, shall be
referenced to define terms used in this ordinance. In addition, the
definitions of the following terms shall apply:
ANIMALS — Any mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian, or fish.
DOMESTICATED ANIMALS — Any animal occurring naturally or
historically in the United States that through long association with
humans, has been bred to a degree which has resulted in genetic
changes affecting the temperament, color, conformation or other
attributes of the species to the extent that makes it unique and different
from wild animals of its kind.
EDUCATION — Nonprofit groups, institutions or individuals who
engage in teaching and instructing with intent and the effect of
imparting knowledge to others through oral presentations and/or
written hand-outs (whose sole purpose is to teach without
entertainment), or entity deemed educational by the Animal Control
Officer, in consultation with the Mayor.
ENTERTAINMENT — Any organization which uses animals to perform
tricks or participate as accompaniments in performances for the
amusement of an audience.
EXOTIC ANIMAL — Any animal not occurring naturally or historically
in the United States. The phrase includes, but is not limited to, all
manner of lions, tigers, leopards, jaguars, cheetahs, elephants, zebras,
camels, giraffes, reptiles and any crossbreed of these animals other
than fish or insects.
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal occurring naturally and traditionally
within the United States that is not a domesticated animal, livestock, or
fowl.
(a)
No living nondomesticated animals shall be displayed for public
entertainment or amusement in circuses, carnivals or other similar
entities on property owned by the Town of Weymouth, on Town-owned
(b)
§ 6-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-702
1:117
§ 6-703. Feeding of wild animals.
§ 6-704. Keeping of livestock or fowl.
property under lease, or on private property. As used in this subsection,
"displayed" shall include, but is not limited to, animal acts or
performances, animal rides and competitive animal races.
Section 6-702 shall not apply to domestic animals, including, but not
limited to, dogs, cats, horses and farm animals.
(c)
Section 6-702 shall not apply shall not apply to exhibits deemed
educational by the Town of Weymouth, as determined by the Animal
Control Officer, in consultation with the Mayor.
(d)
No person within the Town shall feed any wild animal where such
prohibition is posted.
(a)
The Animal Control Officer or any police officer of the Town is hereby
authorized to investigate all complaints made to the Animal Control
Officer or the Town of Weymouth Police Department against the person
who is alleged to have violated the provisions of this ordinance and
shall be subject to the penalties under the provisions of MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, Noncriminal Disposition Fines, as outlined within this ordinance.
(b)
Definitions: MGL c. 40, § 136A, shall be referenced to define terms used
in this ordinance. In addition, the definitions of the following terms shall
apply:
ABUTTER — The owners of property located within 100 feet of the
stable, shelter or structure in which livestock or fowl are proposed kept.
REGULATED ANIMALS — This ordinance shall apply to swine, horses,
cows, goats, sheep, burros, llamas, deer, chickens, ducks or other fowl,
or other farm animals stabled or sheltered outside homes within the
Town of Weymouth.
SMALL ANIMAL SHELTER — Any building, enclosure, premises or
portion thereof where animals under 20 pounds, other than domestic
dogs and cats, are kept. No more than 10 animals are allowed on site in
a small animal shelter.
STABLE — Any building, enclosure, premises or portion thereof where
animals over 20 pounds or more than 10 small animals (under 20
pounds), are kept.
WETLAND — Any wetland resource area as defined in 310 CMR 10.00
or other land defined as wetland with the Weymouth Conservation
Department.
(a)
No person shall keep or allow to be kept within the limits of this Town,
in any building, or on any premises of which he may be the owner,
tenant, or occupant any livestock or fowl without a livestock permit
(b)
§ 6-702 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-704
1:118
granted by the Health Department. A livestock permit is required for a
small animal shelter for the keeping of certain animals, defined above,
No person shall keep or allow to be kept roosters and crowing hens
within the limits of the Town.
(c)
Livestock permit applicants or a designated caretaker must reside
at the property where the livestock is kept, and livestock permit
applicants must provide the name, address, and telephone number of a
competent caretaker, who:
Resides within close proximity of the property where the livestock
is kept;
1.
2. Is capable of caring for the livestock; and
3. Is willing to care for the animals in an emergency.
If the property where livestock is to be kept is not owned by the
applicant, the applicant must submit a notarized letter from the
property owner giving permission to have livestock on the property.
4.
(d)
Livestock permits are not transferable from person to person, location
to location, and do not run with the land.
(e)
All livestock permit applications must be submitted with the required
application fee, the plot plan showing the location and size of the
stable, shelter or structure, and the abutter notifications, if applicable,
to the Weymouth Health Department. The Animal Control Officer and/or
Health Agent shall perform an inspection of the property and the farm
animal housing area once the application is received. No animals shall
be allowed on-site until such permit is granted.
(f)
Applicants must make sure that the setbacks listed below are met and
are shown on their site or plot plan for approval:
Small animal shelter:
a. Ten feet to an adjacent property line.
b. Twenty feet to an adjacent dwelling.
c. One hundred feet from a wetland.
Two hundred feet from the high water mark of a source of
drinking water or tributary thereof.
d.
Ten feet from an occupied dwelling on the same property
where the shelter is kept.
e.
1.
Stable:
a. One hundred feet to an adjacent property line.
b. One hundred feet to an adjacent dwelling.
2.
(g)
§ 6-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-704
1:119
c. One hundred feet from a wetland.
Two hundred feet from the high water mark of a source of
drinking water or tributary thereof.
d.
The Weymouth Animal Control Officer and/or Agent of the Health
Department shall visit the property, before any livestock permit is
granted, to determine the fitness of the property for the safe keeping
of animals. Such inspection shall consist of verifying the suitability of
the site, the condition of the facilities, and the manure storage/odor
abatement plan.
(h)
Anyone requesting a livestock permit under this section must notify
abutters as defined herein by certified mail or constable; however,
notice to abutters is not required for an application to keep a small
animal shelter. Proof of notification must be submitted with the
application. A sample notification letter will be supplied with the
application.
(i)
The Health Director shall consider any concerns, complaints or
objections received by abutters and determine the suitability of the
proposed site for the permit.
(j)
Livestock permits expire annually on December 31 and must be
renewed on an annual basis.
(k)
The maximum allowable number of animals will be stated on the
livestock permit. The Animal Control Officer and/or the Health
Department will determine the maximum allowable number of animals
on a case by case basis based on the size of the lot and the location of
the lot in proximity to other properties, among other factors.
(l)
The construction of stables shall be in conformity with applicable state
and local laws, including, but not limited to, the Town of Weymouth
Building Code, and shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
1. There shall be at least two windows in each stable.
2. There shall be adequate ventilation in each stable.
Each stall shall be no less than five feet by 10 feet in size, or such
larger size so as to allow the animals to have room to comfortably
lie down or stand up.
3.
There shall be adequate drainage either natural or artificial for
urine or waste matter in every stable.
4.
All flooring in any stable shall be acceptable to the Animal Control
Officer and Health Department and be constructed in a manner to
adequately drain.
5.
(m)
§ 6-704 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-704
1:120
§ 6-705. Dogs and cats.
The owners or persons in control of any buildings or premises in which
animals are kept shall keep the buildings and premises clean and free
from decaying food, filth, dirt, stagnant water, and animal wastes.
(n)
All manure shall be kept in a suitable pit or receptacles. No storage
of manure shall be allowed within 100 feet of any wetland. Manure
shall be removed as necessary to eliminate odor or insect problems.
The accumulation, stockpiling, and storage of manure outside of a pit
or receptacle shall be prohibited.
(o)
All animals must be confined to the permitted stable or small animal
shelter or adjacent fenced, gated or penned-in area. They shall not
roam freely on the property, outside of the fenced or penned-in area.
(p)
(q) Adequate water supply shall be available at all times.
Upon inspection, if deficiencies are found by the Animal Control Officer
or Health Department, either may at its discretion issue fines or a
written order to the person or persons having control of the premises
to correct the deficiencies. A reinspection will then be conducted to
ensure compliance. Failure to comply may result in revocation or
suspension of a permit, an order of removal of all animals and/or fines.
The livestock permit holder acknowledges that holding a permit allows
the Animal Control Officer, Animal Inspector and/or Health Department
to inspect the property at any time. Failure to allow inspection is
subject to livestock permit suspension/revocation and/or fines. Fines
shall be issued pursuant to MGL c. 20, § 21D, the noncriminal
disposition procedure, in the amounts as stated in this ordinance.
(r)
The owner or operator of the premises where regulated animals are
kept shall give written notice to the Health Department if he or she
requests a hearing for the purpose of permit suspension, revocation,
denial or refusal to renew a livestock permit. This written notice
requesting a hearing shall be made within 10 days of receipt of such
suspension, revocation, denial or failure to renew and shall be served
through a certified letter sent return receipt requested or by constable
to the Health Department, who shall hold the hearing no later than 21
days from the date the written notice is received.
(s)
The annual fee for a livestock permit will be set in accordance with the
Weymouth Code of Ordinances § 5-305 after review and consent of the
Mayor.
(t)
Leashing required; length of leash. No person shall cause or permit
a dog owned or kept by him, whether licensed or unlicensed, beyond
the confines of the property of the owner or keeper or the property of
another person with knowledge and permission of such other person
unless the dog is properly restrained. A dog is under restraint for
purposes of this ordinance if it is accompanied by its owner or other
(a)
§ 6-704 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-705
1:121
person responsible for the dog, who is in full control of such dog, and
the dog is held firmly on a leash, the length which shall not exceed six
feet. An owner or keeper may use a leash of a greater length to restrain
a dog on the property of an owner or keeper, provided that the dog is
securely confined to the premises of the owner or keeper.
Disturbing the peace. Any owner or keeper who allows a dog to bite,
bark, howl or in any other manner disturbs the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood or endangers the safety of any person or animal is in
violation of this ordinance.
(b)
Restrictions: defecation. No person shall fail to promptly remove and
properly dispose of any feces, as designated by the Board of Health,
left by any dog owned, kept or controlled by him or her on the property
of another, including but not limited to any public property within the
Town. This provision shall not apply to a person who, by reason of a
physical disability, is unable to comply with requirements of such a
section.
(c)
Penalties. The Animal Control Officer is hereby authorized to
investigate any complaint made against the owner or keeper of a dog
who is alleged to have violated the provisions of this ordinance. This
section shall be subject to the penalties under the provisions of MGL c.
40, § 21D, Noncriminal Disposition Fines, as outlined in this ordinance.
(d)
Order to restrain or muzzle. In addition to the fines outlined in this
ordinance, on receipt of a complaint of an alleged violation of this
ordinance, the Animal Control Officer shall investigate and is also
authorized and empowered to order the owner or keeper of a dog to
muzzle and/or restrain a dog as the Officer deems necessary, pending a
hearing under MGL c. 40, § 157.
(e)
The owner or keeper of any dog or cat that is transported to an animal
hospital/care facility by the Animal Control Officer or police officer for
treatment, euthanasia and/or rabies testing is liable for payment to said
facility. If the owner or keeper cannot make such payment at time of
service, and treatment, euthanasia and/or rabies testing is determined
by the Animal Control Officer or Health Department to be needed for
public health and/or public safety, and if the Town is billed for these
services, said owner or keeper will be fined in the amount of the bill
invoiced to the Town.
(f)
Dog licenses. Dog licenses shall be obtained each year. The registering,
numbering, description and licensing, pursuant to the provisions of
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 140, of all dogs in the Town
of Weymouth shall be conducted annually in the office of the Town
Clerk. Applications and licensing shall be in accordance with MGL c.
140, §§ 137 and 137A. Dog licenses must be renewed annually between
January 2 and February 28. In addition to the requirement that a dog
shall be duly licensed as required by law, the owner of a dog which has
not renewed a license before March 1 in any year shall be subject to
(g)
§ 6-705 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-705
1:122
a late fee penalty of $10, and any dog license renewed starting April 1
through December 31 shall be subject to a twenty-five-dollar late fee in
addition to the license fee.
Duty of Animal Control Officer; registry required. It shall be the duty
of the Animal Control Officer and every police officer, pursuant to MGL
c. 140, §§ 151A and 167, to apprehend any unrestrained or unlicensed
dogs and to impound such dog in a facility approved by the Chief of
Police. The Animal Control Officer upon receiving any dog shall make
a complete registry, entering the breed, color and sex of such dog
and whether licensed. If licensed, the name and address of the owner
and the number of the license tag shall be recorded. Unrestrained or
unlicensed dogs may be sought out, caught and confined by the Animal
Control Officer or any police officer of the Town, and impounded.
Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prohibit the use of dogs
for hunting, sporting or working purposes as long as said dogs are
properly restrained.
(h)
Notice of impoundment; reclamation; charges. The Animal Control
Officer shall make reasonable efforts, but in no event not later than
three days after the impounding of any dog, the owner shall be notified,
or, if the owner of the dog is unknown, written notice shall be posted for
three days at one or more conspicuous places in the Town describing
the dog and the place and time of taking. The owner of any dog
so impounded may reclaim such dog upon payment of the costs and
charges incurred by the Town for impounding and maintenance of such
dog; provided, however, that if the dog is not licensed, then before the
dog is released to any person, a license as required by the Town shall
be secured. Charges shall be paid to the facility at which the dog was
held. The daily rate for keeping of a dog shall be set by the approved
facility holding the dog. Any owner/keeper not paying the facility will
be fined the amount owed to the facility and if not paid within 21 days
a civil complaint will be filed in the district court.
(i)
Rabies vaccinations. Whoever is the owner or keeper of a dog or
cat six months of age or older shall cause such dog and cat to be
vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian using a vaccine
approved by the Director of Public Health. Such owner or keeper shall
procure a veterinarian's certification that such dog and cat has been
so vaccinated and setting forth the date of such vaccination and the
duration of immunity, or notarized letter from a veterinarian that a
certificate was issued, and a metal rabies tag bearing an expiration
date indicating that such certification is still in effect. Unvaccinated
dogs and cats acquired or brought into the Town shall be vaccinated
within 30 days after acquisition or entry into the Town or upon reaching
the age of six months, whichever comes later. The owner of a cat may
choose not to affix the rabies tag, but shall have the tag available for
inspection by authorized persons.
(j)
§ 6-705 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-705
1:123
Dogs on public beach. No person shall allow a dog owned or kept by him
on any public beach within the Town, whether leashed or unleashed.
Service dogs under close control of their owners wearing a valid dog
license and certified as aid dogs shall be excluded from the provisions
of this section.
(k)
Displaying of tags. All dogs within the Town of Weymouth shall at all
times display on a collar the town/city license tag in which the dog is
licensed.
(l)
Failure to identify to Animal Control Officer/law enforcement. All
owners/keepers of dogs or cats shall not refuse to identify or provide
false information regarding their name, date of birth, address and
animal information to the Animal Control Officer, Constable or police
officer.
(m)
Posted Town of Weymouth Property. No person shall allow a dog onto
any Town property where there is posted a "No Dogs Allowed" sign,
whether leashed or unleashed. Service dogs under close control of their
owners wearing a valid dog license and certified as aid dogs shall be
excluded from the provisions of this section.
(n)
Animals left unattended in motor vehicle. No person shall allow any
domesticated animal to be left unattended in a motor vehicle for more
than five minutes with the exception of police/law enforcement K9/
Animal Control.
(o)
Unattended dogs. No person shall allow a dog to be unattended outside
for more than two hours unless the dog has access to food, water and
enclosed shelter from the elements.
(p)
Cats and ferrets. No person, firm, organization or corporation shall
keep or house within the Town of Weymouth, in any building, or on any
premises on which he may be the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant,
more than three cats or ferrets, not including kittens under 10 weeks
old, unless such person, firm, corporation, or organization holds a valid
pet shop license from the Massachusetts Division of Animal Health or is
a registered animal shelter with the Massachusetts Division of Animal
Health and has written approval from the Animal Control Officer or is a
licensed veterinarian with the state of Massachusetts; veterinarians do
not require written approval.
(q)
§ 6-705 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-705
1:124
SECTION 6-800
Kennel Licenses
[Amended 11-30-2015 by Ord. No. 15-090]
§ 6-801. Personal kennel license.
Anyone wishing to keep more than four dogs, three months (13 weeks)
or older, shall apply for a personal kennel license.
(a)
The maximum number of dogs allowed to be kept under a personal
kennel license is six.
(b)
Any application for a personal kennel license shall be submitted to the
Town Clerk's office on a form provided by the Town Clerk.
(c)
In addition to meeting all of the requirements of MGL c. 140, §§ 137A
to 137C, any person who receives a kennel license shall maintain the
premises in accordance with the following specifications: a minimum
ten-foot setback from the kennel to an adjacent property line and a
minimum twenty-foot setback from the kennel to abutting habitable
structure, 100 feet from a wetland, 200 feet from a high water mark
of a source of drinking water or tributary thereof, and 10 feet from
an occupied dwelling on the same property where the kennel is kept.
No personal kennel license shall be issued unless the applicant
demonstrates that the use of the subject property as a kennel is
permitted under the Town's Zoning Ordinances.17
(d)
New applicants requesting a license must notify direct abutters by
certified mail or constable. Proof of notification must be submitted with
the application.
(e)
The Weymouth Animal Control Officer shall inspect the facility before
the personal kennel license shall be issued or renewed.
(f)
Each personal kennel license may be issued by the Town Clerk from
January 1 until December 31 of the calendar year, and the annual fee
for such shall be charged in accordance with the Town fee schedule.
(g)
(h) The personal kennel shall be maintained in sanitary condition.
The personal kennel shall not cause a nuisance to others, as such term
is defined in MGL c. 140, § 136A.
(i)
The animals within the kennel shall not be found at large, not under the
control of the owner.
(j)
The kennel shall not cause a health or safety hazard to the animals
within the kennel or to the general public, or owner/operator of the
kennel.
(k)
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 120, Zoning.
§ 6-801 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-801
1:125
§ 6-802. Commercial kennel licenses.
§ 6-803. Commercial kennel requirements.
All dogs within a personal kennel shall be vaccinated for rabies and
certificates must be produced for inspection when requested.
(l)
The annual fee for a personal kennel license will be set in accordance
with the Weymouth Code of Ordinances § 5-305 after review and
consent of the Mayor.
(m)
In addition to meeting all of the requirements of MGL c. 140, §§ 137A
to 137C, applications for a new commercial kennel license shall be
submitted to the Town Clerk's office, on a form provided by the Town
Clerk, along with two copies of interior and exterior plans of the kennel,
as well as a plot plan.
(a)
No new kennel license will be issued until proof is submitted by the
applicant that the location and operation of the kennel are in
compliance with the Town of Weymouth's zoning and land use
regulations.
(b)
No new kennel license will be issued unless the Weymouth Animal
Control Officer, Weymouth Health Department, Weymouth Building
Department, and Town Clerk review and approve the application. All
kennel license renewals must be inspected by the Weymouth Police
Animal Control Officer before a kennel license can be renewed.
(c)
Each kennel license may be issued by the Town Clerk from January
1 until December 31 of the calendar year, and each kennel shall be
charged in accordance with the fee schedule per Subsection (f).
(d)
First time applicants must notify all direct property abutters in writing
of the applicant's intent to operate a commercial kennel, and evidence
of notification must be submitted with the application.
(e)
The annual fee for a commercial kennel license will be set in
accordance with the Weymouth Code of Ordinances § 5-305 after
review and consent of the Mayor.
(f)
Commercial kennel licensees shall be issued 35 dog tags, and any dog
on the property other than 35 covered under the kennel license shall
wear a town dog license tag from the town where the dog is licensed
and shall be available for inspection upon request.
(g)
Housing facilities for dogs shall be maintained in good repair and in
a sanitary condition in such as manner as to protect the dogs from
injury or disease, to contain the dogs, and to restrict the entrance of
other animals; and location, construction, arrangement and operation
of commercial kennels shall not constitute a nuisance.
(a)
§ 6-801 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-803
1:126
§ 6-804. Indoor commercial kennel requirements.
Reliable and adequate utilities are required (i.e., electric power, natural
gas, oil, water, sewer/septic). Adequate potable water shall be provided.
(b)
Supplies of food and bedding shall be stored in facilities which
adequately protect such supplies against infestation or contamination
by vermin or other contaminant. Refrigeration shall be provided for
supplies of perishable food or medication.
(c)
Provision shall be made for the removal and disposal of dog and food
wastes, bedding, and other debris. Waste facilities shall be provided
and operated as to control vermin infestation, odors and disease
hazards.
(d)
Facilities, such as washrooms, basins or sinks, shall be provided in
the kennel to maintain cleanliness among dog caretakers; hot and cold
running water, soap, and towels shall be provided. Toilet facilities shall
be provided in the kennel or nearby on the premises and shall be kept
clean, sanitary, and in good repair.
(e)
Premises shall be kept clean, sanitary and in good repair in order to
protect the dogs from injury or disease. Premises shall remain free of
accumulations of trash, feces, and the overgrowth of vegetation up to
the property line or within 20 feet of the facility. Insects, parasites,
rodents, and other pests shall be controlled effectively.
(f)
All commercial kennels shall have an appropriately stocked animal first
aid kit that will be available and easily accessible at all times.
(g)
All commercial kennels shall post Red Cross or similar animal CPR
guidance in a conspicuous spot within the kennel.
(h)
All commercial kennels shall only administer medication to animals if it
is in the original veterinary prescribed bottle or container.
(i)
All commercial kennels shall have an on-call veterinarian on file that
they may consult with for medical advice.
(j)
Commercial kennels that offer grooming shall keep boarded dogs and
groomed dogs separate at all times, unless proof of rabies vaccination
is available. No dog shall be groomed that is not current on rabies
vaccination.
(k)
Indoor dog facilities shall be provided for all pet shops, shelters and
kennels in order to protect the dogs from adverse weather condition.
(a)
Indoor housing facilities for dogs shall be sufficiently heated when
necessary to protect the dogs from cold, and to provide for their health
and comfort. Adequate heat shall mean enough heat necessary to
prevent physical damage to a dog from hypothermia. The dogs' age,
physical condition and hair coat shall be taken into consideration. The
(b)
§ 6-803 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-804
1:127
§ 6-805. Outdoor commercial kennel requirements.
temperature at the height level of the dogs shall not be allowed to fall
below 55° F. in any indoor primary enclosures where dogs are housed.
Indoor housing facilities for dogs shall be adequately ventilated to
provide for the health and comfort of the animals at all times. Such
facilities shall be provided with fresh air either by means of windows,
doors, vents, or air conditioning and shall be ventilated so as to
minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation. Auxiliary
ventilation, such as exhaust fans and vents or air conditioning, shall be
provided when the ambient temperature is 80° F. or higher.
(c)
Indoor housing facilities for animals shall have ample light, by natural
or artificial means, or both, of good quality and well distributed. Such
lighting shall provide uniformly distributed illumination or sufficient
light intensity to permit routine inspection and cleaning during the
entire working period.
(d)
Primary enclosures shall be so placed as to protect the animals from
excessive sunlight.
(e)
The interior building surfaces of indoor housing facilities at commercial
kennels shall be constructed and maintained so that they are
impervious to moisture and may be readily cleaned and sanitized.
(f)
Commercial kennels shall have a suitable method to eliminate excess
wash water from indoor housing facilities. Drains, when used, shall be
properly constructed and kept in good repair to avoid foul odors and
backup. Facilities which are not connected to a municipal sewerage
system shall have a system for the disposal of dog excrement that meets
all applicable state and local standards.
(g)
Commercial kennels shall have personnel on site at all times when dogs
are present, unless adequate security measures are available to ensure
the safety of the animals present, such as a security/fire protection
system or live video.
(h)
Commercial kennels shall have one person on site at all times during
normal business hours that is trained in Red Cross or similar dog CPR
and first aid.
(i)
When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort, sufficient
shade shall be provided to allow dogs kept outdoors to protect
themselves from the direct rays of the sun.
(a)
Whenever dogs are kept outdoors, they shall be provided with access to
shelter to allow them to remain dry during rain, snow, or other adverse
weather condition.
(b)
(c) A suitable method shall be provided to drain surface water rapidly.
§ 6-804 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-805
1:128
§ 6-806. Primary enclosures for commercial kennels.
Surfaces of outdoor enclosures of pet shops, shelters and kennels shall
be constructed and maintained so that they-are impervious to moisture
and may be readily cleaned and sanitized; runoff from outdoor
enclosures shall be disposed of in accordance with all applicable
regulations.
(d)
Outdoor facilities shall be adequately secured to protect the dogs from
predators, as well as to contain the dogs.
(e)
All commercial kennels shall post the "signs/symptoms of heat stroke
and hypothermia" in dogs within outdoor and indoor play areas.
(f)
(g) Clean water shall be supplied at all times at outdoor kennels.
Primary enclosures shall be structurally sound and maintained in good
repair so as to: contain the dogs; protect dogs from injury; keep
predators out; enable dogs to remain dry and clean; permit dogs
convenient access to food and water as required in these rules; provide
sufficient space for each dog to turn about freely and to stand, sit and
lie in a comfortable normal position; and have no sharp points or edges
accessible to the dogs that could cause injury.
(a)
Animals housed in the same enclosure shall be maintained in
compatible groups.
(b)
Sexually intact males and females shall not be housed in the same
enclosure, except for breeding purposes requested by the owner in
writing.
(c)
Any dog exhibiting a vicious disposition shall be housed individually in
a primary enclosure.
(d)
Immature dogs shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure with
adults other than their mother.
(e)
Animals of different species shall not be housed in the same primary
enclosures.
(f)
Dogs shall not be placed in empty primary enclosures previously
inhabited by other animals unless the enclosure has first been cleaned
and disinfected.
(g)
Animals showing signs of contagious illness shall be removed from
rooms and enclosures containing healthy animals and housed in a
separate isolation room.
(h)
The floors of primary enclosures shall be constructed so as to protect
the dogs' feet and legs from injury. Enclosures may have grid-type
flooring, provided that the grid material is of adequate gauge to prevent
sagging under the weight of the dog and that the mesh is small enough
(i)
§ 6-805 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-806
1:129
§ 6-807. Commercial kennel care requirements.
§ 6-808. Sanitation of commercial kennels.
to prevent their feet from passing through or to cause cutting injuries
to foot pads.
Dogs confined in a primary enclosure shall be exercised in runs or
walked on a leash at least three times a day, totaling 60 minutes of
exercise.
(j)
Dogs shall not be tied to fences or cages in lieu of being housed in
primary enclosures.
(k)
Dogs being boarded overnight shall be fed at least once each day except
as otherwise might be required to provide adequate care. Food from
the previous day shall be discarded and fresh food supplied daily except
when self-feeders are used.
(a)
The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable, and
of sufficient quantity and nutritional value to meet the normal daily
requirements for the condition and size of the dogs.
(b)
Immature dogs shall be fed in accordance with generally accepted
procedures; those animals less than three months of age shall be fed
three times daily; those three to six months of age shall be fed twice
daily.
(c)
Containers of food shall be accessible to animals and shall be located
so as to minimize contamination by excreta or other contaminants and
sources of filth.
(d)
(e) Feeding pans shall be durable, cleaned and sanitized daily.
Disposable food receptacles may be used but must be discarded after
each feeding.
(f)
Self-feeders may be used for the feeding of dry food and they shall be
cleaned regularly to prevent molding, deterioration or caking of feed.
(g)
Potable water must be accessible to dogs at all times unless
contraindicated by a written veterinarian order. Receptacles for such
purposes shall be cleaned daily.
(h)
Primary enclosures for animals shall be physically cleaned often
enough to prevent an accumulation of debris, excretions, and agents
that may cause injury to animals or humans.
(a)
Cages, floors, and hard surfaced pens or runs shall be sanitized at least
once per day by washing them with hot water (180° F.) and soap or
detergent as in a mechanical cage washer, or by washing all soiled
surfaces with a detergent solution followed by a safe and effective
disinfectant.
(b)
§ 6-806 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-808
1:130
§ 6-809. Disease control and vaccination requirements for
commercial kennels.
§ 6-810. Administrative and record requirements of commercial
kennels.
Premises shall be kept clean, sanitary, and in good repair in order to
protect the animals from injury and disease, to facilitate the prescribed
sanitary practices as set forth in these rules, and to prevent nuisances.
(c)
An effective program for the control of insects, parasites, rodents, and
other pests shall be established and maintained.
(d)
Excretions shall be removed from the primary enclosures as often
as necessary to prevent contamination of the dogs contained therein
and to control disease hazards and odors. When cleaning, any dog
contained therein shall be removed from such enclosures during the
cleaning process, and adequate measures shall be taken to protect the
dogs in other such enclosures from being contaminated with water and
other wastes.
(e)
Each animal shall be observed daily for signs of communicable disease
or stress. Sick, diseased, injured or lame dogs shall be provided with
at least prompt, basic veterinary care (that is, to alleviate pain and
suffering), unless such action is inconsistent with the purposes for
which the dog was obtained and is being held.
(a)
Any dog under confinement for, or with signs of, a communicable
disease shall be separated from other healthy animals and placed in
an isolation area in order to minimize dissemination of such disease.
Caretakers shall wash their hands after handling these dogs and follow
procedures which control the dissemination of disease.
(b)
Cleaning utensils for the isolation area shall be separate from those
used for cleaning the general animal population area; such utensils
shall either be washed separately from, or after, those used for the
general population.
(c)
All dogs within the kennel shall have current vaccinations for rabies,
distemper and Bordetella.
(d)
If, in the opinion of the Weymouth Animal Control Officer or the
Director of Public Health, additional vaccinations are necessary due
to animal or public health concerns, additional vaccinations may be
required. If additional vaccinations are required, license holders will be
notified in writing by the Animal Control Officer or Director of Public
Health.
(e)
There shall be kept at each kennel or private shelter a record of all dogs
received. Such record shall state the date each animal was received,
description of animal, breed, age and sex of animal; name, address,
contact information of person from whom acquired and vaccination
(a)
§ 6-808 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-810
1:131
§ 6-811. Right of entry and inspections of commercial kennels.
§ 6-812. General enforcement.
§ 6-813. Fines and violations.
records for each animal being kept. These records shall be kept for two
years.
All commercial kennels shall maintain a list of all dogs' medical
conditions, as well as medications.
(b)
Each commercial kennel or private shelter shall have an adequate
written emergency plan for the emergency medical treatment of its
dogs, as well as in the case of a natural disaster. The kennel shall
maintain proof that all employees have read, understood, and know the
whereabouts of this document.
(c)
A licensee shall promptly notify the licensing agency of any change in
his or her name and address, or any change in operations which may
affect his or her status.
(d)
Any incident involving dog bites or any injuries requiring veterinarian
care to a dog shall be reported to the Weymouth Animal Control Officer
within eight hours of the incident.
(e)
Any dog found deceased at a kennel must be reported to the Weymouth
Animal Control Officer or Weymouth Police Department immediately
after the dog is found.
(f)
Pursuant to MGL c. 140, § 137C, the Mayor, Chief of Police or Animal
Control Officer may at any time inspect a kennel or cause the inspection
of a kennel. Said inspection may include examination of any pertinent
records pertaining to this ordinance. Refusal to comply with an
inspection may be grounds for an emergency suspension or revocation.
(a)
Random compliance inspections can occur on an annual basis or other
time period as deemed appropriate for such facility. At the time of
the inspection, or promptly thereafter, the inspecting authority will
document any violations found.
(b)
This ordinance may be enforced by the Weymouth Animal Control
Officer, Health Department, Inspectional Services Department or the
Police Department, and if, in the judgment of Chief of Police, Animal
Control Officer, and the Health Department, the kennel is not being
maintained in a sanitary and humane manner or if records are not
properly kept as required by law, such person or body shall, by order,
revoke or suspend the license for the kennel.
(a)
This ordinance may also be enforced through appropriate criminal or
civil process under Massachusetts General Laws.
(b)
§ 6-810 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-813
1:132
Penalties for violation of any provision of §§ 6-700 through 6-812 may
result in the following fines and/or suspension or revocation of
applicable license or permit:
1. First offense: $50;
2. Second offense: $75;
Third offense shall be: $100.
Each day the violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense.
This ordinance may be enforced through any means available in
law or in equity, including a noncriminal disposition in accordance
with MGL c. 40, § 21D.
3.
(a)
§ 6-813 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-813
1:133

SECTION 6-900
Littering
§ 6-901. Littering prohibited.
General prohibition against littering. It shall be unlawful for any
person, firm or corporation, in person or by his or its agent, employee
or servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit in any manner in
or upon any public way or other public place in the Town or any
river, canal, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the
jurisdiction of the Town any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste article, thing
or substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid; nor shall any person,
firm or corporation cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit any of the
aforementioned items anywhere within the jurisdiction of the Town
in such manner that they may be carried or deposited in whole or
in part by the action of the sun, wind, rain or snow into any of the
aforementioned places.
(a)
Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the deposit of material under
a permit authorized by any ordinance of the Town or to goods, wares
or merchandise deposited upon any public way or other public place
temporarily, in the necessary course of trade, or to articles or things
deposited in or conducted into the Town sewer system through lawful
drains in accordance with the ordinances of the Town relating thereto.
(b)
Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty of $50 for each
offense.
(c)
§ 6-901 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-901
1:135

SECTION 6-1000
Handbills and Circulars
§ 6-1001. Permit required for distribution.
No person shall distribute circulars, papers or advertisements upon the
public highway without first receiving a permit from the Mayor or his
designee.
§ 6-1001 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1001
1:137

SECTION 6-1100
Yard Sales
§ 6-1101. Operating restrictions.
Definition. Yard sales, garage sales, tag sales or like sales are defined
as a sale, or offering for sale, of personal tangible property from
residential premises.
(a)
Terms and conditions.
No more than three yard sales, garage sales, tag sales or like sales
shall be held at any one location or residence per calendar year.
Each day shall constitute a separate sale.
1.
An application for each sale shall be filed with the Town Clerk's
office with the required fee as recommended by the Town Council.
A copy of the permit shall be forwarded forthwith to the Police
Department.
2.
No property except personal property owned by the resident of the
location of the sale, family members or neighbors shall be sold.
The sale of merchandise by a business entity, new merchandise or
merchandise in bulk is prohibited under this section.
3.
4. Property for sale will be displayed only on the day of the sale.
Hours of sale shall be restricted to daylight hours, to commence no
earlier than 8:00 a.m.
5.
The Town of Weymouth Police Department shall enforce this
section pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D, as
amended, or by the institution of applicable civil or criminal
proceedings.
6.
Any person who violates this section within a calendar year shall
be liable for a written warning on a first offense, fined $100 for
a second offense, $200 for a third offense and $300 for each
additional offense. Each day in which any such violation shall
continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
7.
(b)
§ 6-1101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1101
1:139

SECTION 6-1200
Body Art
§ 6-1202. Purpose.
Town of Weymouth is promulgating rules and regulations in the form of
this Body Art Ordinance which provide minimum requirements to be met by
any person performing body art activities for hire upon another individual
and for any establishment wherein body art activities are to be performed.
These requirements include, but are not limited to, requirements
concerning the general sanitation of the establishment wherein body art
activities are to be performed and the sterilization of instruments to be used
in the conduct of body art. By enacting this Body Art Ordinance, the Town of
Weymouth has determined that these rules and regulations are necessary to
protect the public's health by preventing disease, including, but not limited
to, the transmission of Hepatitis B and/or human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) or acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS).
In addition, this Body Art Ordinance establishes:
§ 6-1203. Administration and enforcement.
This Body Art Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Health
Department of the Town of Weymouth.
§ 6-1204. Definitions.
The following terms used in this Body Art Ordinance, unless the context
otherwise requires, shall have the following meanings:
A requirement for registration and a procedure for the registration
with the Health Department of the Town of Weymouth of all persons
performing such body art activities;
1.
A requirement for minimal training standards for such practitioners,
including requirements for the prevention of disease transmission and
for knowledge of anatomy and physiology;
2.
Provisions for the regular inspection of establishments wherein body
art activities are to be performed; and
3.
Provisions for revocation of the registration of any person or
establishment deemed in violation of the rules and regulations
promulgated under this Body Art Ordinance, or for other means of
enforcement of the provisions of this Body Art Ordinance.
This Body Art Ordinance provides for an annual fee to be paid by a
person and establishment registered under this Body Art Ordinance.
This fee is intended to help defray the cost to the Town of Weymouth
of the administration of the requirements of this Body Art Ordinance.
4.
§ 6-1202 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1204
1:141
AFTERCARE INSTRUCTIONS — Written instructions, approved by the
Department, given to a person upon whom one or more body art activities
have been performed, specific to the body art procedure(s) rendered or
performed, concerning the proper care to be given to the area of the
body upon which the body art has been performed and concerning the
surrounding area of the body.
ANTISEPTIC — An agent that destroys disease-causing microorganisms on
human skin or mucosa.
AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a
specific temperature over a designated period of time.
AUTOCLAVING — The process which results in the destruction of all forms
of microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial spores, by the use of an
autoclave for a minimum of 30 minutes at 17 pounds of pressure (PSI) at a
temperature of 250° F.
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment, alteration or
modification by means including, but not limited to, piercing, tattooing,
branding, braiding, beading/implantation or scarring.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any facility that has been inspected and
approved by the Department for use in conducting body art activities and
for which a current permit is issued by the Department in accordance with
this Body Art Ordinance.
BODY ART ORDINANCE — Section 6-1200 of the Weymouth Code of
Ordinances, as amended from time to time.
BODY ART PRACTITIONER — A person who has received a license to
perform body art activities by the Department pursuant to this Body Art
Ordinance.
BODY ART PRACTITIONER PERMIT — A permit issued by the Weymouth
Department of Health to a person qualified to engage in the practice of body
art in accordance with this Body Art Ordinance.
BODY PIERCING — The form of body art requiring or consisting of the
puncturing or penetration of the skin or of a membrane of a person, other
than the lobe of the ear, for the purpose of the temporary or permanent
placement or insertion of jewelry or other adornment or device therein.
BRAIDING — The form of body art requiring or consisting of the cutting of
strips of skin of a person, which strips are then to be intertwined with one
another and placed onto such person so as to cause or allow the incised and
interwoven strips of skin to heal in such intertwined condition.
BRANDING — The form of body art consisting of or requiring the
inducement of a burn and/or the resulting scarring of the skin of a person
by means of the use of a heated instrument or object.
CLEANING AREA — The area in a body art establishment used in the
sterilization, sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment
used for the practice of body art.
§ 6-1204 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1204
1:142
CONTAMINATED or CONTAMINATION — The presence of or a reasonable
possibility of the presence of blood, bodily fluids, infectious or potentially
infectious matter on an inanimate object.
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other
potentially infectious material; contaminated items that would release blood
or other potentially infectious material in a liquid or semi-liquid state if
compressed; items on which there is dried blood or other potentially
infectious material and which are capable of releasing these materials
during handling; sharps and any wastes containing blood or other
potentially infectious materials, as defined in Code of Federal Regulation,
29 CFR 1910.1030, as defined in Code of Massachusetts Regulations 105
CMR 480.00 et seq., or in this Body Art Ordinance.
COSMETIC TATTOOING — Also known as permanent cosmetics,
micropigment implantation or dermal pigmentation; the form of body art
requiring the implantation of permanent pigment around the eyes, lips and
cheeks of the face and hair imitation.
CUSTOMER or CLIENT — A person upon whom one or more body art
activities is/are to be performed, and shall include a minor client.
CUSTOMER WAITING AREA — The area in a body art establishment for use
and occupation by persons and clients prior to and after the conduct of body
art.
DEPARTMENT — The Weymouth Health Department, established in
accordance with MGL c. 111.
DERMIS — The deeper, thicker portion on the skin lying beneath the
epidermis, to include the subcutaneous layer.
DISINFECT — The destruction of pathogenic microorganisms using a liquid
chemical germicide.
DISINFECTANT — The same as "liquid chemical germicide."
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the outer perimeter of the lobe of
the ear using a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear piercing system
following manufacturer's instructions.
EPIDERMIS — The outer layer of skin which is composed of four
recognizable layers of cells usually a total of about 0.1 mm thick.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, fixtures, containers, vessels, tools, devices,
implements, furniture, display cases, storage units, sinks, and all other
apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a
body art establishment.
EXPOSURE — An event whereby there is an eye, mouth or other mucous
membrane, nonintact skin or parenteral contact with the blood or bodily
fluids of another person or contact of an eye, mouth or other mucous
membrane, nonintact skin or parenteral contact with other potentially
infectious matter.
§ 6-1204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1204
1:143
EXPOSURE CONTROL PLAN — A plan drafted by an operator pursuant to
the requirements of the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA) to eliminate or minimize the potential for an exposure.
EXPOSURE INCIDENT REPORT — A written report detailing the
circumstances of an exposure.
GERMICIDE or GERMICIDAL SOLUTION — The same as "liquid chemical
germicide."
HAND SINK — A sink supplied with hot and cold potable water under
pressure which is used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of
the body.
HEALTH BOARD — The Department of Health of the Town of Weymouth
established in accordance with MGL c. 111.
HOT WATER — Water which is heated to attain and maintain a temperature
of between 110° F. and 130° F.
INFECTIOUS WASTE — The same as "contaminated waste."
INSTRUMENT STORAGE AREA — The area in a body art establishment
used for the storage of linens, equipment and instruments used for body art.
INSTRUMENT or INSTRUMENT USED FOR BODY ART — Those hand
pieces, needles, needle bars and other instruments that may come in
contact with a client's body or possible exposure to bodily fluids during body
art procedures.
INVASIVE — A procedure causing entry into the body either by incision or
by the insertion of an instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or
by any other means intended to puncture, break or compromise the skin or
mucosa.
JEWELRY — Any device or adornment inserted into a pierced or incised area
or portion of the body.
LICENSE — A document issued by the Weymouth Board of Licensing
Commissioners, pursuant to this Body Art Ordinance, authorizing a person
to conduct body art procedures in the Town of Weymouth.
LIQUID CHEMICAL GERMICIDE — A substance registered with the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for use in the destruction of
pathogenic microorganisms or an approximate 1:100 dilution of household
chlorine bleach in clean water mixed fresh daily.
MINOR or MINOR CLIENT — A person of less than 18 years of age as of
that person's last birthday.
MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any trailer, truck, car, van,
camper or other motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, a shed, tent, movable
structure, bar, home or other facility wherein, or concert, fair, party or other
event whereat one desires to or actually does conduct body art procedures,
excepting only a licensed body art establishment which has also obtained a
permit from the Department.
§ 6-1204 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1204
1:144
OPERATOR — Any person alone or jointly with other persons who owns,
controls, operates or manages a body art establishment.
PARENTERAL — The invasion of the skin barrier or mucous membranes.
PERMIT — A document issued by the Department pursuant to this Body Art
Ordinance authorizing the performance of body art activities or the use of a
facility for the conducting of body art activities.
PHYSICIAN — A person licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
in accordance with MGL c. 112, § 2.
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts
an unclothed part of a person upon whom body art is to be performed.
PROHIBITED FORMS OF BODY ART — Those forms of body art prohibited
under this Body Art Ordinance and set forth in § 6-1218 hereof.
SANITIZE — The process of reducing the number of microorganisms on a
surface to a safe level using a liquid chemical germicide.
SANITIZER — The same as "liquid chemical germicide."
SCARIFICATION — That form of body art that requires the use of an
instrument to cut a design into the skin to produce a scar.
SHARPS — Any object (sterile or not) that may purposefully or accidentally
cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa of a person, including, but not limited
to, needles, scalpel blades, razor blades and lancets.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leakproof container that can
be closed for handling, storage, transportation or disposal and is labeled
with the International Biohazard Symbol.
SINGLE USE — Products or items that are intended for one-time, oneperson
use and are to be disposed of after such use, including, but not
limited to: cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic
cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades,
stencils, ink cups and protective gloves.
STERILIZATION UNIT — A unit designed to and which is effective at killing
all microorganisms, including bacterial spores, and which is approved by
the Department for use for sterilization in a body art establishment.
STERILIZE — To effectively kill all microorganisms, including bacterial
spores.
TATTOO — The form of body art consisting of the injection of ink, dye or
other medium to form or create an indelible mark, figure or decorative
design in the subcutaneous portion of the skin.
TATTOO GUN — An electric, vertically vibrating tool used for tattooing.
TATTOOING — The act or process of creating a tattoo.
TATTOO INKS/PIGMENTS/DYES or INKS/PIGMENTS/DYES — The metal or
salt-based substance injected into the subcutaneous portion of the skin in
the act or process of creating a tattoo.
§ 6-1204 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1204
1:145
TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — The same as "mobile body
art establishment."
THREE DIMENSIONAL "3D" BODY ART or BEADING or IMPLANTATION
— The form of body art consisting of or requiring the placement, injection
or insertion of an object, device or other item made of matters such as steel,
titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass or other inert materials beneath the
surface of the skin of a person. These terms do not include body piercing.
ULTRASONIC CLEANING KIT — A unit approved by the Department and
physically large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which
removes all foreign matter from the instruments by means of highfrequency
oscillations transmitted through the contained liquid.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS or STANDARD PRECAUTIONS — The set of
guidelines and controls published by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention as "guidelines for prevention of transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus and Hepatitis B virus to health-care and publicsafety
workers" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report by the Centers
for Disease Control (CDC), June 23, 1989, Vol. 38, No. S-6, and as
"recommendations for preventing transmission of Human
Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to patients during exposureprone
invasive procedures" in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, July
12, 1991, Vol. 40, No. RR-8, each as amended or updated. This method of
infection control requires the employer and the employee to assume that all
human blood and specified human body fluids are infectious for HIV, HBV
and other blood pathogens. Precautions include hand washing, gloving,
personal protective equipment, injury prevention, and proper handling and
disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and blood and body fluid
contaminated products.
WORKSTATION — An area within a body art facility designated for use in
the conducting of body art activities.
§ 6-1205. Severability.
If any provision or subpart thereof contained in this Body Art Ordinance is
found to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction,
the validity of all remaining provisions or subparts thereof shall not be so
affected but shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 6-1206. Body art practitioner permit required.
No person shall conduct any form of body art activity unless such person
holds a valid body art practitioner permit issued by the Department
pursuant to this Body Art Ordinance.
§ 6-1207. Body art establishment permit required.
No person shall establish a facility for the conduct of a business consisting
of or including the performance of one or more body art activities upon
the person of another without a valid permit to operate such facility as a
§ 6-1204 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1207
1:146
venue within which to conduct body art activities issued by the Department
in accordance with this Body Art Ordinance.
§ 6-1208. Exemptions.
Physicians who practice body art activities as a part of patient treatment
are exempt from the provisions of this Body Art Ordinance so long as such
body art activities are performed in a medically acceptable manner.
Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a presterilized, singleuse
stud-and-clasp ear piercing system, without the use of a so-called
"piercing gun," are exempt from the provisions of this Body Art Ordinance.
§ 6-1209. Business registration required.
The requirements of this Body Art Ordinance to obtain a body art
practitioner permit and a body art facility permit are separate from and
in addition to the requirements of MGL c. 110, § 5. An applicant for a
body art establishment permit must comply with the requirements of MGL
c. 110, § 5. Prior to the issuance of a body art establishment permit, an
applicant must demonstrate compliance therewith by way of presentment to
the Department of the original business certificate issued by the Town Clerk
under the provisions of MGL c. 110, § 5.
§ 6-1210. Commonwealth registration or licensing.
The requirements of this Body Art Ordinance to obtain a body art
practitioner permit and/or a body art facility permit are separate from
and in addition to any similar requirements that may be mandated by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 6-1211. Body art practitioners.
Application for registration and permit; fees. Any person seeking
registration under this Body Art Ordinance so as to obtain a body art
practitioner permit shall secure a license from the Board of License
Commissioners prior to any final action being taken upon the
application for a body art practitioner permit to the Department. Any
person seeking registration under this Body Art Ordinance so as to
obtain a body art practitioner permit shall submit a completed
application provided by the Department and shall pay to the Town of
Weymouth a fee of $200. A body art practitioner permit shall be valid
for no more than one year. The Department may renew a body art
practitioner permit under this Body Art Ordinance and each applicant
for such renewal shall pay to the Town of Weymouth a renewal fee of
$200. All body art practitioner permits shall expire on December 31 of
the year of issuance.
(a)
Compliance with Body Art Ordinance requirements. An applicant for
a body art practitioner permit shall demonstrate to the Department
his/her successful compliance with all training, disclosure, consent and
(b)
§ 6-1207 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1211
1:147
educational requirements of this Body Art Ordinance relative to the
form of body art activities for which such applicant seeks a body art
practitioner permit prior to the issuance or renewal of a body art
practitioner permit by the Department.
Hepatitis B vaccination status; disclosure:
1. A Hepatitis B vaccination is highly recommended.
An applicant for a body art practitioner permit shall provide to
the Department, and shall provide to the owner of any body art
establishment in which the applicant intends to perform or in
which he does perform body art activity, valid documentation of his
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) vaccination status stating:
a. Certification of completed vaccination;
b. Laboratory evidence of immunity;
Documentation stating the vaccine is contraindicated for
medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed
licensed health care professional's statement specifying the
name of the body art practitioner permit applicant employee
and that the vaccine cannot be given;
c.
Certificate of vaccination declination of HBV, i.e., for medical
or religious reasons as provided in MGL c. 76, § 15.
d.
2.
(c)
Hygiene. Every body art practitioner shall maintain a high degree of
personal cleanliness, conform to hygienic practices and wear clean
clothes when conducting body art activity. If the clothes of a body
art practitioner are or become contaminated, clean clothing shall be
donned prior to commencement of any further body art activity.
(d)
Minimum training requirements. Every applicant for a body art
practitioner permit or a renewal of a body art practitioner license, in
order to be qualified for such permit, shall provide to the Department
evidence of satisfaction of the following minimal training requirements:
Basic training in first aid and advanced CPR as well as proof of
attendance at required renewal.
1.
Documentation of attendance and completion of courses approved
by the Department, or completion of an examination, on the
following subjects:
(i) Anatomy.
(ii) Skin diseases, disorders, and conditions (including diabetes).
Infectious disease control, including waste disposal, hand
washing techniques, sterilization equipment operation and
methods, and sanitization/disinfection/sterilization methods
and techniques.
(iii)
2.
(e)
§ 6-1211 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1211
1:148
Proof of completion of a bloodborne pathogen training program
(or equivalent), given or approved by the Department. Examples
of courses approved by the Department include courses such as
"Preventing Disease Transmission" (American Red Cross) and
"Bloodborne Pathogen Training" (U.S. OSHA) and must include the
requirements of standards in 29 CFR 1910.1030. Training courses
provided by professional body art organizations or associations
or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted to the
Department for approval.
3.
Evidence satisfactory to the Department of at least one year of
actual experience in the practice of performing body art activities
of the kind for which the applicant seeks a body art practitioner
permit to perform, whether such experience was obtained within
or outside of the commonwealth.
4.
Evidence of a completed apprenticeship program as approved by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the Department, with
instruction in the kind of body art for which the applicant seeks a
body art practitioner permit to perform.
5.
Consent to comply with Body Art Ordinance. An applicant for a body art
practitioner permit shall sign a statement provided by the Department
consenting to and agreeing to abide by all of the provisions of this Body
Art Ordinance.
(f)
Department authorized to issue permits. If an applicant for a body art
practitioner permit demonstrates compliance with Subsection (e), the
Department is hereby authorized to issue a body art practitioner permit
pursuant to the provisions of this Body Art Ordinance, which authorizes
the applicant to conduct body art activities consisting of body piercing
and tattooing.
(g)
Acting within scope of permit. A body art practitioner shall only
perform those forms of body art for which he/she holds a body art
practitioner permit issued by the Department.
(h)
Permit posting requirements. A body art practitioner and/or operator
shall post in an area of the body art establishment accessible to the
Department and to clients the original of the current body art
practitioner permit of the body art practitioner.
(i)
Impairment by drugs or alcohol. No body art practitioner shall conduct
any form of body art activity while under the influence of alcohol or
drugs.
(j)
Restriction of certain body art activities. No body art practitioner shall:
1. Tattoo a minor client;
2. Brand a minor client;
3. Scar or perform scarification upon a minor client;
(k)
§ 6-1211 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1211
1:149
§ 6-1212. (Reserved)
§ 6-1213. Customers and clients.
4. Pierce the genitalia of a minor client;
Pierce a client under 14 years of age, with the sole exception of ear
piercing;
5.
Perform or engage in any of the activities prohibited under
§ 6-1218 of this Body Art Ordinance.
6.
Sterile conditions. A body art practitioner shall only conduct body art
activities under sterile conditions.
(l)
Rash, lesion or visible sign of infection. The skin of a body art
practitioner shall be free of rash, any lesion or visible sign of infection.
A body art practitioner shall not conduct any form of body art activity
upon any area of a client that evidences the presence of any rash, lesion
or visible sign of infection.
(m)
Use of licensed facility. A body art practitioner shall only conduct body
art activities within a facility with a current body art establishment
permit, and which establishment is in compliance with all provisions of
the Body Art Ordinance.
(n)
Use of mobile or temporary body art establishment prohibited. No body
art practitioner shall conduct any form of body art activity in a mobile
or temporary body art establishment.
(o)
Application and consent for body art activity required. Every client shall
complete an application and consent form approved by the Department
prior to having any body art activity performed upon or to his/her body.
(a)
Content of application and consent form. Every application and consent
form required by Subsection (a) shall contain a minimum of the
following:
General information regarding body art, including, at a minimum,
the following statements:
a. Tattoos should be considered permanent;
The removal of tattoos and scars would require surgery or
other medical procedure that may result in scarring or
additional scarring of the skin.
b.
1.
Information as to the side effects of body art, including, but not
limited to: hypertrophic scarring, possible adverse reaction to ink/
dye/pigment, possible change in color of ink/dye/pigment over
time, a decreased ability of physician to locate skin melanoma in
regions concealed by tattoos, brands, scars and other forms of
2.
(b)
§ 6-1211 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1213
1:150
body art, possible nerve damage, febrile illness, tetanus, systemic
infection, and keloid formation.
Client information, including:
a. Name;
b. Proof of age and valid identification;
In the case of a minor client, the parent's or legal guardian's
name, proof of parentage or legal guardianship through a copy
of a birth certificate or court order of guardianship
respectively, or a notarized document signed by the parent
or legal guardian attesting to the parent's or legal guardian's
relationship to the minor client, and the consent to the conduct
of the contemplated body art activity upon the minor client;
c.
d. The type of the body art activity to be performed.
3.
Instructions requiring the client to adhere to the exposure control
plan as such plan relates to the client's conduct in the body art
establishment.
4.
The address and telephone number of the Department and
instructions for the client, or in the case of a minor client, the
minor client and his/her parent or legal guardian, to contact the
Department with any questions or concerns regarding safety,
sanitization or sterilization procedures.
5.
The name of the body art practitioner who is to conduct the body
art upon the client or minor client and that practitioner's
Department registration number.
6.
The manufacturer codes, if any, the identity of the manufacturer,
and lot numbers of any dye/ink or pigment to be used in the body
art activity.
7.
8. Signature of client.
In the case of a minor client, the signature of the client's parent or
legal guardian. The parent or legal guardian shall sign the consent
form in the presence of the body art practitioner.
9.
10. The signature of body art practitioner.
11. The date(s) of all signatures.
The date(s) of the body art procedure, including a daily estimate
of progress for the conduct of body art requiring multiple days to
complete.
12.
(c) Disclosure of certain health-related information.
§ 6-1213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1213
1:151
A client shall inform the body art practitioner of any known chronic
medical or communicable conditions, including, but not limited to,
the following:
a. Diabetes;
b. History of hemophilia (bleeding);
History of skin disease, skin lesions or skin sensitivities to
soap, disinfectants, etc.;
c.
History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes or
other skin sensitivities;
d.
e. History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting or narcolepsy;
The taking of medications such as aspirin or other
anticoagulants, which thin the blood and/or interfere with
blood clotting;
f.
History of or suspicion of adverse reaction to latex or products
containing latex.
g.
1.
A client shall inform the body art practitioner of a known
pregnancy or possibility of pregnancy.
2.
The body art practitioner shall require the client to sign a release
form confirming that the above information was obtained or
attempted to be obtained and the client refused to disclose the
same.
3.
Impairment by drugs or alcohol. No person shall receive any form of
body art activity while under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
(d)
Aftercare instructions. All clients shall obtain and read and follow the
Department-approved aftercare instructions appropriate for the form of
body art conducted upon such person.
(e)
Minimum content or aftercare instructions. Aftercare instructions shall
be approved by the Department and shall include, at a minimum, the
following:
1. Responsibilities and proper care following the procedure;
2. Restrictions, if any, upon the client;
3. Signs and symptoms of infection; and
Instructions to contact a physician if possible signs of infection
occur or if bleeding occurs that is not controlled by light pressure
or if problems with urination or heavy vaginal bleeding occurs (for
genital body piercing or tattooing).
4.
(f)
(g) Age requirements for certain body art activities.
§ 6-1213 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1213
1:152
§ 6-1214. Body art establishments.
1. No minor client shall receive a tattoo;
2. No minor client shall be branded;
3. No minor client shall be scarred;
4. No minor client shall have his or her genitalia pierced;
No client under 14 years of age shall be pierced, with the sole
exception of ear piercing.
5.
Rash, lesion or visible signs of infection. The skin area or mucosa of a
client to receive any form of body art activity shall be free of rash, any
lesion or from any visible sign of infection.
(h)
Injury report. A written report of any injury, infection complication or
disease to a client as a result of a body art procedure, or complaint
of injury, infection complication or disease, shall be forwarded by the
operator or practitioner to the Department with a copy to the
complainant or injured client within five working days of its occurrence
or knowledge thereof. The report shall include:
1. Name of the affected client;
2. Name and location of the body art establishment involved;
3. Nature of the injury, infection complication or disease;
Name and address of the affected client's health care provider, if
any;
4.
5. Other information considered relevant to the situation.
(i)
Application for registration and permit; fees. Any person seeking
registration under this Body Art Ordinance so as to obtain a body
art establishment permit shall secure a license from the Board of
License Commissioners prior to any final action being taken upon the
application for a body art establishment permit to the Department.
A person seeking registration under this Body Art Ordinance so as
to obtain a body art establishment permit shall submit a completed
application provided by the Department and shall pay to the Town of
Weymouth a fee of $200. A body art establishment permit shall be valid
for no more than one year. The Department may renew a body art
establishment permit under this Body Art Ordinance and each applicant
for such renewal shall pay to the Town of Weymouth a renewal fee of
$200. All body art establishment permits shall expire on December 31
of the year of issuance. A body art establishment permit shall not be
transferable from one place or person to another.
(a)
Business activity. The operation of a body art establishment and/or the
conduct of any body art activity under a body art practitioner permit
(b)
§ 6-1213 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1214
1:153
shall occur within the hours of operation set forth by the Board of
Licensing Commissioners.
Plans. Every operator or applicant for a body art establishment permit
shall submit to the Department scaled plans and specifications of the
proposed facility wherein any body art activity is intended to be
conducted demonstrating the compliance of the facility with this Body
Art Ordinance. The Department may require an on-site inspection of
the proposed facility to determine and/or ensure compliance with the
requirements of this Body Art Ordinance prior to the issuance by the
Department of a body art establishment permit pursuant to this Body
Art Ordinance.
(c)
Workstations.
1. Every workstation shall have minimum of 45 square feet.
2. Each body art establishment shall have at least one workstation.
The area within each workstation shall be completely screened
from view from any person outside such workstation.
3.
4. A workstation shall be used for no purpose other than body art.
Each workstation shall be separated from any other area of the
body art facility, including other workstations within such body art
facility, by a wall or curtain or other solid barrier extending from
the floor to a minimum height of eight feet.
5.
6. A workstation shall be maintained in a clean and sterile condition.
(d)
Separate areas.
The cleaning area shall have an area for the placement and use of
an autoclave or other sterilization unit located or positioned so as
to be a minimum of 36 inches from a required ultrasonic cleaning
unit.
1.
Every body art establishment shall have therein an instrument
storage area exclusive of the cleaning area. The instrument storage
area shall be equipped with cabinets for the storage of all
instruments and equipment. The required cabinets shall be located
a sufficient distance from the cleaning area so as to prevent
contamination of the instruments and equipment stored therein.
2.
Every body art establishment shall have therein a customer waiting
area exclusive of and separate from any workstation, instrument
storage area or cleaning area.
3.
(e)
Walls, floors, ceilings.
Every workstation, instrument storage area, toilet room, and
cleaning area shall be constructed and maintained as follows so as
to provide a durable, smooth, nonabsorbent and washable surface:
1.
(f)
§ 6-1214 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1214
1:154
Floors: constructed of commercially rated continuous sheet
vinyl, smooth-sealed cement, ceramic tile with sealed grout, or
other similar materials approved by the Department and shall
be maintained in good repair free of any holes or cracks;
a.
Walls: covered with a semi-gloss or gloss enamel paint, or
constructed of fiberglass-reinforced panel, ceramic tile with
sealed grout or other similar materials approved by the
Department and shall be maintained in good repair free of any
holes or cracks;
b.
Ceiling: covered with semi-gloss or gloss enamel paint, or
approved commercially rated panels or tiles and maintained in
good repair free of any holes, cracks or falling matter.
c.
All such floors, walls and ceilings shall be light-colored. For
purposes of this Body Art Ordinance, "light-colored" shall mean a
light reflectance value of 70% or greater.
2.
Electrical wiring.
All electrical wiring shall be installed and maintained in accordance
with the state and local wiring codes.
1.
All electrical outlets in all workstations and cleaning areas shall
be equipped with approved ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI)
protected receptacles.
2.
(g)
Lighting and ventilation.
Every workstation shall be well ventilated and have a minimum
light service maintained at all times during the conducting of body
art activities at an equivalent of not less than 20 footcandles as
measured 36 inches above the floor, except that a minimum of
100 footcandles shall be provided on the area of the client's body
subject to the conduct of body art, in any area where instruments
or sharps are assembled, and all cleaning areas.
1.
Every workstation, cleaning area and every area in a body art
establishment where linens, instruments, sharps or other
equipment exposed, sanitized or sterilized shall be equipped
exclusively with readily cleanable light fixtures with light bulbs,
lenses or globes of shatterproof material.
2.
(h)
Plumbing.
All plumbing and plumbing fixtures shall be installed in compliance
with local plumbing codes.
1.
To the extent permitted by applicable federal, state and local laws
and ordinances, all liquid wastes shall be discharged through the
plumbing system into the public sewerage system or into a
Department-approved private sewage disposal system.
2.
(i)
§ 6-1214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1214
1:155
An adequate pressurized potable water supply shall be provided to
every body art establishment.
3.
The public water supply entering a body art establishment shall
be protected by a testable, reduced pressure backflow preventer
installed in accordance with MGL c. 142 and 248 CMR, as amended
from time to time.
4.
Toilet rooms.
Every body art establishment shall provide toilet rooms with
adequate lighting and ventilation to the outside for use by
employees and clients, which shall be available to clients during
business hours.
1.
The number and construction of toilet rooms shall be in accordance
with local building and plumbing codes.
2.
Every water closet or toilet stall shall be enclosed and have a wellfitting,
self-closing door.
3.
An adequate supply of toilet tissue shall be provided in a
permanently installed dispenser in each water closet or toilet stall.
4.
Toilet rooms shall not be used for the storage of instruments or
other supplies used for body art activity.
5.
(j)
Hand washing sinks.
A hand washing sink shall be provided within or adjacent to any
toilet room, and there shall be at least one hand washing sink for
every three workstations.
1.
Every hand washing sink shall be equipped with an adequate
supply of hot and cold water under pressure with fixtures to allow
for washing of hands, liquid hand cleanser, single-use sanitary
towels in devices for dispensing, and a waste container of washable
construction.
2.
3. A hand washing sink shall not be used as a janitorial sink.
(k)
Janitorial sink. At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in every
body art establishment for use in cleaning the body art establishment
and proper disposal of liquid wastes in accordance with all applicable
federal, state and local laws. For purposes of this Body Art Ordinance,
a "janitorial sink" means a sink of adequate size equipped with hot and
cold water under pressure so as to permit the cleaning of the body art
establishment and any equipment used for cleaning.
(l)
Instrument sink.
Every cleaning area shall have a sink used exclusively for the
cleaning of instruments.
1.
(m)
§ 6-1214 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1214
1:156
Every instrument sink shall be of adequate size and equipped with
hot and cold water under pressure so as to permit the cleaning of
instruments.
2.
Exposure control plan required. Each operator shall create, update as
needed, and comply with an exposure control plan.
(n)
Exposure control plan submission and accessibility.
The exposure control plan for a body art establishment shall be
submitted by the operator to the Department for review so as to
meet all of the requirements of OSHA regulations, to include, but
not limited to, 29 CFR 1910.1030 et seq., as amended from time to
time.
1.
A copy of the body art establishment's exposure control plan shall
be maintained at the body art establishment at all times and shall
be made available to the Department upon request.
2.
(o)
Telephone access; emergency communication. A body art establishment
shall be required to have a telephone in good working order and easily
accessible to all employees and clients during all hours of operation for
the purpose of contacting police, fire or emergency medical assistance
or ambulance services in the event of an emergency or perceived
emergency. A legible sign shall be posted at or adjacent to the
telephone indicating the correct emergency telephone numbers and the
number of the Department.
(p)
Restrictions on other activities. No operator shall permit the use of a
body art establishment:
For the sale of food and/or beverages, whether to be consumed at
the body art establishment or off-site;
1.
2. As a barbershop or hair salon;
3. As a nail salon;
As a bar, with or without a license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages;
4.
5. As a bowling alley;
6. For human habitation;
7. As a tanning salon;
8. As a massage parlor;
For any other use which, in the opinion of the Department, may
cause the contamination of instruments, equipment, a procedure
surface or workstation.
9.
(q)
§ 6-1214 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1214
1:157
§ 6-1215. Instruments and equipment.
Posting of permit. The operator of a body art establishment shall post
in an area of the body art establishment accessible to the Department
and to clients the original of the current body art establishment permit
issued by the Department.
(r)
Mobile or temporary body art establishment. No person shall establish
or operate a mobile or temporary body art establishment.
(s)
Health of body art establishment employees. No person affected with
boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, weeping dermatological
lesions or acute respiratory infection shall work in any area of, or in any
capacity in, a body art establishment which would create a likelihood
that that person could contaminate equipment, instruments, supplies,
procedure surfaces, workstations or other otherwise compromise or
could reasonably be expected to compromise the sterility of the body
art establishment with body substances or pathogenic organisms.
(t)
Equipment and furnishings. The procedure surface and the surface
of all furniture and countertops located in a workstation, instrument
storage area and cleaning area shall be made of materials that are, or
shall be treated so as to be, smooth, nonabsorbent, nonporous, easily
cleanable and able to withstand repeated cleaning and disinfecting.
Such surfaces shall be maintained in a good condition free from holes
and cracks.
(a)
Sanitizing and sterilization units.
Every body art establishment shall have at a minimum the
following:
One or more ultrasonic cleaning units sold for cleaning
purposes under approval of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. Every ultrasonic cleaning unit shall be clearly
labeled "Biohazardous" and shall be installed or placed in the
cleaning area at a minimum distance of 36 inches from the
required autoclave or other sterilization unit.
a.
One or more autoclave or other sterilization units sold for
medical sterilization purposes under approval of the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration.
b.
1.
Every operator and body art practitioner shall be knowledgeable
in the required washing, cleaning and sterilization procedures,
including the proper operation of the ultrasonic cleaning unit and
autoclave or other sterilization unit.
2.
(b)
Waste receptacles.
Every workstation shall have a foot-operated, covered, cleanable
waste receptacle for disposal of trash and other debris.
1.
(c)
§ 6-1214 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1215
1:158
Every workstation shall have an approved sharps container
exclusively used for the disposal of contaminated waste in
accordance with the Weymouth Health Department.
2.
Linens. Every body art establishment or body art practitioner shall
maintain an adequate supply of reusable, launderable linens or singleuse
linens, such as drapes, lap cloths and aprons, to be used in
conducting body art activities.
(d)
Rotary pens. If used in body art activity, rotary pens, also known as
"cosmetic machines," shall have detachable, disposable, sterile combo
couplers and shall have detachable, disposable casings or casings
designed and manufactured to be easily cleaned and sterilized.
(e)
Ink, dye and pigment.
All inks, dyes, and pigments used to alter the color of skin in
the conduct of body art shall be specifically manufactured for
such purpose, approved, properly labeled as to their ingredients,
manufacturer and lot number in accordance with applicable United
States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requirements, and
shall not be contaminated or adulterated. The mixing of such inks,
dyes or pigments or the dilution of the same with potable sterile
water is acceptable, unless prohibited or not recommended by the
product manufacturer.
1.
Inks, dyes and pigments prepared by or at the direction of a body
art practitioner for use in body art activity shall be made
exclusively of nontoxic and noncontaminated ingredients approved
by the Department or the FDA.
2.
(f)
Inserted objects; jewelry.
Jewelry shall be sterilized, free from polishing compounds, free
from nicks, scratches, burrs or irregular surface conditions.
1.
Jewelry of sixteen-gauge girth or thicker shall not have raised
external threads or threading.
2.
Jewelry shall be in good condition, designed and manufactured for
insertion into the intended body part of the client.
3.
The use of previously worn jewelry or jewelry brought into the body
art establishment by the client or another is prohibited.
4.
Only jewelry manufactured of surgical implant stainless steel of
American Society for Testing and Material Standards (ASTM) grade
F138, surgical implant solid 14K or 18K white or yellow gold,
niobium, surgical implant titanium of Ti6A4V ELI, ASTM F-136-98,
platinum or other materials considered by the Department to be
equally biocompatible and capable of adequate cleaning and
sterilization shall be inserted into a client.
5.
(g)
§ 6-1215 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1215
1:159
§ 6-1216. General requirements.
Single-use equipment and instruments. Equipment, instruments and
supplies intended for single use shall not be used more than one time.
(h)
Prohibited instruments and materials. No operator, body art
practitioner or other person shall utilize or have available in a body art
establishment any:
Instruments or materials, such as styptic pencils or devices, alum,
or any similar material used to check the flow of blood;
1.
Liquid sterilants for the attempted sterilization of any reusable
instrument or component;
2.
Rotary pens that are designed or manufactured with a spongetype
material at the opening of the chamber for the purpose of
prohibiting the backflow of pigment and body fluid into the
machine;
3.
Multiple-use instruments or components that are designed in such
a manner that restricts or prevents proper washing, cleaning or
sterilization;
4.
Drugs, chemicals or agents that require a licensed medical
practitioner's authorization for use, application or dispensation;
5.
Suturing kits or suturing devices, scalpels, cauterizing tools or
devices, or other tools, devices or instruments used for or in
conjunction with any prohibited body art activity, and not otherwise
properly used for any allowed body art activity;
6.
Piercing needles or piercing tapers for sale or use by one not a
body art practitioner;
7.
8. Needles used in the practice of "play piercing," so-called.
(i)
Animals.
No body art practitioner shall conduct any form of body art upon
an animal.
1.
No animal, except one actually serving as any guide animal, signal
animal or service animal accompanied by a totally or partially blind
person or deaf person or a person whose hearing is impaired or
handicapped person, shall be allowed in a body art establishment.
2.
Fish aquariums shall be allowed in the waiting area and
nonprocedural areas of a body art establishment.
3.
(a)
Smoking, eating and drinking prohibited. No person shall smoke, or
otherwise use any form of tobacco, eat or drink at or in a workstation,
instrument storage area or cleaning area. Only in the case of medical
need may fluids be consumed by a client.
(b)
§ 6-1215 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1216
1:160
Disease transmission. Except as set forth in these regulations, no
operator, body art practitioner or other person shall commit or permit
any act that may expose any client or person to disease or illness
or otherwise contaminate any instrument or area in a body art
establishment.
(c)
Exposure incident report.
An exposure incident report shall be completed by the close of the
business day during which an exposure has or might have taken
place by the involved or knowledgeable body art practitioner for
every exposure incident occurring in the conduct of any body art
activity.
1.
Each exposure incident report shall contain:
A copy of the application and consent form for body art activity
completed by any client or minor client involved in the
exposure incident;
a.
A full description of the exposure incident, including the
portion of the body involved therein;
b.
c. Instrument(s) or other equipment implicated;
A copy of the body art practitioner permit of the involved body
art practitioner;
d.
e. Date and time of exposure;
A copy of any medical history released to the body art
establishment or body art practitioner; and
f.
Information regarding any recommendation to refer to a
physician or waiver to consult a physician by persons involved.
g.
2.
(d)
Record maintenance.
Every operator shall have and retain at the body art establishment
for inspection by the Department the following information for the
time period specified below, to be updated as needed to remain
current:
Exposure control plan: one copy of the exposure control plan
for the body art establishment submitted to the Department;
a.
Employee records for the previous three years indicating:
name, home address, home phone number, identification
photograph, state identification card number, physical
description as detailed on state identification card, date of
birth, type(s) of body art procedures conducted, dates of
employment at the body art establishment, body art
practitioner registration number, Hepatitis B vaccination
status or declination notification;
b.
1.
(e)
§ 6-1216 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1216
1:161
Body art practitioner independent operator (nonemployee of
the body art establishment) records for the previous three
years indicating: name, home address, phone number, state
identification card number, physical description as detailed
on state identification card, date of birth, type(s) of body art
procedures conducted, dates operating at the body art
establishment; body art practitioner registration number,
Hepatitis B vaccination status or declination notification;
c.
Client records for the previous two years: copies of all
application and consent forms for body art activity;
d.
Waste hauler manifests for contaminated waste transport and
disposal for the previous three years;
e.
Training records for the previous three years: documentation
to verify training of exposure control plan for all employees
and body art practitioner independent operators conducting
body art activity at such establishment;
f.
Commercial biological monitoring (spore) system test results
for the previous three years;
g.
Body Art Ordinance: one copy of the most current version of
this Body Art Ordinance and any state regulations concerning
the practice of body art.
h.
Every operator shall have and permanently retain at the body
art establishment for inspection by the Department all exposure
incident reports. The disposal or destruction of these reports is
prohibited.
2.
Establishment maintenance. Every area of a body art establishment
shall be kept in good repair, clean and free of all vermin and maintained
so as to prevent contamination of clients and other persons.
(f)
Toilet room and plumbing maintenance. Every toilet room, all plumbing
and all plumbing fixtures shall be kept clean, fully operative, and in
good repair.
(g)
Equipment and instrument maintenance.
All instruments, equipment and procedure surfaces used for body
art activity, including, but not limited to, devices, containers,
cabinets, storage compartments, chairs, tables, counters, and
dispensers, shall be maintained clean, fully operative, and in good
repair and free from contamination.
1.
All instruments manufactured for performing any specific body
art activity shall be so designated, used and approved, and shall
not be modified, adulterated, contaminated or improperly used.
Instruments used for body piercing shall be constructed of stainless
surgical-grade steel, and designed and manufactured for such use.
2.
(h)
§ 6-1216 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1216
1:162
Contaminated instruments.
Every contaminated reusable instrument or component thereof,
including, but not limited to, needles, needle bars, needle tubes,
needle caps, body piercing tubes, rotary pens, and coil machines,
shall be immersed in water or other approved liquid solution in the
cleaning area until cleaned and sterilized.
1.
Prior to sterilization, every such instrument shall be thoroughly
washed by scrubbing with an appropriate disinfectant and hot
water in accordance with manufacturer's instructions so as to
remove contamination and foreign matter.
2.
Upon completion of the washing process as set forth in Subsection
(i)(2) above, every such instrument shall be cleaned using an
ultrasonic cleaning unit in accordance with manufacturer's
instructions.
3.
Upon completion of the cleaning process as set forth in Subsection
(i)(3) above, every such instrument shall be packaged into
procedure set-up packages with color-change indicators designed
to indicate complete sterilization thereof, initials of the person
responsible for sterilizing the instruments and date of such
sterilization. Instruments may be packaged individually or with
other instruments to the extent permitted under the package
manufacturer's instructions.
4.
Upon completion of the packaging process as set forth in
Subsection (i)(4) above, every such instrument shall be properly
sterilized by properly autoclaving in an approved autoclave or
sterilized in another type of sterilization unit according to
manufacturer's instructions.
5.
If a package becomes wet, is opened or is otherwise compromised
so as to allow the possible contamination of the contents of the
package, any instrument therein shall be deemed contaminated
and shall again be washed, cleaned, packaged and sterilized as
indicated above prior to use.
6.
Sterilized instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or
tightly covered container. Cabinets and containers designated for
the storage of sterilized instruments shall be used for that purpose
exclusively.
7.
Every sterilized package shall be deemed expired six months after
the date of sterilization. Every instrument therein shall again be
washed, cleaned, packaged and sterilized consistent with the
provisions of this section prior to use.
8.
Liquid sterilants shall not be used for the sterilization of any
reusable instrument.
9.
(i)
§ 6-1216 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1216
1:163
Instrument storage. All instruments must be stored in the instrument
storage area in a manner so as to prevent contamination. Identical
instruments shall be exclusively stored together, unless intermingled
storage with different instruments does not represent a hazard as
determined by the Department.
(j)
Use of chemicals and cleansers. All germicides, disinfectants,
chemicals, and cleansers must be used according to the manufacturer's
requirements, used only for the purpose approved and intended by
the manufacturer and properly labeled and stored so as to prevent
contamination and hazard.
(k)
Labeling. All storage containers, cabinets, shelves and other storage
areas in the instrument storage area shall be properly labeled as to
their contents, including, but not limited to, identification of
contaminated or soiled contents as appropriate.
(l)
Linen storage and cleaning.
Clean linen shall be stored in a manner so as to prevent
contamination. Containers used for the storage of such linen shall
be clearly labeled as to the contents and used for no other purpose.
Linens that have become soiled or contaminated shall be disposed
of, or not be used, until properly laundered. Contaminated linen
shall be labeled, handled, stored, transported, and laundered or
disposed of so as to prevent hazard in a manner approved by the
Department.
1.
Any other protective clothing, garment or cloth items worn during
or used during in body art activity and intended for reuse shall be
mechanically washed with detergent and dried after each use. The
items shall be stored in a clean, dry manner and protected from
contamination until used. Should such items become contaminated
directly or indirectly with bodily fluids, the items shall be washed
in accordance with standards applicable to hospitals and medical
care facilities, at a temperature of 160° F. or a temperature of 120°
F. with the use of chlorine disinfectant.
2.
(m)
Cleaning and testing of ultrasonic cleaning units and sterilization units.
Every ultrasonic cleaning unit and autoclave or sterilization unit
shall be used and maintained according to manufacturer's
specifications. Each ultrasonic cleaning unit, autoclave or other
sterilization unit shall be emptied and thoroughly cleaned and
disinfected at least once each day that the unit is used.
1.
Every autoclave or sterilization unit shall be tested with a
commercial biological monitoring (spore) system test in a manner
and frequency consistent with the manufacturer's instructions, but
no less than once every week, to monitor the efficacy of the
eradication of all living organisms, including spores, by the
autoclave or other sterilization unit.
2.
(n)
§ 6-1216 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1216
1:164
§ 6-1217. Conduct of body art.
Biological monitoring (spore) system testing of the autoclave or
other sterilization unit shall be performed by an independent
commercial testing laboratory contracted by the operator and/or
body art practitioner. A provision shall be included in the contact
between the operator and/or body art practitioner with the
commercial testing laboratory requiring the commercial testing
facility to notify the Department of any failure of the autoclave or
other sterilization unit to eradicate all living organisms, including
spores.
3.
Waste hauling.
All waste shall be removed from the body art establishment on a
daily basis and placed in an approved secured receptacle for pickup
and removal.
1.
All contaminated waste in solid form and sharps shall be disposed
of through use of an approved waste hauler in accordance with
all applicable state, federal and local laws and/or regulations. The
frequency of disposal shall be determined by the Department, but
shall be no less than every 30 days.
2.
(o)
Workstation sanitizing.
All surfaces in a workstation which come in contact with a client
or which become contaminated or which may reasonably have
become contaminated shall be cleaned with water and soap or
other appropriate cleaning compound immediately following the
conduct of body art upon a client.
1.
The workstation, including, but not limited to, the client's chair,
table, tray, procedure surface and similar surfaces, shall be
thoroughly sanitized with an approved disinfectant immediately
before and immediately after the conduct of body art upon a client
therein/thereon.
2.
(a)
Hand washing and use of gloves.
A body art practitioner shall clean his/her hands and forearms
thoroughly by washing with antibacterial soap and warm water and
promptly dry the same with single-use paper towels or like material
prior to conducting any body art activity.
1.
A body art practitioner shall wear new, clean, single-use
examination gloves while assembling all instruments and other
supplies intended for use in the conduct of body art and during the
conduct of body art upon a client. New, clean, single-use nonlatex
examination gloves shall be used during the preparation for and
the conduct of any body art activity upon a client with a known or
a suspected latex allergy.
2.
(b)
§ 6-1216 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1217
1:165
If an examination glove is pierced, torn or contaminated through
contact with any part of the client not subject to the conduct of
body art or such other surface so as to present the possibility
of contamination, any person other than the client, or otherwise
exposed to an unsanitary or nonsterile surface, both gloves must
be promptly removed and discarded into an appropriate waste
receptacle. The body art practitioner shall don new gloves before
proceeding with the conduct of body art.
3.
If the gloves of a body art practitioner are removed at any time
during assembly of instruments or supplies, or the conduct of body
art, the body art practitioner must clean his/her hands and don new
gloves in accordance with this section.
4.
The use of single-use examination gloves does not preclude or
substitute for the above hand washing requirement.
5.
Instrument and equipment preparation.
Every body art practitioner shall use linens, properly cleaned in
accordance with these regulations, or new single-use drapes, lap
cloths, and aprons for each element of body art conducted upon a
client.
1.
Every substance used in the conduct of body art shall be dispensed
from containers so as to prevent contamination or the possibility of
contamination of the unused portion. Immediately before tattooing
a client, a sufficient quantity of the ink, dye or pigment to be used
therefor shall be transferred from its original bottle or container
into sterile, single-use disposable cups, caps or containers.
2.
Upon sanitization of the workstation, the instrument tray shall be
covered with an uncontaminated single-use paper towel, tray cover
or similar material.
3.
Every instrument required for the conduct of body art upon a client
shall be placed and arranged on the instrument tray in a manner so
as to prevent contamination of sterilized instruments. All sterilized
instruments shall remain in sterile packages until opened in front
of the client.
4.
Sharps containers shall be easily accessible to the body art
practitioner and located as close as is feasible to the immediate
area where the sharps will be used.
5.
(c)
Use of workstation.
The conduct of body art shall occur only upon a client or minor
client in a workstation under sterile conditions.
1.
Only the client, the parent or legal guardian of a minor client,
the guide or service animal of a client, the body art practitioner
conducting the body art and an assistant or apprentice to the body
2.
(d)
§ 6-1217 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1217
1:166
art practitioner, with the express permission of the client, shall be
permitted in the workstation during the conduct of body art.
Use of instruments, supplies and sharps.
All instruments used in the conduct of body art shall be without
contamination, and shall be properly cleaned, sanitized and
sterilized in accordance with this Body Art Ordinance.
1.
All instruments and other equipment or supplies used in the
conduct of body art that are designed or intended for single use
shall only be used once.
2.
All sharps shall be properly disposed of in a sharps container
immediately following use.
3.
All products applied to the skin, including body art stencils, shall
be single-use and shall be used only once.
4.
Products used in the application of body art stencils shall be
dispensed and applied to the area of the client upon which the
body art activity is to be performed with sterile gauze or other
sterile applicator so as to prevent contamination of the container
and contents of the product in use. The gauze or other applicator
shall be used only once.
5.
Only single-use disposable razors shall be used in the conduct of
body art activities, and such single-use disposable razors shall not
be used more than one time.
6.
(e)
Waste disposal. Disposable items such as gloves, wipes, cotton balls,
Q-tips, water cups, rinse cups (used alone or in an ultrasonic cleaning
unit), drapes, lap cloths, aprons and other single-use items that have
come into contact with any person, client, workstation, instrument
trays, counters, towels or linens used for the conduct of body art,
or have otherwise become contaminated, shall be promptly discarded
into an appropriate waste receptacle during or upon completion of the
conduct of body art in accordance with this Body Art Ordinance.
(f)
Multiple body art activities. The following shall be deemed to be
multiple body art activities on a single client, each requiring proper
washing, cleaning, sanitization and sterilization of instruments,
workstations and other equipment and areas as set forth under these
regulations:
Creating two or more tattoos on different areas of the body of a
single client;
1.
The use of more than one needle or scalpel during the conduct of
body art upon a single client;
2.
Creating one tattoo and the use of one needle or scalpel on a single
client.
3.
(g)
§ 6-1217 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1218
1:167
§ 6-1218. Prohibited activities.
(a) Piercing gun. The use of a piercing gun is prohibited at all times.
Cosmetic tattooing; micropigmentation, etc. Cosmetic tattooing, also
known as permanent cosmetics, micropigment implantation or dermal
pigmentation, is hereby prohibited unless performed by a medical
doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or such other
person who receives a license, permit or registration by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts specifically to perform such
activities.
If a person obtains such a license, permit or registration from the
commonwealth, such person may conduct such body art activity,
provided all requirements of this Body Art Ordinance are complied
with, except § 6-1206.
(b)
Particular body piercings prohibited or restricted. The following body
piercings are hereby prohibited:
1. Piercing of the uvula;
2. Piercing of the tracheal area;
3. Piercing of the neck;
4. Piercing of the ankle;
5. Piercing between the ribs or vertebrae;
6. Piercing of the web area of the hand or foot;
7. Piercing of the lingual frenum (tongue web);
8. Piercing of the clitoris;
Any form of chest or deep muscle piercings, excluding piercing the
nipple;
9.
10. Piercing of the anus;
11. Piercing of an eyelid, whether the top or bottom;
12. The form of body piercing known as "pocketing";
13. Piercing of the gums;
14. Piercing or skewering of a testicle;
So-called "deep" piercing of the penis, meaning piercing through
the shaft of the penis, or "trans-penis" piercing in any area from the
corona glandis to the pubic bone;
15.
So-called "deep" piercing of the scrotum, meaning piercing through
the scrotum, or "trans-scrotal" piercing;
16.
(c)
§ 6-1218 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1218
1:168
§ 6-1219. Enforcement.
So-called "deep" piercing of the vagina, to include, but not limited
to so-called "triangles."
17.
Tongue splitting. The cutting, splitting or other bifurcation of the
tongue is hereby prohibited unless performed by a medical doctor
licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(d)
Braiding. The braiding of the skin is hereby prohibited unless
performed by a medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
(e)
Three dimensional body art; implantation. Three dimensional body art,
including "beading," and implantation is hereby prohibited unless
performed by a medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
(f)
Tooth filing, fracturing or removal. The filing or shaping or the
intentional fracturing or extraction of a tooth is hereby prohibited
unless performed by a dentist licensed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
(g)
Cartilage modification. The cutting, notching, sculpting or other
modification of cartilage is hereby prohibited unless performed by a
doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(h)
Amputation. The intentional amputation of any part of the body is
hereby prohibited unless performed by a doctor licensed by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(i)
Genital modification. Modification of the genitalia by means of
subincision, bifurcation, castration, male or female nullification or
other surgical means is hereby prohibited unless performed by a doctor
licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(j)
Introduction of saline or other liquids. The introduction of saline
solution or other liquid or semi-liquid substance into the body of
another for the purposes of causing a modification of the body is
hereby prohibited unless performed by a medical doctor licensed by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(k)
Branding or scarring. Branding or scarring may not be performed
under the permit and may only be performed by a licensed medical
doctor.
(l)
Violation by a body art practitioner.
A body art practitioner permit shall be suspended by the
Department immediately upon written notice of such suspension to
the subject body art practitioner when, in the opinion of the Health
Department nurse or inspector, the Health Department nurse or
inspector has reason to believe that, due to a condition or practice
1.
(a)
§ 6-1218 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1219
1:169
of the subject body art practitioner, a threat to the public health
exists.
When the condition or practice believed to cause such threat to the
public health is abated or corrected to the satisfaction of Health
Department personnel, the Health Department may terminate the
suspension of the body art practitioner permit of the subject body
art practitioner and reinstate the same upon written notice to the
subject body art practitioner, and the body art practitioner permit
of such body art practitioner shall remain in full force and in effect
until the expiration of the same or until the subsequent suspension,
termination, revocation or modification thereof.
2.
In all other instances of a violation of this Body Art Ordinance
by a body art practitioner, the Department shall serve upon the
subject body art practitioner written notice of violation detailing
the condition, event or practice determined by the Department to
be in violation of this Body Art Ordinance. Such written order to
correct shall instruct the body art practitioner that he or she shall
have a time period as determined by the nurse or inspector to abate
or correct such condition, event or practice to the satisfaction of
the Department.
3.
Should a body art practitioner, subject to a notice of violation
pursuant to Subsection (a)(3), fail to abate or correct the condition,
event or practice which is the subject of a notice of violation, or to
otherwise comply with a notice of violation, the Department may
suspend, terminate, revoke or modify the permit held by such body
art practitioner.
4.
Violation by an operator or in a body art establishment.
A body art establishment permit shall be suspended by the
Department immediately upon written notice of such suspension to
the subject operator when, in the opinion of the Health Department
nurse or inspector, due to a condition of or practice in the body art
establishment, the nurse or inspector of the Health Department has
reason to believe that a threat to the public health exists.
1.
When the condition or practice believed to cause such threat to the
public health is abated or corrected to the satisfaction of the Health
Department personnel, the Health Department may terminate the
suspension of the body art establishment permit of the subject
operator and reinstate the same upon written notice to the subject
operator, and the body art establishment permit of such body art
establishment shall remain in full force and in effect until the
expiration of the same or until the subsequent suspension,
termination, revocation or modification thereof.
2.
In all other instances of a violation of this Body Art Ordinance by
an operator or in a body art establishment, the Department shall
serve upon the subject operator written notice of violation detailing
3.
(b)
§ 6-1219 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1219
1:170
the condition, event or practice determined by the Department to
be in violation of this Body Art Ordinance. Such order of notice
shall instruct the operator that he or she shall have a time period
as determined by the nurse or inspector to abate or correct such
condition, event or practice to the satisfaction of the Department.
Should an operator subject to an order of notice pursuant to
Subsection (b)(3) fail to abate or correct the condition, event or
practice which is the subject of a notice of violation, or to otherwise
comply with a notice of violation, the Department may suspend,
terminate, revoke or modify the body art establishment permit held
by such operator.
4.
Criminal prosecution. In accordance with §§ 1-109 and 1-110 of these
ordinances, as amended from time to time, at the discretion of the
Department, whoever violates any provision of this Body Art Ordinance
may be penalized by indictment or on a criminal complaint brought in
the District Court.
(c)
Fine for violation; each day a separate offense. The fine for a violation
of any provision of this Body Art Ordinance shall be no less than $10
and no greater than $1,000 per day, per offense.
(d)
Noncriminal disposition. In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D, and
§§ 1-109 and 1-110 of these ordinances, as amended from time to time,
at the discretion of the Department, whoever, in the opinion of the
Department, violates any provision of this Body Art Ordinance may be
penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
The range of fines associated with this noncriminal disposition shall be
not less than $10 nor more than $1,000 per day, per offense.
(e)
Weymouth Department of Health regulations. The Weymouth
Department of Health may from time to time promulgate and amend
regulations pertaining to the requirements for all applicants for a body
art practitioner permit and a body art facility permit. In addition to the
Body Art Ordinance, body art practitioners and applicants for a body
art facility permit are required to adhere to the requirements set forth
in the Department of Health regulations. In the event these regulations
conflict with any section or subsection of the Body Art Ordinance, it is
the Body Art Ordinance which shall take precedence.
(f)
§ 6-1219 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1219
1:171

SECTION 6-1300
Sex Offender Residency Restrictions
§ 6-1301. Definitions.
§ 6-1302. Residency restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any adult criminal Level 3 sex offender to establish
a residence or any other living accommodations within 1,500 feet of the
property on which any school, day-care center, park, or recreational facility
open to the public is located. The fifteen-hundred-foot restriction shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest property line upon which the
house, apartment complex, condominium complex, motel, hotel or other
residence is located to the property line of the nearest school, day-care
center, park, or recreational facility. Distances will be taken from the Town's
GIS system, and GIS services to the Town shall be presumed accurate and
shall be evidence of a violation.
§ 6-1303. Established residents.
Changes to property resulting in a school, day-care center, park, or
recreational facility within 1,500 feet of an adult criminal Level 3 sex
offender's registered address which occur after an adult criminal Level 3
sex offender establishes residency shall not form the basis for finding that a
criminal sex offender is in violation of Section 6-1300 of these ordinances.
§ 6-1304. Notice to move.
Level 3 registered sex offenders who reside on a permanent or temporary
basis within 1,500 feet of any school, day-care center, park, or recreational
facility following passage of this section shall be in violation of this section
and shall, within 30 days of receipt of written notice of the registered
sex offender's noncompliance with this section, move from said location
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
ADULT CRIMINAL LEVEL 3 SEX OFFENDER — A person convicted of
a criminal sex offense and designated as a Level 3 sex offender by the
Massachusetts Sex Offender Registry Board. The Board has determined
that these individuals have a high risk to reoffend and that the degree
of dangerousness posed to the public is such that a substantial public
safety interest is served by active community notification.
GIS — Geographic information system.
SCHOOL — A licensed or accredited public or private school or church
school that offers instruction in pre-school, including a licensed day
care or other business permitted as a school by the Town of Weymouth,
or any of grades Kindergarten through Grade 12. This definition shall
not include private residences in which students are taught by parents
or tutors.
(a)
§ 6-1301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1304
1:173
to a new location, but said new location may not be within 1,500 feet
of any school, day-care center, park, or recreational facility. The first day
following the thirty-day written notice shall be considered the first violation.
Following the first violation, every day that the registered sex offender
continues to reside within 1,500 feet of any school, day-care center, park, or
recreational facility shall be considered a separate violation.
§ 6-1305. Violations and penalties.
The following penalties will be imposed by the Weymouth Police
Department:
(a) First offense by registered sex offender: noncriminal fine of $150.
Subsequent offense by registered sex offender: noncriminal fine of $300
and notification to offender's parole officer and/or probation officer and
the Commonwealth's Sex Offender Registry Board that the sex offender
has violated a municipal ordinance.
This section expressly does not repeal or otherwise affect any other
provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the Town of Weymouth,
Massachusetts.
(b)
§ 6-1304 WEYMOUTH CODE § 6-1305
1:174
Chapter 7
REGULATIONS AFFECTING USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 6-1305 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 6-1305
1:175

SECTION 7-100
Building Construction
§ 7-101. Permits, plans and certificates; moving of buildings.
Permit required; conditions of issuance. The Inspector of Buildings shall
grant permits for the erection, alteration, removal or tearing down of
buildings. No structure or foundation shall be built, altered or torn
down without such a permit, but no permit shall be issued unless the
street is on a plan duly filed and recorded, and before the permit
shall be issued, such street shall have been suitably improved to the
satisfaction of the Planning Board as adequate in respect to public
health, safety and general welfare for the special circumstances of the
particular street, and an affidavit filed by a registered engineer stating
that plans and profiles of said street are in compliance; and until the
Inspector has carefully examined the plans and specifications of the
proposed building or alterations and ascertained that the building has
sufficient strength, that means of ingress and egress are sufficient and
the building conforms to the requirements of these ordinances and the
regulations of MGL c. 143.
(a)
Plans for public buildings; plan requirements for other buildings.
A copy of the plans and specifications of every public building shall
be deposited in the office of the Inspector of Buildings.
1.
Plans may be required for construction of all buildings to show
compliance to all applicable codes and ordinances and other such
plans or details as may be deemed necessary by the Inspector of
Buildings.
2.
Upon request for a building permit, the builder shall submit to
the Inspector of Buildings a linen or Mylar and two prints of the
proposed plot plan. The plan shall show the entire building lot,
a portion of the way or street on location (public or otherwise)
and an accurate location of the proposed building. This plan shall
be accomplished by a qualified registered land surveyor. It shall
show the survey data required to distinguish the lot and building.
The Inspector of Buildings shall also require that all plans and
computations bear the name of the person designing the plans and
the name of the owner of the proposed building.
3.
(b)
Inspections; right of entry; reports of violations; institution of
proceedings.
The Inspector of Buildings shall examine as often as practicable
all buildings which are being erected, raised, enlarged, altered or
repaired and for that purpose shall have the right of entry thereto.
1.
In the case where a building is found to violate any provision
of these ordinances, the Inspector of Buildings shall direct such
alterations as may be necessary to bring such structure into
2.
(c)
§ 7-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-101
1:177
compliance. If the building's owner does not comply with such
directions, the Inspector of Buildings shall make a written report of
the facts to the Mayor, who shall institute such court proceedings,
either civil or criminal, as the facts shall warrant.
Applicability to alterations and additions. Any alterations or additions to
any buildings already erected or hereafter to be built as herein defined
shall, to the extent of such work, be subject to the provisions of this
section.
(d)
Certificate of occupancy. No building hereafter erected, altered or in
any way changed as to construction or use under a permit or otherwise
shall be occupied or used without a certificate of occupancy, signed by
the Inspector of Buildings; said certificate shall not be issued until the
building and its uses and accessory uses comply in all respects with
applicable laws and Town ordinances.
(e)
Alterations and additions to comply. No building erected or hereafter
built shall be raised or built up or altered in such manner that, were
such building wholly built or constructed after the passage of this
section, it would be in violation of any provision of this section.
(f)
Moving of buildings. No building shall be moved to any location where
its construction would be in violation of the provisions of this section.
(g)
Fees. There shall be fees, payable to the Town of Weymouth, for
building, electrical, plumbing and gas fitting permits for the erection,
alteration, demolition or moving of structures or building systems. The
fees shall be as set by the Inspector of Buildings in accordance with 780
CMR 114.3, 114.3.1, Massachusetts State Building Code and § 5-305 of
these ordinances.
(h)
Stretch Energy Code. For the purpose of regulating the design and
construction of buildings for the effective use of energy applications,
building permits shall conform to Appendix 115.AA of the
Massachusetts Building Code, 780 CMR, the Stretch Energy Code,
including future editions, amendments, or modifications thereto.
[Added 10-19-2015 by Ord. No. 15-107]
(i)
§ 7-101 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-101
1:178
SECTION 7-200
Demolition of Buildings
§ 7-201. Purpose; definitions; procedures; enforcement.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the historically or
architecturally significant buildings or markers in the Town and to
encourage owners of such properties to seek out persons who might be
willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such buildings and
markers rather than demolish them.
(a)
Definitions. The following words used in this section, unless the context
otherwise requires, shall have the following meanings:
COMMISSION — The Weymouth Historical Commission.
DEMOLITION — Any act of pulling down, destroying, removing or
razing a building or marker; or commencing the work of total or
substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same.
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any
building or portion thereof which:
PROPERTIES — Includes buildings, structures, bridges, historical sites,
etc.
In whole or in part was built 100 or more years prior to the date of
the application for the demolition permit or is of unknown age;
1.
Is importantly associated with one or more historic persons or
events or with the architectural, cultural, political, economic or
social history of the Town, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or
the United States of America;
2.
Is historically or architecturally important by reason of period,
style, method of building construction or association with a
particular architect, either by itself or in the context of a group of
buildings or structures.
3.
(b)
Annual reporting of historical properties or significant buildings.
The Historical Commission shall compile and file with the Mayor,
the Department of Community Planning and Development,
Inspector of Buildings and Director of Public Works, on an annual
basis, a current list of all known historical properties currently
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or properties
researched and found by the Commission to be historically or
architecturally significant. Said list shall be disseminated to all new
owners of historical properties or significant buildings on an annual
basis.
1.
The owner shall have 30 days to appeal said determination by
the Commission, which shall hold a public hearing with 14 days'
2.
(c)
§ 7-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-201
1:179
advance written notice to the owner before a final determination is
made.
Procedure.
The Mayor, the Director of Planning and Community Development,
the Inspector of Buildings and the Director of Public Works shall
notify the Commission of any such projects which might result
in the demolition of any property that is included on the list.
Within seven days after receipt of an application for demolition,
the Inspector of Buildings shall notify, in writing, the Historical
Commission of said application.
1.
No demolition permit shall be issued except by the following
procedure:
Within 30 days following receipt of the application from the
Inspector of Buildings, the Commission shall conduct a public
hearing and shall give public notice thereof by publishing
notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing in a local
newspaper at least 14 days before said hearing and mail by
certified mail, with return receipt requested, a copy of said
notice to the applicant.
a.
If, after such hearing, the Commission determines that the
demolition of the significant building would not be detrimental
to the historical or architectural heritage or resources of the
Town, the Commission shall so notify in writing the Inspector
of Buildings within seven days of such determination. Upon
receipt of such notification or after the expiration of seven
days from the date of the conduct of the hearing, if he has
not received notification from the Commission, the Inspector
of Buildings may, subject to the requirements of the State
Building Code and any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, issue the demolition permit.
b.
If the Commission determines that the demolition of the
significant building would be detrimental to the historical or
architectural heritage or resources of the Town, such building
shall be considered a preferably preserved significant building.
c.
Upon determination by the Commission that the significant
building which is the subject of the application for a demolition
permit is a preferably preserved significant building, the
Commission shall so advise the applicant and the Inspector of
Buildings in writing within seven days of said hearing, and no
demolition permit will be issued for six months after the date
of such determination by the Commission.
d.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Inspector of
Buildings may issue a demolition permit for a preferably
e.
2.
(d)
§ 7-201 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-201
1:180
preserved significant building at any time after receipt of
written advice from the Commission to the effect that either:
The Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable
likelihood that either the owner or some other person
or group is willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or
restore such building;
(i)
The Commission is satisfied that for six months the owner
has made continuing, bona fide and reasonable efforts to
locate a purchaser to preserve, rehabilitate and restore
the subject building, and that such efforts have been
unsuccessful;
(ii)
Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the Inspector of
Buildings shall issue the demolition permit upon expiration
of 183 days from the original date of application.
(iii)
Emergency demolition. Nothing in this section shall restrict the
Inspector of Buildings from ordering the demolition of any building in
the event of an imminent danger to the safety of the public.
(e)
Enforcement.
The Inspector of Buildings and the Commission are authorized to
institute any and all actions and proceedings as they may deem
necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the
requirements of this section or to prevent a threatened violation
thereof.
1.
No building permit shall be issued with respect to any premises
upon which a significant building has been voluntarily demolished
in violation of this section for a period of one year after the date of
such demolition. As used herein, "premises" includes the parcel of
land upon which the demolished building was located.
2.
(f)
§ 7-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-201
1:181

SECTION 7-300
Wetlands Protection
§ 7-301. Scope; definitions; permits and approvals; enforcement.
Purpose and authority. The purpose of this section is to protect the
wetlands, related water resources and adjoining land areas in the Town
of Weymouth by prior review and control of activities deemed by the
Conservation Commission likely to have a significant or cumulative
effect upon resource area values deemed important to the community,
including but not limited to the following (collectively, the "resource
area values" protected by this section):
1. Public or private water supply.
2. Groundwater.
3. Flood control.
4. Erosion and sedimentation control.
5. Storm damage prevention, including coastal storm flowage.
6. Water quality.
7. Water pollution control.
8. Fisheries.
9. Shellfish.
10. Wildlife habitat.
11. Rare species habitat, including rare plant species.
12. Aquaculture.
13. Recreation.
14. Aesthetics.
Historical and archaeological preservation.
Authority. This section is intended to utilize the Home Rule
authority of this municipality to protect additional resource areas,
for additional values, with additional standards and procedures
stricter than those of the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131,
§ 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.
15.
(a)
Jurisdiction. Except as permitted by the Conservation Commission or
as provided in this section, no person shall commence to remove, fill,
dredge, build upon, degrade, discharge into or otherwise alter the
following resource areas (collectively, the "resource areas protected by
this ordinance"):
(b)
§ 7-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-301
1:183
Any freshwater or coastal wetland, riverine wetland, marsh, wet
meadow, bog, swamp or kettle hole, whether bordering on surface
waters or isolated, or whether annual or seasonal;
1.
2. Any bank, beach or dune;
3. Any ocean, bay or estuary;
Any reservoir, lake, pond of any size, vernal pool, river, stream or
creek, whether intermittent or continuous, natural or man-made;
4.
5. Any land under the aforesaid waters;
Any land subject to flooding or inundation by groundwater or
surface water;
6.
Any land subject to tidal action, coastal storm flowage or flooding
at or below the one-hundred-year storm line;
7.
Any land within 100 feet of any of the aforesaid resource areas (the
"buffer zone");
8.
9. Riverfront area.
Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and implementation of this section:
AESTHETICS — The natural scenery and appearance of any area
visually accessible to the public.
ALTER — Includes, without limitation, the following activities when
undertaken to, upon, within or affecting resource areas protected by
this section:
Removal, excavation or dredging of soil, sand, gravel or aggregate
materials of any kind;
1.
Changing of preexisting drainage characteristics, flushing
characteristics, salinity distribution, sedimentation patterns, flow
patterns or flood retention characteristics;
2.
3. Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may
degrade water quality;
4.
5. Placing of fill or removal of material which would alter elevation;
Driving of piles, erection or repair of buildings or structures of any
kind;
6.
7. Placing of obstructions or objects in water;
8. Destruction of plant life, including cutting of trees;
(c)
§ 7-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-301
1:184
ANRAD — Abbreviated notice of resource area delineation.
BANK — Includes the land area which normally abuts and confines a
water body; the lower boundary being the mean annual low flow level,
and the upper boundary being the first observable break in the slope or
the mean annual flood level, whichever is higher.
DATE OF ISSUANCE — The date an order of conditions, modification
or extension of an order or any written decision of the Commission is
mailed, as evidenced by a postmark, certified mail card or the date it is
hand delivered.
DOA — Determination of applicability.
LAND IN AGRICULTURAL USE — Land within resource areas presently
and primarily used in producing or raising agricultural commodities
for commercial purposes, including land used in a customary and
necessary manner to produce such commodities, such as existing
access roads and irrigation systems. Such land may lie inactive up to
five consecutive years unless it is under a contract with federal or state
agencies for a longer term.
NOI — Notice of intent.
ORAD — Order of resource area delineation.
POND — The term "pond" shall follow the definition of 310 CMR 10.04
except that the size threshold of 10,000 square feet shall not apply.
PERSON — Includes any individual, group of individuals, association,
partnership, corporation, company, business organization, trust, estate,
the commonwealth or political subdivision thereof to the extent subject
to Town ordinances, administrative agency, public or quasi-public
corporation or body, this municipality and any other legal entity, its
legal representatives, agents or assigns.
RARE SPECIES — Includes, without limitation, all vertebrate and
invertebrate animal and plant species listed as endangered, threatened
or of special concern by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and
Wildlife, regardless of whether the site in which they occur has been
previously identified by the Division.
RFD — Request for determination.
REGULATIONS — Local regulations promulgated by the Weymouth
Conservation Commission under § 7-301(q) of the Code of Ordinances.
Changing temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other
physical, biological or chemical characteristics of any waters;
9.
Any activities, changes or work which may cause or tend to
contribute to pollution of any body of water or groundwater;
10.
11. Application of pesticides or herbicides;
Incremental activities which have, or may have, a cumulative
adverse impact on the resource areas protected by this section.
12.
§ 7-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-301
1:185
RIVERFRONT AREA — The area of land between a river's mean annual
high water line and a parallel line located 200 feet away (25 feet in
areas specified in the Rivers Protection Act) measured horizontally
outward from the river's mean annual high water line. There is no
buffer zone to the riverfront area. The riverfront area may include or
overlap other resource areas and/or their buffer zones.
VERNAL POOL — Includes a confined basin depression which, at least
in most years, holds water for a minimum of two months during the
spring and/or summer, and which is free of adult fish populations, as
well as the area within 100 feet of the mean annual boundary of such
a depression, regardless of whether the site has been certified by the
Massachusetts Division of Wildlife and Fisheries.
Except as otherwise provided in this section or in regulations of the
Commission, the definitions of terms in this section shall be as set forth
in the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310
CMR 10.00.
Conditional exceptions.
Public services. The application and permit required by this section
shall not be required for maintaining, repairing or replacing, but
not substantially changing or enlarging, an existing and lawfully
located structure or facility used in the service of the public to
provide electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph or other
telecommunication services, provided that written notice has been
given to the Commission prior to commencement of work, and
provided that the work conforms to performance standards and
design specifications in regulations adopted by the Commission.
1.
Agriculture. The application and permit required by this section
shall not be required for work performed for normal maintenance
or improvement of land which is lawfully in agricultural use at
the time the work takes place, provided that written notice has
been given to the Commission prior to commencement of work,
and provided that the work conforms to performance standards and
design specifications in regulations adopted by the Commission.
2.
Emergency projects.
The application and permit required by this section shall not be
required for emergency projects necessary for the protection
of the health and safety of the public, provided that the work
is to be performed by or has been ordered to be performed
by an agency of the commonwealth or a political subdivision
thereof; provided that advance notice, oral or written, has
been given to the Commission prior to commencement of work
or within 24 hours after commencement; provided that the
Commission or its agent certifies the work as an emergency
project; provided that the work is performed only for the time
and place certified by the Commission for the limited purposes
a.
3.
(d)
§ 7-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-301
1:186
necessary to abate the emergency; and provided that, within
21 days of completion of an emergency project, a report is
submitted to the Commission describing how the work was
performed so as to contribute to the resource area values
protected by this section. Upon failure to meet these and other
requirements of the Commission, the Commission may, after
notice and a public hearing, revoke or modify an emergency
project approval and order restoration and mitigation
measures.
Other than as stated in this section, the exceptions provided in
the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations,
310 CMR 10.00, shall not apply under this section.
b.
Request for determination of applicability.
Any person desiring to know whether or not a proposed activity
or an area is subject to this section may, in writing, request a
determination from the Commission. Such a request for
determination (RFD) shall include such information and plans as
are deemed necessary by the Commission or specified in the
regulations of the Commission.
1.
The Commission may accept as the RFD under this section the
request for determination of applicability form used under the
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310
CMR 10.00.
2.
At the time of the filing of an RFD, the applicant shall pay a filing
fee specified in the regulations of the Commission. This fee is in
addition to that required by the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c.
131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
3.
Upon receipt of an RFD, the Commission is authorized under
Subsection (i) of this section to require an applicant to pay a fee
for the reasonable costs and expenses of any expert consultant
deemed necessary by the Commission to review the RFD. The fee
shall be specified in the regulations of the Commission.
4.
The Commission may waive the filing fee and consultant fee for an
RFD filed by a state or federal agency. The Town is exempt from the
filing fee and the Commission may waive the consultant fee.
5.
Any person filing an RFD with the Commission at the same time
shall give written notice thereof, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by hand delivery, to all abutters at their mailing
addresses shown on the most recent applicable tax list of the
Assessors, including owners of land directly opposite on any public
or private street or way. The notice to abutters shall enclose a
copy of the RFD or shall state where copies may be examined and
obtained by the abutter. An affidavit of the person providing such
notice, with a copy of the notice, shall be filed with the Commission.
6.
(e)
§ 7-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-301
1:187
If the person making the request is not the owner of the area
subject to the request, the RFD shall include a certification that the
owner has been provided a copy of the RFD.
Notice of the time and place of the public hearing at which the
determination will be made shall be given by the Commission at the
expense of the person making the request, not less than five days
prior to such hearing, by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town, and by mailing a notice to the person
making the request, the owner of the area subject to the request
and Town boards and officials as prescribed in this section.
7.
Within 21 days after the date of receipt of the RFD, unless an
extension is authorized in writing by the applicant, the Commission
shall hold a public hearing on said request. Within 21 days of
the close of the public hearing or any continuances thereof, the
Commission shall issue a determination of applicability (DOA). The
DOA shall be signed by a majority of the Commission, and copies
shall be sent by the Commission to the person making the request
and to the owner of the area subject to the DOA. The Commission
may use as the DOA the form used under the Wetlands Protection
Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
8.
9. A DOA shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance.
Applications for permits:
A written application shall be filed with the Commission to perform
activities regulated by this section affecting the resource areas
protected by this section. No activities may commence without
receiving and complying with a DOA, permit ("order of conditions")
or order of resource area delineation (ORAD) issued pursuant to
this section.
1.
The permit application ("notice of intent" or NOI) or abbreviated
notice of resource area delineation (ANRAD) may in part be the
form filed pursuant to the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131,
§ 40, and the regulations, 310 CMR 10.00. The NOI or ANRAD shall
include such information and plans as are deemed necessary by the
Commission to describe the proposed activities and their effects on
the resource areas protected by this section. The Commission shall
establish in its regulations the minimum submittal requirements
for an NOI.
2.
At the time of filing an NOI, an ANRAD, or applying for an extension
or modification of an order of conditions, or for a certificate of
compliance for work completed under an order of conditions, the
applicant shall pay a filing fee specified in the regulations of the
Commission. The fee is in addition to that required by the Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
3.
(f)
§ 7-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-301
1:188
Upon receipt of an NOI, an ANRAD, or a request for an extension
or modification of an order of conditions, or for a certificate of
compliance, the Commission is authorized pursuant to § 3-305 of
these ordinances and Subsection (i) of this section, to require an
applicant to pay a fee for the reasonable costs and expenses to be
borne by the Commission for expert consultant services deemed
necessary by the Commission to come to a final decision on the
application or request.
4.
The Commission may waive the filing fee and consultant fee for
applications and requests filed by a state or federal agency. The
Town is exempt from the filing fee and the Commission may waive
the consultant fee.
5.
Notice and hearings.
Any person filing an NOI, an ANRAD, or request for an extension
or modification of an order of conditions shall provide written
notice to abutters pursuant to the requirements of the Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and as implemented by the
Department of Environmental Protection in guidance documents or
its regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
1.
Notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be given by
the Commission at the expense of the applicant not less than five
days prior to the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town and by mailing a notice to the applicant
and to the Town officials and boards and adjoining municipalities
specified in Subsection (h) of this section.
2.
The Commission shall commence the public hearing within 21
days from receipt of a completed application or request, unless an
extension is authorized in writing by the applicant.
3.
Whenever possible, the Commission shall combine its hearing
under this section with the hearing conducted under the Wetlands
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
4.
The Commission shall have the authority to continue the hearing to
a date certain announced at the hearing, for reasons stated at the
hearing, which may include receipt of additional information from
the applicant, or from others deemed necessary by the Commission
in its discretion, or to obtain comments and recommendations of
the Boards and officials listed in Subsection (h). If an agreed-upon
date cannot be announced at the public hearing, then the date,
time and place of the continued public hearing shall be publicized
in accordance with Subsection (g)(1) and (2).
5.
The Commission shall issue its order of conditions, amended order
of conditions or decision on an extension of an order of conditions
or order of resource area delineation (ORAD), in writing, within 21
6.
(g)
§ 7-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-301
1:189
days of the close of the public hearing, unless an extension of time
is authorized in writing by the applicant.
The order of conditions, modification or extension of an order
of conditions, or ORAD must be approved by a majority of the
Commission eligible to vote on the application or request. To be
eligible to vote, a Commission member must be present during the
entire public hearing and at all continuances of the public hearing
on the application or request.
7.
The order of conditions, modification or extension of an order or
ORAD shall be signed by a majority of the Commission and shall be
mailed or hand delivered to the applicant, agent or attorney.
8.
Coordination with other boards.
Any person filing an RFD, NOI, ANRAD, or request for an
amendment of an order of conditions with the Commission shall
submit a project submittal form (available from the Weymouth
Conservation Commission) no later than 14 days prior to the public
hearing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand
delivery, to the Mayor, Town Council, Department of Community
Planning and Development, Board of Appeals, Health Department,
Town Engineer and Inspector of Buildings. If so requested by a
Weymouth office or department herein listed, the applicant shall
provide a full copy of its submittal. The project submittal form shall
inform the boards and officials that, under the provision of this
section, they have 14 days in which to file advisory comments and
recommendations with the Commission and the applicant.
1.
Any person filing an RFD, NOI, ANRAD, or request for an
amendment of an order of conditions with the Commission shall
provide a copy thereof, along with the project submittal form, to
the Conservation Commission of the adjoining municipality, if the
RFD, NOI, ANRAD, or request pertains to property within 300 feet
of that municipality.
2.
An affidavit of the person providing notice, with a copy of the
notice mailed or delivered, shall be filed with the Commission.
The Commission shall not take final action until the boards and
officials have had 14 days from receipt of notice to file written
comments and recommendations with the Commission, which the
Commission shall take into account but which shall not be binding
on the Commission. The applicant shall have the right to receive
any comments and recommendations, and to respond to them at a
hearing of the Commission, prior to final action.
3.
(h)
Consultant fees.
Upon receipt of an RFD, NOI, ANRAD, request for an extension
or modification of a permit, request for issuance of a certificate
of compliance, or at any point during the hearing process, the
1.
(i)
§ 7-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-301
1:190
Commission is authorized to require an applicant to pay a fee for
the reasonable costs and expenses to be borne by the Commission
for specific expert consultant services deemed necessary by the
Commission to come to a final decision on the application or
request. This fee is called a consultant fee.
The specific consultant services may include, but are not limited
to, survey and delineation, analysis of resource area functions,
performing or verifying the accuracy of wildlife habitat evaluations,
hydrogeologic and drainage analyses and environmental or land
use law. The Commission may require the payment of a consultant
fee at any point in its deliberations prior to a final decision. The
exercise of discretion by the Commission in making its
determination to require the payment of a consultant fee shall
be based upon its reasonable finding that additional information
acquirable only through consultants would be necessary for the
making of an objective decision. The Commission shall consult with
the Town Solicitor and shall retain no environmental law or land
use law consultant except with the express approval of the Town
Solicitor.
2.
The applicant shall pay the fee to be put into a revolving fund,
which may be drawn upon by the Commission for specific
consultant services approved by the Commission at one of its public
meetings. The revolving fund must be authorized by a separate
vote of the Town Council meeting in accordance with the State's
revolving fund statute, MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
3.
The Commission shall return any unused portion of the consultant
fee to the applicant unless the Commission decides at a public
meeting that other action is necessary. Any applicant aggrieved by
the imposition of or size of the consultant fee or any act related
thereto, may appeal in accordance with Subsection (o) of this
section.
4.
Consultant fees. The maximum consultant fee charged to
reimburse the Commission for reasonable costs and expenses shall
be according to the following schedule:
Project Cost Maximum Fee
Up to $100,000 $2,500
$100,001 to $500,000 $3,500
$500,001 to $1,000,000 $5,000
$1,000,001 to $1,500,000 $7,500
$1,500,001 to $2,000,000 $10,000
5.
§ 7-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-301
1:191
NOTE: Each additional $500,000 project cost increment (over
$2,000,000) shall be charged at an additional maximum fee of
$2,500 per increment.
The "project cost" means the estimated entire cost of the project,
including, but not limited to, building construction, site
preparation, landscaping and all site improvements. The applicant
shall submit estimated project costs at the Commission's request,
but the lack of such estimated project costs shall not avoid the
payment of the consultant fee.
Burden of proof. The applicant for an order of conditions or
modification of an order of conditions shall have the burden of proving
by a preponderance of the credible evidence that the work proposed
in the application or request will not have unacceptable significant
or cumulative effect upon the resource area values protected by this
section. Failure to provide adequate evidence to the Commission
supporting this burden shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to
deny a permit or grant a permit with conditions.
(j)
Permits and conditions.
If the Commission, after a public hearing, determines that the
activities which are subject to the permit application or the land
and water uses which will result therefrom are likely to have a
significant individual or cumulative effect upon the resource area
values protected by this section, the Commission, within 21 days
of the close of the hearing, shall approve or deny a permit for
the activities requested. If it approves a permit, the Commission
shall impose conditions that the Commission deems necessary or
desirable to protect those values, and all activities shall be done
in accordance with those conditions. The Commission shall take
into account the cumulative adverse effects of loss, degradation,
isolation and replication of protected resource areas throughout
the community and the watershed, resulting from past activities,
permitted and exempt, and foreseeable future activities.
1.
The Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet
the requirements of this section for failure to submit necessary
information and plans requested by the Commission; for failure to
meet the design specifications, performance standards and other
requirements in regulations of the Commission; for failure to avoid
or prevent unacceptable significant or cumulative effects upon
the resource area values protected by this section; and where no
conditions are adequate to protect those values. Due consideration
shall be given to any demonstrated hardship on the applicant by
reason of denial, as presented at the public hearing.
2.
To prevent wetlands loss, the Commission shall require applicants
to avoid wetlands alteration wherever feasible; shall minimize
wetlands alteration; and, where alteration is unavoidable, shall
3.
(k)
§ 7-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-301
1:192
require full mitigation. The Commission may authorize or require
replication of wetlands as a form of mitigation, but only with
adequate security, professional design and monitoring to assure
success, because of the high likelihood of failure of replication.
A permit shall expire three years from the date of issuance.
Notwithstanding the above, the Commission, in its discretion, may
issue a permit for a period up to five years from the date of
issuance for recurring or continuous maintenance work, provided
that annual notification of time and location of work is given to the
Commission. Any permit may be renewed for one or more periods
of up to one year each, provided that a request for a renewal
is received in writing by the Commission 30 days prior to the
expiration date. Notwithstanding the above, a permit may contain
requirements which shall be enforceable for a stated number of
years, indefinitely or until standing protection is in place, and shall
apply to all current and subsequent owners of the land.
4.
For good cause, the Commission may revoke or modify a permit,
determination, or order issued under this section after notice to the
holder of the permit, determination, or order, notice to the public,
abutters and Town boards, pursuant to Subsection (g)(1) and (2),
and a public hearing.
5.
The Commission may combine the permit issued under this section
with the order of conditions issued under the Wetlands Protection
Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
6.
No work proposed in any permit application shall be undertaken
until the permit issued by the Commission with respect to such
work has been recorded in the Registry of Deeds, or if the land
affected is registered land in the Land Court, and until the holder
of the permit certifies in writing to the Commission that the permit
has been recorded.
7.
Security. As part of a permit issued under this section, and in addition
to any security required by any other municipal or state board, agency
or official, the Commission may require that the performance and
observance of the conditions imposed thereunder (including conditions
requiring mitigation work) be secured wholly or in part by one or more
of the methods described below:
By a proper bond or deposit of money or negotiable securities
or other undertaking of financial responsibility sufficient, in the
opinion of the Commission, to be released in whole or in part
upon issuance of a certificate of compliance for work performed
pursuant to the permit;
1.
By a conservation restriction, easement or other covenant
enforceable in a court of law, executed and duly recorded by the
owner of record, running with the land to the benefit of this
municipality whereby the permit conditions shall be performed and
2.
(l)
§ 7-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-301
1:193
observed before any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage
deed. This method shall be used only with the consent of the
applicant.
Certificate of compliance.
Upon completion of work approved by an order of conditions,
an applicant shall file a written request with the Commission for
a certificate of compliance certifying that the work or portions
thereof have been completed in compliance with the order of
conditions. If a project has been completed in accordance with
plans stamped by a registered professional engineer, architect,
landscape architect or land surveyor, a written statement by such
a professional person certifying substantial compliance with the
plans and setting forth any deviation from the plans approved
in the order shall accompany the request for a certificate of
compliance.
1.
A certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Commission
within 21 days of receipt of the request.
2.
Prior to any decision on the request, the Commission shall conduct
a site inspection in the presence of the applicant or the applicant's
representative.
3.
If the Commission determines after review and inspection that the
work has not been done in compliance with the order of conditions,
it may refuse to issue a certificate of compliance. Such refusal
shall be in writing and shall specify the reasons for denial. The
Commission may issue a partial certificate of compliance specifying
what work has been completed in compliance with the order of
conditions.
4.
If the order of conditions contains requirements which continue
past the completion of work, such as maintenance or monitoring,
the certificate of compliance shall specify which conditions shall
continue.
5.
The certificate of compliance shall be recorded in the Registry of
Deeds, or if the land affected is registered land, in the Land Court.
Certification of recording shall be sent to the Commission. Upon
failure of the applicant to record, the Commission may do so at the
applicant's expense.
6.
(m)
Enforcement.
No person shall remove, fill, dredge, build upon, degrade or
otherwise alter resource areas protected by this section, or cause,
suffer or allow such activity, or leave in place unauthorized fill,
or otherwise fail to restore illegally altered land to its original
condition, or fail to comply with a permit or an enforcement order
issued pursuant to this section.
1.
(n)
§ 7-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-301
1:194
The Commission, its agents, officers and employees shall have
authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of
performing their duties under this section and may make or cause
to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the
Commission deems necessary, subject to the Constitutions and laws
of the United States and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
2.
The Commission shall have authority to enforce this section, its
regulations and permits issued thereunder by violation notices,
administrative orders and civil and criminal court actions. Any
person who violates provisions of this section may be ordered to
restore the property to its original condition and take other actions
deemed necessary to remedy such violations or may be fined, or
both.
3.
Upon request of the Commission, the Mayor and the Town Solicitor
shall take legal action for enforcement under civil law. Upon
request of the Commission, the Chief of Police shall take legal
action for enforcement under criminal law.
4.
Municipal boards and officers, including any police officer or other
officer having police powers, shall have authority to assist the
Commission in enforcement.
5.
Any person who violates any provision of this section or
regulations, permits or administrative orders issued thereunder
shall be punished by a fine of $300 per day or portion of a day.
Each day or portion thereof during which a violation continues
or unauthorized fill or other alteration remains in place shall
constitute a separate offense, and each provision of the ordinance,
regulations, permits or administrative orders violated shall
constitute a separate offense once the first notice of violation has
been given.
6.
As an alternative to criminal prosecution under § 1-110 of these
ordinances, the Conservation Commission and its agents may issue
citations under the noncriminal disposition procedure set forth in
MGL c. 40, § 21 D, and § 1-109 of these ordinances.
7.
If a civil fine for a violation is contemplated, the Commission shall
hold a public hearing to discuss the alleged violation and to give
the landowner and/or violator an opportunity to respond to the
evidence and circumstances. The landowner and/or violator shall
be given at least 48 hours' notice in writing of the date, time
and place of the hearing, by certified mail or hand delivery. The
fine is payable to the Town of Weymouth within 21 days and shall
be placed in the consultant fee revolving fund for use by the
Commission.
8.
Appeals. A decision of the Commission shall be reviewable in the
Superior Court in accordance with MGL c. 249, § 4.
(o)
§ 7-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-301
1:195
Relation to the Wetlands Protection Act. This section is adopted under
the Home Rule Amendment of the Massachusetts Constitution and the
Home Rule Statutes, independent of the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL
c. 131, § 40, and regulations, 310 CMR 10.00.
(p)
Regulations. After public notice and public hearing, the Commission
shall promulgate regulations to effectuate the purposes of this section.
Failure by the Commission to promulgate such regulations, or a legal
declaration of their invalidity by a court of law, shall not act to suspend
or invalidate the effect of this section.
(q)
Severability. The invalidity of any subsection or provision of this section
shall not invalidate any other section or provision thereof, nor shall
it invalidate any permit or determination which previously has been
issued.
(r)
§ 7-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-301
1:196
SECTION 7-400
Hazardous Materials
§ 7-401. Purpose and authority; registration requirements; storage
and handling; enforcement.
Statutory authority. This section is adopted by the Town under its Home
Rule powers, its police powers to protect public health and welfare and
its authorization under MGL c. 40, § 21.
(a)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect, preserve and
maintain the environment and the public's health from contamination
and exposure to hazardous materials. This includes maintaining the
existing and potential groundwater supply, recharge areas and surface
waters within the Town from contamination with hazardous materials.
This section is not intended to supersede or replace those regulations
set forth by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP),
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) or any other local, state or federal
regulation.
(b)
Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation
and implementation of this section:
DISCHARGE — The disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, incineration or placing of any hazardous material into or on
any land or water so that such hazardous material or any constituent
thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into any waters,
including groundwaters.
FACILITY — A commercial or industrial establishment, including home
businesses, that is registered in accordance with Subsection (d) of this
section.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS — A product, waste or combination of
substances which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical, toxic, radioactive or infectious characteristics, poses, in the
Director of Public Health's judgment, a substantial present or potential
hazard to human health, safety or welfare or the environment when
improperly treated, stored, transported, used, disposed of or otherwise
managed. Hazardous materials include, without limitation, petroleum
products, heavy metals, radioactive or infectious materials and all
substances deemed as "toxic" or "hazardous" under MGL c. 21C and
c. 21E using the Massachusetts Oil and Hazardous Substance List (as
contained in 310 CMR 40.000).
REPORTABLE DISCHARGE — The discharge of a reportable quantity
(RQ) of a material as defined under the Massachusetts Contingency
Plan, 310 CMR 40.000; the threshold quantity above which a spill or
release of oil or a hazardous material must be reported to the DEP.
(c)
(d) Registration.
§ 7-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-401
1:197
Every owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment, including home businesses, storing hazardous
materials with a total quantity for all types equal to or exceeding
50 gallons liquid volume or 25 pounds dry weight shall register
with the Director of Public Health the types, quantities, locations
and method of storage of said hazardous materials. Registration
required by this provision shall be immediate and annually
thereafter within 30 days of November 1 of each year.
1.
Information required.
Registration shall be on a form designated by the Director of
Public Health and shall indicate, at a minimum:
(i) Name of applicant;
(ii) Facility address;
Type of material by hazard class and maximum quantity
stored at any point in time of each type of hazardous
material stored during the period of registration;
(iii)
A diagram and description of the general storage or
processing location of each material type within the
facility;
(iv)
The size, type, age and location of all underground
containers and the type of hazardous material stored in
each;
(v)
Person to contact in the event of an emergency and
telephone number(s) where that person can be contacted.
This person must be knowledgeable in the types of
hazardous materials used at this establishment, proper
storage and handling procedures and emergency response
procedures and authorized to act upon such procedures;
(vi)
Any alternate person(s) to contact if the primary contact is
not available and the telephone number of each;
(vii)
a.
Further information as may be required by the Director of
Public Health to complete registration.
b.
2.
Owners or operators of commercial or industrial establishments,
who have not previously registered in accordance with Subsection
(d)(1) shall, if they meet the registration requirement, register
initially within 30 days of meeting such requirements and within 30
days of November 1 each year.
3.
In addition to registration, owners or operators of commercial or
industrial establishments registered in accordance with Subsection
(d)(1) shall maintain on the premises an inventory, reconciled on
a monthly basis, of purchase use, sale and disposal of hazardous
4.
§ 7-401 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-401
1:198
materials and/or waste. The purpose of this account is to detect
any product loss and to provide an ongoing record of all quantities
of hazardous materials within the Town over the registration
threshold.
Upon the request of the Director of Public Health, owners or
operators shall produce immediately the latest reconciled
inventory.
5.
Homeowners with underground storage tanks for home heating
fuel (not within the confines of basement or other containment)
shall register said tank(s) with the Director of Public Health. No
other sections of this section shall apply to homeowners.
6.
In the event that a facility closes, moves to a new location or
changes ownership, the owner or operator of the facility shall notify
the Director of Public Health of said changes at least 30 days
prior to those changes. For those facilities that close, a closure
inspection will be performed by the Director of Public Health.
For those facilities that move or undergo change of ownership,
a new registration form must be completed by the new owner
in accordance with Subsection (d) of this section. Existing
registration is not transferable between past and future owners
and/or operators. Provisions of this section shall not operate to
prevent the transfer, sale or change of ownership of a piece of
property.
7.
Emergency information.
Each facility must keep on file, at a location known and
accessible to all emergency response personnel, material
safety data sheets (MSDS) on all hazardous materials stored
or used at the facility. These data sheets must be available
to the Director of Public Health and Fire Department during
inspections, investigations or in the event of a hazardous
materials emergency.
a.
Each facility must keep on file an emergency response/spill
contingency plan at one location known and accessible to all
emergency response personnel. This plan must detail the
procedures to be used for prevention and control of
emergencies, the emergency equipment available on site,
outside agencies and organizations which would be notified
and/or may provide assistance in an emergency and an
evacuation plan for personnel. Plans must be posted in a
prominent location and be available for inspection by the
Director of Public Health or the Fire Department. Plans must
be updated every year.
b.
8.
(e) Storage, handling and transportation.
§ 7-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-401
1:199
All hazardous materials and/or waste shall be stored so as to
minimize any discharge of said material to ensure maximum
protection of the environment and the public health, safety and
welfare.
1.
All facilities shall provide adequate employee training programs
to ensure the proper use, storage, transportation and handling of
hazardous materials and/or waste.
2.
All hazardous materials shall be removed by a licensed carrier
and disposed of in accordance with state and federal laws and
regulations.
3.
All records pertaining to storage, removal and disposal of
hazardous wastes shall be retained for no less than five years and
shall be made available for review by the agent or designated
representative of the Director of Public Health upon request.
4.
Aboveground storage.
Hazardous materials and/or wastes shall be held on the premises
in product tight, approved containers for said materials. All
containers shall be stored appropriately according to chemical/
toxicity characteristics as outlined by state and federal regulations.
1.
Hazardous waste accumulation areas must be posted with a sign
that says "hazardous waste."
2.
Labeling. All aboveground storage containers shall be labeled at a
minimum with the following information:
Hazardous materials:
(i) Original manufacturer's label or equivalent.
(ii) Type of material (chemical name).
(iii) Hazards associated with the material.
(iv) Date placed on premises.
(v) Any necessary warnings.
a.
Hazardous wastes:
(i) The words "hazardous waste."
(ii) Type of waste (chemical name).
(iii) Hazards associated with the waste.
(iv) Accumulation start date.
(v) Any necessary warnings.
b.
3.
(f)
§ 7-401 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-401
1:200
Aboveground containers of hazardous materials and/or waste shall
be stored on a surface impervious to the materials and/or wastes
being stored. The storage shall not be in a location that would
allow spilled material to exit the building via door, drain, sump
or otherwise. If these conditions are not met, then secondary
containment, as outlined below for outdoor storage, will be
required. An outdoor storage area must have secondary
containment, such as a berm or dike which will hold any spills or
leaks in the following amount: either 10% of the total volume of the
containers or 110% of the largest container, whichever is larger.
4.
Owners or operators of delivery trucks or tank trailers containing
liquid hazardous materials which are parked overnight on a regular
basis must obtain an assignment from the Director of Public Health
approving the storage location. The owner or operator must make
provisions for detection and containment of spillage from the
parked vehicle acceptable to the Director of Public Health.
5.
Underground storage. The following provisions shall apply to all
underground liquid hazardous material storage systems:
Owners shall file with the Director of Public Health the size, type,
age and location of each tank, leak detection and containment
devices and the type of hazardous material stored in each.
Evidence of the date of purchase and installation, including the
Fire Department permit, if any, shall be included, along with a
sketch map showing the exact location of such tanks on the
property.
1.
Testing and removal.
All underground storage tanks must be tested according to
state and federal regulations. The test methods used must be
approved by the Fire Department.
a.
Any steel, noncontained, underground storage system which
is 20 years or older must be tested on an annual basis or
removed.
b.
Owners of tanks for which evidence of installation is not
available shall, at the order of the Director of Public Health,
have such tank systems tested. If either the Director of Public
Health or the Fire Chief determines that the tank is not
product tight, it shall be disposed of under the direction of
the Director of Public Health or the Fire Chief according to
all state and federal regulations. All leaking tanks must be
emptied by the owner or operator within 12 hours of leak
detection and removed by the owner or operator in a time
period to be determined by the Director of Public Health. Such
notification must be immediate to the Fire Chief and Director
of Public Health.
c.
2.
(g)
§ 7-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-401
1:201
Certification of testing shall be submitted to the Director of
Public Health and the Fire Chief within seven days of testing.
d.
All underground storage tanks removed must be cleaned and
disposed of according to all local, state and federal regulations.
A copy of disposal receipt must be submitted to the Director of
Public Health within seven days of removal.
e.
All abandoned tanks must be removed with all deliberate
speed. An abandoned tank is one taken out of service and/or no
longer usable with present business. Any tank which remains
unused for six months shall be considered abandoned.
f.
New installations.
Newly installed tanks shall be protected from internal and
external corrosion and shall be of a design approved by the
Director of Public Health and the Fire Chief. These must meet
all state and federal standards.
a.
Tank installation on lots not having a permit prior to adoption
of this section are not permitted within four feet of maximum
high water table or within 100 feet of a surface water body or
within 400 feet of Great Pond and all Town water supply wells.
b.
Any location which had a storage permit at the time this
section was first adopted and which seeks an expansion of that
preexisting permit will require a variance of the provisions of
this section for the expansion.
c.
3.
Enforcement.
Protection. Other than that which is allowed by a permit issued by
other local, state and/or federal laws, any discharge of hazardous
materials within the Town is prohibited.
1.
Reporting of discharges. Any person having knowledge of a
reportable discharge of hazardous materials shall immediately
report the discharge to the Director of Public Health, Police and
Fire Departments. A reportable discharge in the watershed
protection district or involving the sanitary sewer requires
immediate notification to the Director of Public Works. Acceptable
immediate notification shall be a telephone call with a follow-up
report in writing within 24 hours.
2.
Written notices of violation. Any violator of this section shall be
notified in writing of said violations by the Director of Public
Health. This written notice may specify corrective actions
necessary, including containment and cleanup of discharged
materials; preventative measures required to avoid future
violations; requests for documentation; a compliance schedule and
3.
(h)
§ 7-401 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-401
1:202
any other action deemed necessary by the Director of Public Health
to meet the purpose of this section.
Right of entry. The Director of Public Health and his/her agents
may enter upon privately owned property for the purposes of
performing their duties under this section.
4.
Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $200. Each day or portion
thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense; if more than one, each condition violated shall
constitute a separate offense. This section may be enforced
pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21D, by a Town police officer or other
officer having police powers as well as the Director of Public
Health. Upon request of the Director of Public Health or the Fire
Chief, the Mayor and Town Solicitor may take legal action as may
be necessary to enforce this section.
5.
Fees.
Any person registering storage of hazardous materials pursuant
to this section shall pay to the Town of Weymouth an annual
registration fee of $30. Such fee shall be due on the same date
as the annual registration. Failure to pay the registration fee shall
constitute a violation with respect to the penalties provided in
Subsection (h)(5) of this section. No fee shall be charged for
homeowner underground storage tanks for home heating fuels.
1.
The Director of Public Health may charge for expenses incurred
in the enforcement of this section or any emergency actions
necessary.
2.
(i)
Severability. Each provision of this section shall be construed as
separate, to the end that, if any provision or sentence, clause or phrase
thereof shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder of that
section and all other sections shall continue in full force.
(j)
Establishment of rules and regulations. The Director of Public Health
shall establish rules and regulations consistent with, and as may be
necessary to promulgate a comprehensive code for the safe storage,
use and handling of hazardous materials to meet the stated purpose of
this section.
(k)
Variances. The Director of Public Health may vary the application of
any provision of this section, unless otherwise required by law, in
any case when, in its opinion, the applicant has demonstrated that
an equivalent degree of environmental protection required under this
section will still be achieved. The applicant, at his own expense, must
notify abutters by certified mail at least 10 days before the Board of
Health meeting at which the variance request will be considered. The
notification shall state the variance sought and the reasons therefor.
Any variance granted by the Board of Health shall be in writing. Any
(l)
§ 7-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-401
1:203
denial of a variance shall also be in writing and shall contain a brief
statement of the reasons for the denial.
§ 7-401 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-401
1:204
SECTION 7-500
Underground Fuel Storage
§ 7-501. Purpose and authority; definitions; tank registration,
design, installation, testing and maintenance; enforcement.
Statutory authority. This section is adopted by the Town of Weymouth
under its Home Rule powers, its police powers to protect the public
health and welfare and its authorization under MGL c. 40, § 21.
(a)
Purpose; applicability. The purpose of this section is to control the
installation and maintenance of underground gasoline or fuel storage
tanks over 1,000 gallons and to protect groundwater and surface water
from contamination due to leakage. The provisions of this section are
applicable only to underground tanks.
(b)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Weymouth Fire Department.
NONCORROSIVE SOIL — Soil that, when tested by a qualified
professional, is shown to have a resistivity greater than 10,000 ohmcentimeters
and that does not exhibit corrosive characteristics in a soilchemistry
analysis.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODPLAIN — Includes all special flood
hazard areas designated as Zones A, A2, A3, A8 and V3 as shown on
maps titled "National Flood Insurance Program, FIRM, Flood Insurance
Rate Map," Nos. 250257 0001 through 0009, Town of Weymouth,
effective date September 30, 1980, and the floodway fringe as shown
on National Flood Insurance Program Floodway, Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map Nos. 250257 0001 through 0009, Town of Weymouth,
effective date September 30, 1980, on file with the Town Clerk,
Inspector of Buildings, the Director of Planning and Community
Development, and the Director of Public Works.18
UNDERGROUND TANK — Any fuel storage containment system for
naphtha, gasoline, kerosene and mixtures of gasoline and oils which
have densities of less than 0.86 gram per cubic centimeter with a
capacity in excess of 1,000 gallons, the top of which is located below
the ground.
(c)
Registration of existing tanks; notice; license revocation; abandonment.
Tank registration. Every operator of an underground tank must file
with the Town Clerk the size, type, age, contents and location of its
underground tanks.
1.
(d)
18.Editor's Note: The current flood map for Weymouth is No. 25021C0233E, effective
7-17-2012.
§ 7-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-501
1:205
Notification of Fire Department. The Town Clerk must forthwith
give the Fire Chief a copy of the information filed for each tank that
is registered according to Subsection (d)(1) of this section.
2.
Revocation of unexercised licenses. The Fire Chief may revoke
unexercised licenses based on the provisions of MGL c. 148, § 13.
Licenses issued by the Fire Chief may be revoked if they are
unexercised within six months from the issuance of a new license.
3.
Removal of hazardous conditions upon abandonment of
underground tanks. The Fire Chief may order the elimination of
hazardous conditions associated with the cessation of use and
abandonment of underground tanks if the license holder has failed
to do so within six months of the cessation of activities.
Reimbursement for such expenses shall be based on MGL c. 148,
§ 13.
4.
Standards for tank design, installation and location.
Tank design.
Unless proven otherwise by soil tests performed by qualified
professionals, the soils in Massachusetts shall be assumed to
be corrosive. Metallic tanks (except stainless steel) without
cathodic protection or an underground secondary containment
system will be prohibited. Also prohibited is Schedule 40 steel
pipe, galvanized or black iron, or approved nonmetallic (except
fiberglass-reinforced plastic) pipe. If a qualified professional
demonstrates that the soils in which the tank is to be placed
are noncorrosive as described in the definition of
"noncorrosive soil" in Subsection (c), above, a steel tank with
interior coating and other approved piping may be installed.
a.
In corrosive soils, underground tanks must be constructed of
noncorrodible materials, such as fiberglass-reinforced plastic
(FRP) or its equivalent; steel with external-bonded
noncorrodible material (i.e., fiberglass-reinforced plastic); a
steel system cathodically protected by an impressed-current
cathodic system, sacrificial anodes or equivalent protection; or
a double-walled tank. These requirements are in accordance
with Massachusetts Board of Fire Prevention regulations.
b.
In corrosive soils, piping shall be constructed of noncorrodible
materials, such as fiberglass-reinforced plastic or its
equivalent, a steel system with cathodic protection or some
other type of equivalent protection, in accordance with
Massachusetts Board of Fire Protection regulations.
c.
Cathodic protection systems shall be maintained and checked
in accordance with Massachusetts Board of Fire Prevention
regulations.
d.
1.
(e)
§ 7-501 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-501
1:206
Commercial tanks must be equipped with striker plate below
openings used for product measurement or filling.
e.
Tank installation.
The Fire Chief or his designee must inspect and approve
underground tanks prior to their burial, in accordance with
Massachusetts Board of Fire Protection regulations.
a.
Tanks must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation techniques. Damage to protective coatings or to
the fiberglass-reinforced plastic tank or surface must be
repaired prior to covering the tank.
b.
New underground tanks shall be tested for tightness,
hydrostatically or with air pressure at not less than three
pounds per square inch and not more than five pounds per
square inch after installation, but before being covered or
placed in use in accordance with Massachusetts Board of Fire
Prevention regulations.
c.
Piping should be tested in accordance with Massachusetts
Board of Fire Prevention regulations before being covered,
enclosed or placed in use.
d.
Backfill material used to cover all new tank installations and
repairs must be of the type and quality specified by the tank
manufacturer's installation procedures and by pertinent
regulations governing storage tank installation.
e.
Underground tanks that are to be located in areas subject to
flooding or below the maximum water table elevation must be
anchored according to manufacturer's instructions and to the
satisfaction of the Fire Chief or his designee.
f.
2.
Tank location.
Underground tanks may not be installed within the onehundred-
year floodplain. Underground tank installation is also
prohibited within 100 feet of Whitman's Pond, Mill River and
Swamp River and within 400 feet of Great Pond and all Town
water supply wells.
a.
Underground tanks that are to be installed within the
watershed of a drinking water reservoir or within the cone
of depression of a public well (or, lacking a defined cone of
depression, within 1,000 feet of a public water supply well)
must submit, for review by the Fire Chief, the Director of
Public Health, and the Director of Public Works, a plan
outlining the procedures or devices, such as product sensors
and/or area monitoring devices, to be used to prevent water
supply contamination. The plan must be endorsed by
b.
3.
§ 7-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-501
1:207
representatives of the three departments noted above, prior to
tank installation.
Detection of leakage; testing.
Inventory verification.
All underground tanks, except fuel oil tanks and tanks
connected with burning equipment, must be monitored for
the prevention and detection of leakage of flammable and
combustible liquids in accordance with the provisions of
Massachusetts Board of Fire Prevention regulations.
a.
The daily inventory records must be shown to the Fire Chief,
or his designee, prior to the issuance of a permit or license
renewal.
b.
The owner and operator must participate in a program of
regularly scheduled inventory verification, at least once every
two years, in accordance with Massachusetts Board of Fire
Prevention regulations. The operator of tanks 10 years of age
or older shall submit to the Fire Chief annually a report
certifying that the inventory verification has been performed
and stating the calculated gain/loss over the verification
periods.
c.
The Fire Chief may require the operator of an underground
tank storage system to test the system for tightness, at the
operator's expense, when accurate daily inventory records
have not been maintained as specified in Subsection (f)(1)(a) of
this section.
d.
If daily inventory records indicate a loss of product in excess
of 0.5% of the volume of product used or sold or an abnormal
increase in the amount of water contained in the tank, steps
must be taken immediately in accordance with Massachusetts
Board of Fire Prevention regulations to detect and stop the
leak. The discrepancy must be reported to the Fire Chief.
e.
1.
Tank testing.
Unless the tank operator demonstrates to the Fire Chief and
the Director of Public Health that its tanks are constructed
of a material that will not corrode, have product sensors or
have been repaired or tested within the last year, underground
tanks shall be required, at the expense of the owner, to
undergo one of the following tests at five-year intervals from
the date of installation up to the 20th year, and annually
thereafter: a Kent-Moore (Health Petro-Tite) test or a Sun-
Mark leak-locator test or the equivalent as determined by the
Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be given at least 48 hours'
a.
2.
(f)
§ 7-501 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-501
1:208
notice of the time, date and place of testing. Test results must
be submitted to the local Fire Chief.
The waiver from Subsection (f)(2)(a) of this section may not
be granted for a tank that is located within any of the areas
specified in Subsection (e)(3)(b).
b.
If flammable fluids or their vapors have been detected in
neighboring structures, sewers or wells on or off the property
locations, the Fire Chief may require that any nearby tank,
including underground residential tanks less than 1,000
gallons, be tested at the expense of each tank's owner.
c.
Procedure in cases of spills or leaks.
Leak reporting. Any person who is aware of a spill or abnormal
loss of flammable fluids must report such spill or loss immediately
to the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief must be responsible for other
notification, including the Director of Public Health.
1.
Equipment replacement/removal.
After a leak is confirmed, underground tanks (or piping) must
be emptied immediately and removed or repaired forthwith
under the direction of the Fire Chief.
a.
A leaking tank that is 20 years old or older that does not
comply with the design standards in Subsection (e)(1)(b) must
be removed and may not be repaired. A permit for its removal
must be obtained in accordance with MGL c. 148, § 38A.19
b.
A leaking tank that is less than 20 years old must be repaired
or removed. If the tank operator can show, to the satisfaction
of the Fire Chief, that, in the case of steel tanks, the leak was
from internal corrosion and that the tank can be repaired so as
not to pose a continuing threat to the soils and waters of the
commonwealth, considering, at a minimum, the corrosiveness
of the soil, tank age and external condition, techniques to be
used for the repair and the location of the tank, then the tank
may be repaired. Operators of leaking fiberglass-reinforced
plastic tanks must demonstrate to the Fire Chief that the tank
can be repaired according to manufacturer's instructions.
Operators who do not meet these requirements must remove
the tank.
c.
If it is necessary to replace an underground steel tank that
has developed a corrosion-induced leak, all other steel tanks at
the facility of the same age or older, whether they are leaking
d.
2.
(g)
19.Editor's Note: This section of state law was repealed by St. 2009, c. 4, § 5. See now MGL c.
21O, § 1.
§ 7-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-501
1:209
or not, shall be repaired or replaced with tanks that meet the
requirements of Subsection (e)(1) of this section.
Administration of provisions.
The provisions of this section shall be administered by the Fire
Chief.
1.
Variances from the specific requirements of this section may be
authorized by the chief licensing authority after notice and a public
hearing.
2.
Licenses issued in accordance with MGL c. 148, § 13, for
underground tanks must be renewed annually in April in the Town
Clerk's office. Tank owners must submit to the Fire Chief and
the licensing authority a statement certifying satisfactory leakdetection
results over the period of the license, in accordance
with Subsection (f)(2) of this section, and inventory verification, at
least 30 days before the issuance of a permit renewal for the time
periods specified herein. Test results must accompany the license
renewal application.
3.
Fees necessary for the issuance and renewal of permits or licenses
shall be set by the Fire Chief, subject to review by the Mayor.
4.
The Fire Chief or his designee may, at all reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice to the occupant of the premises, enter
any premises, public or private, for the purpose of investigating,
sampling or inspecting any record, condition, equipment, practice
or property relating to activities subject to this section and may,
at any time and upon reasonable notice to the occupant of the
premises, enter such premises for the purpose of protecting the
public health or safety or to prevent damage to the environment.
5.
(h)
§ 7-501 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-501
1:210
SECTION 7-600
Private Property Maintenance.
[Added 3-21-2015 by Ord. No. 15-006]
§ 7-601. Vacant or foreclosing private property.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to prevent vacant and
foreclosing properties from posing nuisances and dangerous situations
in the Town and from jeopardizing the safety and welfare of the public,
abutters and public safety officials.
(a)
Definitions. The following words used in this section, unless the context
otherwise requires, shall have the following meanings:
BUILDING — Any combination of materials having a roof and enclosed
within exterior walls or firewalls, built to form a structure for the
shelter of persons or items.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE — A certificate issued by the
Inspector of Buildings to the owner of a vacant or foreclosing property
upon compliance with the provisions in this section.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — A person appointed by the legal
property owner to act on his/her behalf with the Town
FORECLOSING — The process by which a property, placed as security
for a real estate loan, is taken into possession by the lender to satisfy
the debt if the borrower defaults.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance that may be defined as a
"hazardous material" under the Town Ordinances, such as § 7-401(c),
or the General Laws and regulations issued therefrom, specifically
including, but not strictly limited to, the Massachusetts Oil and
Hazardous Substance List.
INITIATING THE FORECLOSING PROCESS — Taking any of the
following actions:
OWNER — Any person or entity who alone or severally with others may
be defined as an "owner" under the Town Ordinances, such as § 1-102,
or the General Laws and regulations issued therefrom, specifically
including, but not strictly limited to, the State Sanitary Code, 105 CMR
410.00 et seq., the State Building Code, or the State Fire Code, 527
CMR 1.00 et seq.
PROPERTY — Any private property, or portion thereof, located in the
Town, including buildings and structures located on the parcel.
1. Taking possession of a residential property per MGL c. 244, § 1.
2. Commencing a foreclosing action on a property in any court.
In any instance where the mortgage authorizes the mortgagee
entry to the property to make necessary repairs upon the
mortgagor's failure to do so.
3.
(b)
§ 7-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-601
1:211
STRUCTURE — That which has been built or constructed and which
is or should be fastened, anchored, attached or rests on a building,
foundation or on the ground, including all buildings, fences, fire
escapes, railings, towers, sidewalks, signs and stairways.
Registration.
The owner of a vacant or foreclosing property, unless exempt from
such actions per the General Laws, within 35 days of said property
becoming vacant or within 15 days of initiating the foreclosure
process and receipt of notice from the Town of Weymouth shall:
Provide written notification to the Inspector of Buildings,
Director of Public Health and the Fire Chief of the status
of said property. The notice shall include the name, address,
telephone number and e-mail address of the owner or
designated representative of said property; the location of the
property; the date on which the property became vacant; the
approximate time the building is expected to remain vacant (if
applicable); the specific nature of any contents still located in
or on the property;
a.
For all commercial properties and for all residential properties
with three or more residential units, the owner shall provide
to the Fire Chief one set of site plans for every building and
structure located on said property, if required by the Fire
Chief. The owner or designated representative shall certify site
plans are up-to-date and accurate annually, from the date of
submitting the initial written notification;
b.
Provide the name, address, telephone number, and e-mail
address of an emergency contact to the Inspector of Buildings,
Director of Public Health and the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief
may require such information be placed on the front of the
property;
c.
Remove any hazardous material, garbage, debris, or any other
material from said property as per the request of the Inspector
of Buildings, Director of Public Health, or the Fire Chief in
accordance with any relevant ordinance or General Law;
d.
Properly secure all doors, egresses, hatchways, and windows
to prevent unauthorized access. The Inspector of Buildings
shall, at his discretion, inspect all entries to ensure vacant or
foreclosing properties are properly secure;
e.
Post "No Trespassing" signs on any vacant property, if
requested by the Inspector of Buildings, Director of Public
Health or the Fire Chief;
f.
Ensure the vacant or foreclosing property is free from all
garbage, debris, and stagnant water, and free from
g.
1.
(c)
§ 7-601 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-601
1:212
unreasonable overgrowth of vegetation around the exterior. All
structures attached and unattached of any vacant or foreclosed
property must be maintained and will be subject to inspection
by the Inspector of Buildings per MGL c. 143, §§ 6 through 14;
Maintain the property in accordance to any Town ordinance
regarding maintenance of property as well as any Town zoning
ordinance; and
h.
Notify the Inspector of Buildings, Director of Public Health and
the Fire Chief when the said property is sold, transferred or is
no longer vacant.
i.
The Inspector of Buildings shall issue a certificate of compliance
upon adequate completion of above provisions. The certificate of
compliance will be subject to continued compliance with the above
provisions and shall be valid for one year and may be extended
for periods of up to six months at a time, as determined by the
Inspector of Buildings.
2.
Enforcement.
Any owner of a vacant or foreclosing property who fails to comply
with the provisions of this section may be subject to fines in
accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day or portion thereof
shall constitute a separate offense. If more than one violation is
found, each condition shall constitute a separate offense.
1.
Upon being informed of vacant or foreclosing properties without a
certificate of compliance, the Inspector of Buildings shall order the
owner to immediately acquire one. Should the owner fail to comply
with the order, the Inspector of Buildings, Director of Public Health
or the Fire Chief may enter said vacant or foreclosing property to
inspect. Except when the vacant or foreclosed property presents an
immediate threat to public health, welfare or safety, the Inspector
of Buildings, Director of Public Health or the Fire Chief may seek
a court order to permit access to said properties. Court orders to
secure, clean and verify vacant or foreclosing properties to comply
with any relevant ordinance or General Law may be sought by the
Inspector of Buildings, Director of Public Health or the Fire Chief.
2.
The owner of a vacant or foreclosing property who fails to acquire
a certificate of compliance in accordance to this section shall be
liable to the Town for all expense incurred by the Town in securing
such property and removing all garbage, debris, exterior
overgrowth, or any other material order removed. If the owner fails
to pay or reimburse the Town within 14 days of notice, the Town
Clerk shall record the claim notice in the Norfolk County Registry
of Deeds and shall have the right to file a civil action to establish a
lien on the property for the balance due.
3.
(d)
§ 7-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-601
1:213
Any person or entity affected by the action or inaction of an owner
of private property, any civic organization, neighborhood group, or
other affected agency may file, in writing, a complaint of violation
of any of these conditions with the Inspector of Buildings.
4.
Upon receipt of a complaint of an alleged violation of this section,
the Inspector of Buildings may conduct an investigation of such
complaint. The Police Chief, Fire Chief and Director of Health may
be solicited for input should the complaint be relevant to said
department. The Inspector of Buildings, Director of Public Health,
the Police Chief, or the Fire Chief may confer among themselves
to determine which official shall determine whether a violation
occurred. Any decision by a majority of these officials shall be final
as the appropriate authority to enforce any alleged violations of
this section.
5.
This enforcement authority under this section shall be in addition
to and not in place of any other existing authority under any
relevant ordinance or General Law. If any conflict exists under
this section and any other authority, then the legal authority that
provides the Town the greatest authority and the maximum
flexibility in enforcement shall govern.
6.
Penalties.
Each violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.
1.
Each day any violation of any provision in this section shall be
deemed a separate offense.
2.
Each separate offense of this section shall be punishable by a fine
of $50 per MGL c. 40, § 21D.
3.
The total cumulative fines for multiple offenses in any case shall not
exceed $300 per day per MGL c. 40, § 21D.
4.
The owner of any property that has received proper notification
of a violation of this section and who has failed or neglected to
correct such violation by the date specified in such notice shall be
fined cumulatively for each separate offense and will be liable for
payment to the Town within 30 days of receipt of the request for
payment sent by certified mail.
5.
The imposition of any fine from this section shall not be construed
to prevent enforcement of any other ordinances, laws or
regulations of the same property nor prevent other enforcement
measures or fines.
6.
Failure to pay any debt from enforcement of this section shall
constitute a debt in favor to the Town. The Town may initiate a civil
action to establish a lien on the property for the balance due.
7.
(e)
§ 7-601 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-601
1:214
§ 7-602. Anti-blight program.
Upon the refusal to correct any violation of this section per
notifications sent via certified mail, the Town Solicitor may bring
civil or legal action against the property owner.
8.
For purposes of MGL c. 40, § 21D, the Inspector of Buildings, the
Director of Public Health, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, or any of
their designees are authorized to enforce this section.
9.
Penalties under this section shall be in addition to and not in
place of any other existing authority under any relevant ordinance
or General Law. If any conflict exists under this section and any
other authority, then the legal authority that provides the Town the
greatest authority and the maximum flexibility in enforcement shall
govern.
10.
Hearing.
The person or persons to whom any order or notice is issued
pursuant to this section may request a hearing before the
municipal hearing officer. Such request shall be in writing and shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk within seven days after
receipt.
1.
In the event of a demonstrated personal or economic hardship
which renders the owner of the property incapable of complying
with an order under this section, the owner of the property may
request a hearing before the municipal hearing officer for a waiver
from the terms of the section. The officer shall have the authority
to consider mitigating circumstances in determining the extent
of compliance and time frame required for compliance with this
section in the event of a demonstrated hardship.
2.
(f)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to address the blighted
conditions that exist within the Town of Weymouth. Blighted conditions
contribute to the decline of neighborhoods, adversely affect the
economic well-being of the Town, and may pose adverse conditions
to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens and abutters to the
Town. Many blighted conditions can be rehabilitated, reconstructed,
demolished or reused to provide a safe, decent and sanitary quality of
life for the public, occupants, abutters and neighborhoods.
(a)
Definitions. The following words used in this section, unless the context
otherwise requires, shall have the following meanings:
BLIGHTED CONDITIONS — Shall be considered as any one or more of
the following:
1. Multiple missing, broken or boarded up windows or doors;
(b)
§ 7-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-602
1:215
PROPERTY — Any private property or portion thereof, located in the
Town, including any buildings, structures or other personal property on
the parcel.
Inadequate maintenance as evidenced by structurally
compromised foundation, collapsing or missing exterior walls, roof,
gutters or damaged or missing siding;
2.
The unreasonable accumulation of unused or stored building
materials, storage of abandoned or unregistered vehicles or
trailers, discarded or stored appliances and household furnishings,
overgrown brush, trees or shrubbery that may harbor vermin or
pests or present a risk to the public health or safety, or overgrown
grass of at least one foot situated on the premises;
3.
4. Extensive fire or water damage;
5. Infestation by rodents or other pests;
6. Excessive garbage or trash on the property;
Lots, such as commercial parking lots or open storage areas, left in
a state of abandonment;
7.
Vacant buildings or structures left unsecured or unguarded against
unauthorized entry;
8.
At least one partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, nonoperative or
discarded vehicle, as defined by § 13-101, on premises for longer
than 30 days; or
9.
Any condition causing a public nuisance, harboring vermin or
pests, presenting a threat to public health or safety, or which is a
fire hazard as determined by the Fire Chief or his designee, or is
attracting illegal activity as determined by the Police Department.
10.
Enforcement.
Any person or entity affected by the action or inaction of an owner
of private property, any civic organization, neighborhood group, or
other affected agency may file, in writing, a complaint of violation
of any of these conditions with the Inspector of Buildings.
1.
Upon receipt of a complaint of an alleged violation of this section,
the Inspector of Buildings may conduct an investigation of such
complaint. The Police Chief, Fire Chief and Director of Health may
be solicited for input should the complaint be relevant to said
department. The Inspector of Buildings, Director of Public Health,
the Police Chief, or the Fire Chief may confer among themselves
to determine which official shall determine whether a violation
occurred. Any decision by a majority of these officials shall be final
as the appropriate authority to enforce any alleged violations of
this section.
2.
(c)
§ 7-602 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-602
1:216
The Inspector of Buildings or said agency shall serve notice of
violation upon completion of the investigation with due findings.
The owner of the property shall be notified via certified mail.
The notice shall require the owner to bring the property into
compliance with the requirements of the notice within 30 days
of receipt. An extension or extensions may be granted at the
discretion of the Inspector of Buildings, in the event of
demonstrated hardship. Violation notices shall be drafted so as to
be applicable to the property owner, and the owner's agents, heirs,
successors or assigns.
3.
Should the property owner fail to comply, or neglect or refuse to
take the corrective action specified in the notice, the Town may
undertake such corrective action when, in its judgment, a failure to
do so endangers the health, safety and welfare of the public. Except
when the violation presents an immediate threat to public health,
welfare or safety, the Inspector of Buildings or Director of Public
Health shall seek a court order to appoint a receiver to correct
the violation(s). Any work performed on the property shall be done
in accordance with the procedures set forth in the State Sanitary
Code.
4.
Notification of the intention to make such corrective action shall
be sent to the owner via any method allowed by any relevant
ordinance or General Law.
5.
Should the Town undertake any corrective actions, the cost of
such repairs shall constitute a debt in favor of the Town against
the owner of the blighted condition. Should the property owner
fail, neglect or refuse to pay the debt within 30 days of the debt
receipt, the Town may initiate a civil action to establish a lien on
the property for the balance due.
6.
This enforcement authority under this section shall be in addition
to and not in place of any other existing authority under any
relevant ordinance or General Law. If any conflict exists under
this section and any other authority, then the legal authority that
provides the Town the greatest authority and the maximum
flexibility in enforcement shall govern.
7.
Penalties.
Each violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a
separate offense.
1.
Each day any violation of any provision in this section shall be
deemed a separate offense.
2.
Each separate offense of this section shall be punishable by a fine
of $50 per MGL c. 40, § 21D.
3.
(d)
§ 7-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-602
1:217
The total cumulative fine for multiple offenses in any case shall not
exceed $300 per day per MGL c. 40, § 21D.
4.
The owner of any property that has received proper notification
of a violation of this section and who has failed or neglected to
correct such violation by the date specified in such notice shall be
fined cumulatively for each separate offense and will be liable for
payment to the Town within 30 days of receipt of the request for
payment sent by certified mail.
5.
The imposition of any fine from this section shall not be construed
to prevent enforcement of any other ordinances, laws or
regulations of the same property nor prevent other enforcement
measures or fines.
6.
Failure to pay any debt from enforcement of this section shall
constitute a debt in favor to the Town. The Town may initiate a civil
action to establish payment of the debt or a lien on the property for
the balance due.
7.
Upon the refusal to correct any violation of this section per
notifications sent via certified mail, the Town Solicitor may bring
civil or legal action against the property owner.
8.
For purposes of MGL c. 40, § 21D, the Inspector of Buildings, the
Director of Public Health, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, or any of
their designees are authorized to enforce this section.
9.
Penalties under this section shall be in addition to and not in
place of any other existing authority under any relevant ordinance
or General Law. If any conflict exists under this section and any
other authority, then the legal authority that provides the Town the
greatest authority and the maximum flexibility in enforcement shall
govern.
10.
Hearing.
The person or persons to whom any order or notice is issued
pursuant to this section may request a hearing before the
municipal hearing officer. Such request shall be in writing and shall
be filed in the office of the Town Clerk within seven days after
receipt.
1.
In the event of a demonstrated personal or economic hardship
which renders the owner of the property incapable of complying
with an order under this section, the owner of the property may
request a hearing before the municipal hearing officer for a waiver
from the terms of the section. The Board shall have the authority
to consider mitigating circumstances in determining the extent
of compliance and time frame required for compliance with this
section in the event of a demonstrated hardship.
2.
(e)
§ 7-602 WEYMOUTH CODE § 7-602
1:218
Chapter 8
PUBLIC WORKS
§ 7-602 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-602
1:219

SECTION 8-100
Garbage, Rubbish, Refuse, Recycling
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-602
1:221

SECTION 8-200
Sanitary Sewers
§ 8-201. Connections to sanitary sewers.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
HABITABLE STRUCTURES — Includes any building or edifice used for
habitation, employment, amusement and any other facilities requiring
a potable water supply for sanitary or culinary purposes.
(a)
Connection required.
All habitable structures having access to sewers of the Town of
Weymouth shall connect to such sewer, by a sufficient drain, before
any use or occupancy is made thereof.
1.
All habitable structures abutting a public or private way and having
access to sewers of the Town of Weymouth shall connect to such
sewer by a sufficient drain at the time of completion of construction
of the common sewer line in the way or within the following
designated areas and time limits, whichever is later:
Great Pond drainage area: one year from the date of
notification of being in violation of this section;
a.
Whitman's Pond drainage area (including Mill River and Old
Swamp River drainage areas): one year from the date of
notification of being in violation of this section;
b.
All other areas: two years from the date of notification of being
in violation of this section.
c.
2.
(b)
Applicability to sales of habitable structures. Owners of habitable
structures required to connect to the common sewer line pursuant to
this section shall, prior to the transfer or conveyance thereof, comply
with the provisions of this section.
(c)
Exemptions.
Habitable structures which by reason of grade, elevation or other
just cause, which cannot be drained into the sewer system of the
Town of Weymouth, as determined by the Director of Public Works,
shall be exempted from the provisions of this section until such
impediment is alleviated.
1.
Habitable structures connected to a septic system constructed in
accordance with the requirements of Title 5 of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts Environmental Code, and to any applicable
provisions of the rules and regulations of the Weymouth Health
Department, as determined by the Director of Public Health, shall
be exempted from the provisions of this section.
2.
(d)
§ 8-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-201
1:223
Violations and penalties. The penalties for violations of this section shall
be as follows:
Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be served
by the Director of Public Health with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the
period stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
1.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in this section shall be fined in the amount of $25 for
each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue
shall be deemed a separate offense once initial notice of violation
has been given.
2.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be liable to
the Town of Weymouth for any loss, expense or damage caused by
such violation.
3.
(e)
Additional remedies. The provisions of this section may be enforced by
civil action without limiting the prosecution of any violations hereof.
(f)
Enforcement of other regulations. Nothing herein shall prevent or
interfere with the enforcement of any other proceeding, rule,
regulation, order or law concerning sewer connections.
(g)
§ 8-201 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-201
1:224
SECTION 8-300
Water Supply
§ 8-301. Water use restrictions.
Authority. This section is adopted by the Town of Weymouth under
its Home Rule powers, its police powers to protect public health and
welfare and its specific authorization under MGL c. 40, §§ 5, 21, 21D
and 41A.
(a)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect, preserve and
maintain the public health, safety and welfare whenever there is in
force a state of concern for the water supply by providing for
enforcement of any duly imposed restrictions, requirements, provisions
or conditions imposed by the Director of Public Works of the Town of
Weymouth.
(b)
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONCERN — Exists when the level of water
in Great Pond drops to an elevation determined by the Department of
Public Works' rules and regulations, or the Director of Public Works
determines the need to protect the water supply and imposes voluntary
water restrictions.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — Exists when the level
of water in Great Pond drops to an elevation determined by the
Department of Public Works' rules and regulations, or the Director of
Public Works otherwise elects to impose mandatory water restrictions
to protect the water supply.
WATER TAKERS — Includes all private persons, firms or other entities
using the public water supply of the Town of Weymouth, whether or not
the use of such water, as measured by a meter, shall be billed in his, her
or its name.
(c)
Restraint of use of water.
On the occurrence of a state of water supply concern or of a
state of water supply emergency, the Department of Public Works
may issue such restrictions, conditions, requirements, provisions or
regulations restraining the use of water by the water takers as it
may determine are necessary to protect the water supply.
1.
Public notice shall be given as described under Subsection (e) of
this section, along with simultaneous notice to the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection.
2.
(d)
Notification of restraint of water use. Notification of any provision,
restriction, requirement or condition with which water takers (users)
of water supplied by the Department of Public Works are required to
comply to abate a water shortage shall be sufficient for the purposes of
(e)
§ 8-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-301
1:225
this section if it is published once in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Town of Weymouth or by such other notice as is reasonably
calculated to reach and inform all water takers of the Town's water
supply.
Violation. Following notification by the Department of Public Works of a
state of water supply emergency, no person shall violate any mandatory
water supply provision, condition, requirement or restriction imposed
by the Department of Public Works or in a plan approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection.
(f)
Penalties for violations. Any water taker who violates the mandatory
water restrictions imposed by this section shall be punished by a fine of
$50. Each separate instance of noncompliance following the issuance
of any warning or citation pursuant to this section shall constitute a
separate violation. Such penalty shall be enforced in accordance with
§ 1-109 of these ordinances.
(g)
§ 8-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-301
1:226
SECTION 8-400
Streets and Roads
§ 8-401. Excavations.
Permit required; fee. No person or corporation shall make any
excavation within the limits of any public way in the Town except upon
and in accordance with the conditions of a permit to be issued by the
Department of Public Works, such permit to be issued only upon written
application stating the location and extent of the proposed excavation,
and a fee as determined by the Director of Public Works shall be
charged for each permit issued.
(a)
Conditions of permit. It shall be a condition of each permit thus issued
that the surface of the highway shall be restored to its original
condition and at the expense of the person or corporation to whom the
permit is issued; also that the person or corporation to whom the permit
is granted shall indemnify the Town against all claims of all persons who
may be injured in their person or property by reason of such excavation.
The Director of Public Works may fix the time within which such permit
shall remain in force and may prescribe what precautions shall be taken
to guard the public against injury. Violation of any of the conditions of
said permit shall render the same void.
(b)
Maintenance of access to property required. No person having the
authority to dig up or obstruct any street shall do so in a manner which
does not leave reasonable access for persons and vehicles to property
abutting on such street or which does not have a reasonable passage
through the street for fire apparatus.
(c)
Excavation of street. Whenever the Town of Weymouth undertakes the
repair, resurfacing or other such improvement of streets, roads or
sidewalks, the gas utility company shall provide for the maintenance
and improvements of its service gate boxes. The service gate boxes
located in the street, roads or sidewalks shall be repaired, replaced
or otherwise identified, so that they are in good condition, easily
accessible and raised to the proposed finish grade.
(d)
Excavation of street by a public utility company or private contractor.
Any public utility company or private contractor who excavates a utility
trench in Weymouth over 100 continuous feet in length shall be
required to complete the following:
Replace or cold plane/mill asphalt from the furthest street incision
to the nearest shoulder or sidewalk on that street;
1.
2. In no case shall the resurfacing be less than eight feet wide;
The replacement of the asphalt shall be compacted with a minimum
one-ton roller to ensure that the street is at grade level with the
other section of the street.
3.
(e)
§ 8-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-401
1:227
§ 8-402. Barriers.
§ 8-403. Private way signs required; exception.
No private way, lane or alley shall connect with a public highway of the
Town unless at its junction with each highway it shall have a sign reading
"Private Way" or "Not a Public Way," provided that this provision shall not
apply to such private driveways not exceeding 12 feet in width as have a
gate, gateway or barway at their junction with the public highway or are
otherwise so constructed and located that, in the opinion of the Department
of Public Works, they cannot reasonably be mistaken for a public highway.
§ 8-404. Procedure for street acceptance.
If final paving is not completed within 120 days of excavation, the
applicant for the permit must submit an explanation in writing
to the Director of Public Works as to why final paving has not
been completed. Failure to comply with this section will result
in the suspension of all future permits to the applicant until the
street repair has been deemed acceptable by the Director of Public
Works.
Erection of barriers around excavations required. The owner or owners
of land which has been excavated shall erect barriers or take other
suitable measures to protect persons from damages incident thereto
within five days after such owner or owners have been notified in
writing by the Director of Public Works that such excavation constitutes
a hazard to public safety.
(a)
The penalty for violation of this section shall be $50 for each day on
which the violation exists.
(b)
Petition to be filed. All petitions for the acceptance of streets, new or
otherwise, must be presented to the Department of Public Works for
an inspection, review and report before being submitted to the Town
Council. The petition shall include an application fee as established
by the Director of Public Works in accordance with § 5-305 of these
ordinances.
(a)
Minimum width; exception. No street or way shall be laid out or
accepted by the Town of Weymouth of a width less than 40 feet, unless
the same shall have been actually opened and used for public travel
prior to January 1, 1924, and is recommended and approved by the
Department of Public Works.
(b)
Compliance with specifications required. No street or way constructed
through lands by the owners thereof shall be laid out or accepted or
recommended by the Department of Public Works for acceptance as
a public way or street of the Town of Weymouth unless previously
constructed and completed to the subgrade in accordance with the
(c)
§ 8-401 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-404
1:228
latest specifications promulgated by the Department of Public Works
and/or the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
Compliance with state law required; releases by property owners. Any
street or way constructed through private land by the owners thereof in
accordance with the specifications as referenced in § 8-408 may be laid
out and accepted as a public street of the Town of Weymouth, provided
that such action is taken in accordance with provisions of MGL c. 82,
§§ 21 through 24, and provided also that the owners of at least 75% of
the lands through which such street or way passes have signed releases
of all property which the Town deems it necessary to acquire for such
layout and have accepted and have granted sloping privileges.
(d)
Plan and profile required; street specifications.
A plan and profile done in ink on Mylar 24 inches wide by 36
inches long at a scale of one inch to 40 feet of each street shall be
submitted by the petitioners at the time application is made. The
survey and plan work will be accomplished by a private registered
engineer and registered land surveyor, and the cost of the work
will be borne by the abutters and/or petitioners. The engineer and
surveyor will design a satisfactory road grade and indicate the
necessary water, sewer and drainage. They will set the necessary
bounds as indicated by the Town Engineer. They will clear the plan
with the Engineering, Highway and Water and Sewer Divisions of
the Public Works Department as well as the Health and Building
Departments, which, in approving the plan, will sign the Mylar
in the appropriate spaces provided. A signature box for Planning
Board and Town Council approval shall also be provided on the
Mylar.
1.
Such plan will show all physical characteristics of the street
presented for acceptance, i.e., all property lines; the names of the
respective owners as of a date not earlier than January 1 of the year
in which the petition is filed; the correct locations of all buildings;
all utilities (water, sewer and storm drainage; including profile
views); all easements necessary for drainage, sewer or water
mains; all stone bounds; all survey data necessary to lay out the
street, including tangent lines at layout intersections and any other
requirements for recording the plan at the Registry of Deeds.
All elevations are to be based on Town of Weymouth elevation
datum. A full detailed estimate of the costs necessary to bring the
road into compliance with Town standards shall, simultaneously, be
submitted to the Director of Public Works.
2.
The deed reference, including Land Court certificate number
where applicable, and sheet, block and lot shall be shown for each
lot on the street.
3.
(e)
Exemptions and waivers. The Town Council may exempt or waive the
local requirement of this section for any public street acceptance if, in
(f)
§ 8-404 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-404
1:229
§ 8-405. Installation and maintenance of traffic signs and markings.
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the installation and
maintenance of traffic signs and the painting of curbings, crosswalks, center
lines, warning signs, traffic markings, etc., on the streets of the Town.
§ 8-406. Obstructions in streets.
§ 8-407. Removal of vehicles during winter storm emergencies.
the opinion of the Department of Public Works, it is in the best interest
of the Town to do so.
Obstructions restricted. No person shall place or cause to be placed
any obstruction in any public street, footpath or sidewalk or suffer any
such obstruction placed or controlled by him to remain for more than
one hour after being notified by a police officer or the Director of Public
Works to remove the same.
(a)
Leaves. No person shall place leaves or cause leaves to be placed by
raking onto any public way. Leaves are to be bagged for collection
in accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Department of Public Works. The penalty for violation of this subsection
shall be $25 for each offense.
(b)
Visibility at intersections. No person owning or controlling any property
abutting upon two or more intersecting ways in the Town of Weymouth
shall construct or maintain any fence or other structure, other than
a building, or plant, grow or maintain any hedge, trees or other
shrubbery of a height of more than three feet above the level of the
adjoining way and within 35 feet of the nearest point of the intersection
of such way, so that the same will obstruct the open view of travelers
on each abutting way within said distance of 35 feet.
(c)
Snow obstruction of public ways and sidewalks. No person engaged in
the removal of snow shall, under any circumstances, cause said snow to
be deposited so as to obstruct any public way or sidewalk. The penalty
for violation of this subsection shall be $50 for each offense.
(d)
Removal. Any vehicle on a public way in the Town interfering with the
work of removing or plowing snow, or removing ice therefrom, may be
removed by or under the authority of the Chief of Police to a public
garage or any convenient place.
(a)
Notice of removal. The Chief of Police shall give notice within a
reasonable time of the place to which the vehicle has been moved to the
registered owner of the vehicle.
(b)
Payment of charges for vehicle redemption. The owner, before being
permitted to remove the vehicle, shall establish his right to do so
and pay to the Town or to the keeper of the place of storage the
cost of removal and any storage charges resulting therefrom, not to
(c)
§ 8-404 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-407
1:230
§ 8-408. Openings in streets restricted.
exceed that fee established by the Department of Public Utilities of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
In general. No street, road or highway in the Town shall be opened
for installation of sewers, water mains, drains, public utilities or other
purposes, except for emergency services, for five years after such
street, road or highway has been reconstructed, rebuilt or relocated.
Prior to reconstruction, rebuilding or relocation of any street, road or
highway, the Department of Public Works shall notify the telephone, gas
and electric companies not less than three months before actual work
will be started.
(a)
Notification of property owners. All property owners of occupied and
unoccupied land along a street, road or highway proposed for
construction or reconstruction shall be notified that said highway
cannot be opened for a period of five years, except in a case of extreme
emergency. Said notice shall be issued prior to construction or
reconstruction.
(b)
Specifications for various types of streets.
For all street openings on fully reconstructed streets, the following
construction methods shall be mandatory (streets consisting of
gravel subbase, penetrated stone and bituminous concrete
surface):
Surface will be cut carefully with a suitable cutting tool
(pavement blade with jackhammers or pavement saw);
a.
All backfill will be gravel, tamped and consolidated in six-inch
layers;
b.
c. Puddling will be the final operation of backfill;
After puddling, pavement will again be cut a minimum of 12
inches beyond excavation and removed through to gravel
subbase;
d.
Six-inch slab of concrete will be placed in such a manner as to
bridge trench;
e.
Existing blacktop edges will be painted with tack coat
emulsion;
f.
Blacktop finish will be applied in two courses, giving a smooth
joint;
g.
Contractor or utility will notify the Department of Public Works
prior to backfill operation, so that an inspector may be present.
No backfilling will be accomplished without an inspector
present.
h.
1.
(c)
§ 8-407 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-408
1:231
§ 8-409. Police details.
All police details within the limits of public ways and sidewalks in the
Town of Weymouth shall be performed by Weymouth police officers unless
For all street openings on Class A-1 and Class A streets, the
following construction methods shall be mandatory (Class A and
A-1 streets consisting of gravel base and bituminous concrete
surface):
Surface will be cut carefully with a suitable cutting tool
(pavement blade with jackhammer or pavement saw);
a.
All backfill will be gravel, tamped and consolidated in six-inch
layers;
b.
c. Puddling will be the final operation on backfill;
Existing blacktop edges will be painted with a tack coat
emulsion;
d.
Blacktop finish will be applied in two courses, giving a smooth
joint;
e.
Contractor or utility will notify the Department of Public Works
prior to backfill operations so that an inspector may be
present. No backfilling will be accomplished without an
inspector present.
f.
2.
For all street openings on streets built with penetrated stone,
the following construction methods shall be mandatory (streets
consisting of gravel base and penetrated stone):
Surface shall be cut carefully with a suitable cutting tool
(pavement blade with jackhammer or pavement saw);
a.
All backfill will be gravel, tamped and consolidated in six-inch
layers;
b.
c. Puddling will be the final operation on backfill;
After puddling, pavement will again be cut a minimum of 12
inches beyond excavation and removed through to gravel
subbase;
d.
Six-inch slab of concrete will be placed in such a manner as
to bridge the trench and will be finished off flush with stone
surface;
e.
Contractor or utility will notify the Department of Public Works
prior to backfill operations so that an inspector may be
present. No backfilling will be accomplished without an
inspector present.
f.
3.
§ 8-408 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-409
1:232
there are no available Weymouth police officers to perform such detail as
determined by the Weymouth Police Chief or his designee.
§ 8-409 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-409
1:233

SECTION 8-500
Responsible Employer Ordinance
§ 8-501. Public construction projects.
All bidders and all subcontractors under the bidder for projects subject to
MGL c. 149, § 44A(2), shall, as a condition for bidding, agree in writing that
they comply with the following obligations:
Qualifications.
The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder shall comply
with the Weymouth Responsible Employer Ordinance as it
currently exists and as it may, from time to time, be amended.
All bidders and all subcontractors under the bidder must provide
documentation that they are in compliance with the provisions of
this section prior to the bid opening.
1.
All bidders and subcontractors under the bidder who are awarded
or who otherwise obtain contracts on projects subject to MGL
c. 149, § 44A(2), shall comply with the obligations of the Town
of Weymouth's Responsible Employer Ordinance for the entire
duration of their work on the project, and an officer of each such
bidder or subcontractor under the bidder shall certify under oath
and in writing on a weekly basis that it is in compliance with such
obligations.
2.
(a)
Requirements.
The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must comply
with the obligations established under MGL c. 149 to pay the
appropriate lawful prevailing wage rates to their employees.
1.
The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain
or participate in a bona fide apprentice training program as defined
by MGL c. 23, §§ 11H and 11I, for each apprenticeable trade or
occupation represented in their workforce that is approved by
the Division of Apprentice Training of the Department of Labor
and Industries and must abide by the apprentice-to-journeyman
ratio for each trade prescribed therein in the performance of the
contract.
2.
In a manner that is consistent with applicable law and regulations,
any bidder or subcontractor under a bidder awarded a contract
subject to this policy shall give special consideration to recruiting
workers who are residents of the Town of Weymouth for each
apprenticeable trade or occupation represented in their workforce
that is approved by the Division of Apprentice Training of the
Department of Labor and Industries, and must consider hiring
qualified residents of the Town of Weymouth in filling the
apprentice-to-journeyman ratio for each trade prescribed therein in
the performance of the contract.
3.
(b)
§ 8-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-501
1:235
The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must furnish,
at their expense, hospitalization and medical benefits for all their
employees employed on the project and/or coverage at least
comparable in value to the hospitalization and medical benefits
provided by the health and welfare plans in the applicable craft
recognized by MGL c. 149, § 26, in establishing minimum wage
rates.
4.
The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain
appropriate industrial accident insurance coverage for all the
employees employed on the project in accordance with MGL c. 152.
5.
The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must properly
classify employees as employees rather than independent
contractors and treat them accordingly for purposes of workers'
compensation insurance coverage, employment taxes, social
security taxes and income tax withholding per MGL c. 149, § 148B.
6.
The bidder and all subcontractors under the bidder must maintain
a bona fide pension plan for all their employees employed on the
project.
7.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to construction
projects for which the low general bid was less than $200,000 or to
work performed pursuant to subcontracts that are subject to MGL
c. 149, § 44F, and that were bid for less than $25,000 or to rebids
for construction projects for which the Town of Weymouth receives
fewer than three qualified general contract bidders in the original
bid.
8.
Sanctions.
Any bidder or subcontractor under the bidder who fails to comply
with any one of the obligations as set forth in the policy for any
period of time shall be, at the sole discretion of the Town of
Weymouth, subject to one or more of the following sanctions:
a. Cessation of work on the project until compliance is obtained;
Withholding of payment due under any contract or subcontract
until compliance is obtained;
b.
c. Permanent removal from any further work on the project;
Liquidated damages payable to the Town of Weymouth in the
amount of 5% of the dollar value of the contract.
d.
1.
In addition to the sanctions outlined in Subsection (c)(1) above,
a general bidder or contractor shall be equally liable for the
violations of its subcontractor, with the exception of violations
arising from work performed pursuant to subcontractors that are
subject to MGL c. 149, § 44F. Any contractor or subcontractor who
has been determined by the Town of Weymouth to have violated
2.
(c)
§ 8-501 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-501
1:236
any of the obligations set forth in this section shall be barred
from performing any work on any future projects for six months
for a first violation, for three years for a second violation, and
permanently for a third violation.
Waiver.
Any proposed waiver of the provisions of Paragraph (1) of this section
can only be made with the approval of the Mayor of the Town of
Weymouth.
If any provision of this section, or the application of such provision to
any person or circumstances, shall be enjoined or held to be invalid,
the remaining provisions of this section, or the application of such
provisions to persons or circumstances, other than that which is
enjoined or held invalid shall not be affected thereby.
(d)
§ 8-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-501
1:237

SECTION 8-600
Trees and Other Planting Materials
§ 8-601. Trees.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
STREET TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other wood vegetation
on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets,
avenues or right-of-ways within the Town.
PARK TREES — Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other wood vegetation in
public parks having individual names, and all other areas owned by the
Town of Weymouth.
(a)
Tree species. The list of the official street trees will be in accordance
with the tree species size and classes listed below, and no trees may be
planted closer than the restrictions listed in Subsection (d).
Small Trees Medium Trees Large Trees
Crabapple - flowering Ash - green Maple - silver
Plum - flowering Ash - white Maple - sugar
Hawthorn Locust Oak - pin
Cherry - flowering Oak Sycamore
Dogwood Linden - littleleaf Tulip
Magnolia Maple - Norway Oak - scarlet
Maple - red Sweet Gum
(b)
Spacing. The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the tree
species size and classes listed in Subsection (b) of this section, and no
trees may be planted closer than the restrictions listed in Subsection
(d) below.
(c)
Distances. The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines
and sidewalks will be in accordance with the tree species size and
classes listed in Subsection (b) of this section, and no tree may be
planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following:
Small trees - two feet
Medium trees - three feet
Large trees - four feet
(d)
§ 8-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-601
1:239
No street tree shall be planted closer than 30 feet to any street corner
measured from the point of nearest intersection curbs or curblines. No
street trees shall be planted closer than 10 feet to any fire hydrant. No
street trees other than those species listed as small trees in Subsection
(b) of this section may be planted under or within 10 lateral feet of
any overhead utility wire, or within five lateral feet of any underground
water, sewer, transmission line or other utility.
Public tree care. The Town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain
and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets,
alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary
to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the beauty of such
public grounds. The Town may remove or order to be removed, any tree
thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature
can cause injury to sewer, electric, gas, water lines, or other public
improvements, or is infected with any injurious fungus, insect, or other
pests.
(e)
Topping and pruning. It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any
person, firm, or Town department to top any street tree, park tree, or
any other tree on public property. "Topping" is defined as severe cutting
back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within
the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy
and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where
pruning practices are impractical, may be exempt from this section at
the determination of the Town Tree Board. Every owner of any tree
overhanging any street or right-of-way within the Town shall prune the
branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any
street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection, so that there
shall be a clear space of 12 feet above the surface of the street and
eight feet from the surface of the sidewalk.
Said owner shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or
broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of
the public. The Town shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub
on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light
along the street from a streetlight or interferes with the visibility of any
traffic control device or sign.
(f)
Stump removal. All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed
below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not
project above the surface of the ground.
(g)
Penalty and enforcement. Any person who violates any provision of this
section and who is prosecuted by criminal complaint pursuant to the
provisions of § 1-110 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75 nor
more than $120 per inch of the diameter of the tree or the branch
removed. The Tree Board may approve replacement trees as long as
they are equal to one tree for every 2 1/2 inches. Enforcement of the
(h)
§ 8-601 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-601
1:240
provisions of this section as a municipal infraction shall be punished by
a penalty of $50 for each violation.
Creation of a Town Tree Board. A Tree Board, as provided in § 3-219
of these ordinances, shall consist of the Director of Public Works, the
Administrative Assistant to the Director of Public Works, and the Town
Arborist.
(i)
Duties and responsibilities of the Tree Board. It shall be the
responsibility of the Tree Board to study, investigate, counsel, and
develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the
care, preservation, pruning, planting, removal or deposition of trees
and shrubs in parks, along streets, and in other public areas. Such a
plan will be presented semi-annually to the Mayor.
(j)
Tree replacements. Any person, firm, corporation, or agency that in the
course of construction, subdivision development, or for any other such
reason wishes to remove any living public shade tree, 2 1/2 inches in
diameter at breast height (dbh) or greater, in accordance with MGL c.
87, § 3, must first obtain a permit from the Tree Warden or Director of
Public Works. If removal is permitted, it shall be at no cost to the Town
within the Spring or Fall months following completion of construction
and replaced in locations specified by the Tree Warden or Director of
Public Works with a number of small trees determined to be equivalent
on the following basis:
The total dbh of all replacement trees shall equal or exceed the
total dbh of all trees to be removed, except in cases where a public
shade tree is cut or removed prior to obtaining a permit as required
herein, for which replacement trees or equivalent shall be provided
at double the dbh of all lost trees.
1.
Replacement trees shall be balled and burlapped, not less than
2 1/2 inches dbh, and shall be planted by a professional Arborist,
nurseryman, or landscaper in accordance with the National
Arborist Association. The Tree Warden or Director of Public Works
shall determine species, size, and planting locations.
2.
At the option of the applicant, the Town may, upon payment of the
agreed-upon sum, replace said trees according to the standards
herein set forth.
3.
Partial relief may be granted by the Tree Warden or Director of
Public Works, from the replacement requirements herein, only in
cases where the health, location, or condition of the tree to be
cut warrants. However, in no case shall any tree of less than 2 1/2
inches dbh be required for each tree lost.
4.
If any automotive machine causes damage to a tree or woodland,
the Department of Public Works shall be notified, whereupon a
certified arborist will inspect the damage and place a value on the
damage. The Town of Weymouth will bill the insurance company
5.
(k)
§ 8-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-601
1:241
accordingly to utilize the money to plant trees at the locations of its
choice.
§ 8-601 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-601
1:242
SECTION 8-700
Stormwater
§ 8-701. Stormwater Management Ordinance.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the requirements
of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
General Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Small Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer Systems issued by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency; to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of
Weymouth residents; to protect the natural resources, water bodies,
drinking water supplies, groundwater resources, environment, and
municipal facilities of the Town; to satisfy the appropriate water quality
requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act; to eliminate or reduce
the adverse effects of soil erosion and sedimentation as a result of landdisturbing
activities; and to manage stormwater runoff to minimize
adverse impacts to the Town, its citizens, and the environment.
Section 8-701 is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendments of the Massachusetts Constitution, the Massachusetts
Home Rule statutes, and the regulations of the Federal Clean Water Act
found at 40 CFR 122.34. The provisions of § 8-701 apply to all property
owners in the Town.
The Department of Public Works (DPW) shall administer and enforce
§ 8-701 and will issue a stormwater management permit to document
compliance with this section. The DPW may promulgate rules and
regulations to effectuate the purpose of this section.
(a)
Definitions. Unless otherwise defined in this subsection, the terms in
this section correspond to definitions found in the Clean Water Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the Massachusetts General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The
following definitions apply to this section:
APPLICANT — A person who applies for a stormwater management
permit under this section of the Town Ordinances. "Applicant" shall
include an owner, or his/her agent or representative, or his/her assigns.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as it is amended from time to time.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Any activity that removes the surface cover
from land, changes the grade or exposes soil to the potential influence
of stormwater.
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS —
The standards issued by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), codified in regulations at 310 CMR
10.05(6)(k) through (q), and further defined and specified in the
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook issued by the DEP. The standards
address stormwater impacts through implementation of performance
(b)
§ 8-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-701
1:243
standards that reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies
and control the quantity of runoff from a site.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including
any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped
storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or
man-made or -altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage
structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or
operated by the Town.
PROJECT — Land disturbance conducted on either a single property
or multiple properties as part of a single proposal (e.g., residential
subdivision).
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface
water runoff and drainage.
Applicability. A stormwater management permit is required by any
property owner who undertakes a project that discharges or proposes
to discharge stormwater off his/her property in the Town of Weymouth
and meets the following criteria:
Minor projects, which are those that involve either:
Land disturbance of more than 7,500 square feet of land but
less than one acre; or
a.
Stockpiling more than 50 cubic yards but less than 1,000 cubic
yards of excavate or fill.
b.
1.
Major projects, which are those that involve either:
a. Land disturbance of one acre or more; or
b. Stockpiling 1,000 cubic yards of excavate or fill or more.
2.
(c)
Exemptions. Projects are exempt from needing a stormwater
management permit if the stormwater discharges resulting from them
demonstrate compliance with the Massachusetts Stormwater
Management Standards, either through a properly issued order of
conditions, site plan review, special permit/variance or definitive
subdivision plan.
The following activities and discharges are exempt from this section:
1. DPW ice and snow control operations;
2. Flow resulting from municipal emergency response activities;
3. Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the DPW prior
to the time of the test;
4.
(d)
§ 8-701 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-701
1:244
Nonstormwater discharges permitted under an NPDES permit
administered under the authority of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency;
5.
Projects that commenced prior to the effective date of this section,
provided they have all necessary approvals and permits and are
completed within one year from such effective date;
6.
7. Water line flushing;
8. Flow from potable water sources;
Uncontaminated groundwater or uncontaminated pumped
groundwater;
9.
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains, crawl space
pumps, or air conditioning condensation;
10.
Water from sump pumps and other pumps that remove floodwaters
from basements;
11.
Water discharge from irrigation or watering of lawns, trees,
landscaping, and gardens;
12.
Water from property management activities, including washing
walkways, patios, house siding, windows, or similar property
management activities;
13.
14. Individual resident car washing;
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less than one
ppm chlorine), provided the water is allowed to stand for one week
prior to draining and the pool is drained in such a way as not to
cause a nuisance.
15.
Application and review procedures. At least 30 days prior to
commencement of site clearing or stockpiling activities, the applicant
shall file with the DPW two copies of plans and forms specified by the
DPW. A complete application shall include the DPW permit application
forms, all requirements therein, application fee as per DPW service fee
schedule and the following:
MINOR PROJECTS — A sketch of the proposed project and an
accompanying narrative which shall include the following information:
1. The location of land-clearing, stockpiling and development
activities; erosion control measures to prevent the sedimentation
of water bodies and off-site discharge of sediment;
2. Waste control measures to prevent wastes from contacting
stormwater runoff;
3. Details of a planned program of inspection and maintenance to
ensure proper operation of stormwater management measures;
and
(e)
§ 8-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-701
1:245
4. Additional stormwater management measures as directed by the
DPW.
MAJOR PROJECTS —
1. Name, address and telephone number of the owner and person
responsible for implementation of the plan and for proper
inspection and maintenance of erosion and sedimentation controls;
2. Plans prepared by a MA registered professional engineer or
professional land surveyor depicting property lines, existing and
proposed ground conditions and topography using no greater than
two-foot increments, boundaries of wetlands and natural or
artificial water storage or conveyance structures, one-hundredyear
flood elevations and location of all existing and proposed
buildings, utilities, easements and impervious surfaces;
3. A narrative description of proposed erosion control measures and
sedimentation control measures;
4. Location and design details of erosion and sediment control
measures proposed to prevent off-site sediment transport during
construction;
5. A locus map showing the site in relationship to the surrounding
area's watercourses, water bodies and other significant geographic
features, and roads and other significant structures;
6. A plan showing the extent of clearing, construction equipment
access and storage areas, and material laydown, temporary storage
of construction debris and soil stockpile areas;
7. A construction schedule, including estimated dates for initiation
and completion for such tasks as clearing and grading,
construction of utilities and infrastructure, construction of
buildings, and final grading and landscaping;
8. A written program of documented inspections of stormwater
management systems and a corrective action program for
identified deficiencies;
9. A stormwater management plan prepared by a MA registered
professional engineer that demonstrates compliance with the
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Standards;
10. A statement as to applicability under the Massachusetts Natural
Heritage and Endangered Species Program pursuant to the
Massachusetts Endangered Species Act (MGL c. 131A), if
applicable.
Within 30 calendar days after receiving a complete application, the
DPW shall, in writing:
1. Approve the plans as submitted and issue a stormwater
management permit;
§ 8-701 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-701
1:246
§ 8-702. Illicit Connection/Discharge Ordinance.
2. Approve the plans subject to such reasonable conditions as may
be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this section,
and issue a stormwater management permit subject to these
conditions;
3. Disapprove the plans, specifying the reason(s) and procedure for
submitting a revised application and/or submission; or
4. Request additional information or data.
Failure of the DPW to act on an original or revised plan within 30
calendar days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in
accordance with the plan as filed unless such time is extended by
agreement between the applicant and the DPW.
Violations and penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this
section may be punished, under MGL c. 40, § 21D, as a noncriminal
offense, by fines of:
1. First offense: $100.
2. Second offense: $200.
Additional offenses: $300.
Or under MGL c. 40 § 21D, by criminal complaint at the
appropriate venue. Each day or portion thereof during which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. For further
explanation, see §§ 1-109 and 1-110 of these ordinances.
3.
(f)
Severability. The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be
severable. If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this
section or the application thereof to any property owner, establishment,
or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
the other provisions or application of said section to the extent
permitted by law.
(g)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to increase surface and
groundwater quality by eliminating and prohibiting illicit connections
and discharges to the municipal storm drain system.
Section 8-702 is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule
Amendments of the Massachusetts Constitution, the Massachusetts
Home Rule statutes, and the regulations of the Federal Clean Water Act
found at 40 CFR 122.34. The provisions of § 8-702 apply to all property
owners in the Town.
The Department of Public Works (DPW) shall administer and enforce
§ 8-702 and may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the
purpose of this section.
(a)
§ 8-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-702
1:247
Definitions. Unless otherwise defined in this subsection, the terms in
this section correspond to definitions found in the Clean Water Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) and the Massachusetts General Permit for
Stormwater Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The
following definitions apply to this section:
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as it is amended from time to time.
GROUNDWATER — Water beneath the surface of the ground.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyance
which allows an illicit discharge into a storm drain, including without
limitation sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and any
connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether
said connection was previously constructed, permitted, or approved
before the effective date of this section.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Direct or indirect discharge to the storm drain
that is not composed entirely of stormwater, except as exempted in
Subsection (d).
MASSACHUSETTS STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS —
The standards issued by the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), codified in regulations at 310 CMR
10.05(6)(k) through (q), and further defined and specified in the
Massachusetts Stormwater Handbook issued by the DEP. The standards
address stormwater impacts through implementation of performance
standards that reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies
and control the quantity of runoff from a site.
MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM — The system of conveyances
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including
any road with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped
storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or
man-made or -altered drainage channel, reservoir, and other drainage
structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or
operated by the Town.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company,
trust, corporation, agency, authority, department or political
subdivision of the commonwealth or the federal government, to the
extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or agent of such
person.
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface
water runoff and drainage.
UNCONTAMINATED WATER — Water free of toxic or hazardous waste
(as defined in MGL c. 21C and c. 21E, and 310 CMR 30.000 and
40.000), sewage, agricultural, industrial or commercial waste, runoff,
leachate, heated effluent or other matter, whether originating at a point
or nonpoint source.
(b)
§ 8-702 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-702
1:248
Prohibited activities.
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow
to be discharged any contaminated water or nonstormwater
discharge into the municipal storm drain system, into a
watercourse, or into the waters of the commonwealth.
1.
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain
or continue any illicit connection to the municipal storm drain
system, regardless of whether the connection was permissible
under applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of
connection.
2.
Obstruction of municipal storm drain system. No person shall
obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out
of the municipal storm drain system without prior written approval
from the Department of Public Works.
3.
(c)
Exemptions. The following activities and discharges are exempt from
this section:
1. DPW ice and snow control operations;
2. Flow resulting from municipal emergency response activities;
3. Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
Dye testing, provided verbal notification is given to the DPW prior
to the time of the test;
4.
Nonstormwater discharges permitted under an NPDES permit
administered under the authority of the United States
Environmental Protection Agency;
5.
Projects that commenced prior to the effective date of this section,
provided they have all necessary approvals and permits and are
completed within one year from such effective date;
6.
7. Water line flushing;
8. Flow from potable water sources;
Uncontaminated groundwater or uncontaminated pumped
groundwater;
9.
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains, crawl space
pumps, or air conditioning condensation;
10.
Water from sump pumps and other pumps that remove floodwaters
from basements;
11.
Water discharge from irrigation or watering of lawns, trees,
landscaping, and gardens;
12.
(d)
§ 8-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-702
1:249
Water from property management activities, including washing
walkways, patios, house siding, windows, or similar property
management activities;
13.
14. Individual resident car washing;
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water [less than one
part per million (ppm) chlorine], provided the water is allowed to
stand for one week prior to draining and the pool is drained in such
a way as not to cause a nuisance.
15.
Violations and penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this
section may be punished, under MGL c. 40 § 21D, as a noncriminal
offense, by fines of:
1. First offense: $100.
2. Second offense: $200.
Additional offense: $300.
Or under MGL c. 40, § 21D, by criminal complaint at the
appropriate venue. Each day or portion thereof during which a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. For further
explanation, see §§ 1-109 and 1-110 of these ordinances.
3.
(e)
Severability. The provisions of this section are hereby declared to be
severable. If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this
section or the application thereof to any property owner, establishment,
or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
the other provisions or application of said section to the extent
permitted by law.
(f)
§ 8-702 WEYMOUTH CODE § 8-702
1:250
Chapter 9
LICENSES AND PERMITS
§ 8-702 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 8-702
1:251

SECTION 9-100
Licensing Responsibilities
§ 9-101. Assignment of responsibilities.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the
Department of Public Health:
Description Chapter Section
Animal rendering 111 154
Animal stables 111 155
Baths, public 140 51
Bathing suit rentals 140 194ff
Burial 114 45, 47
Dairy products 94 40
Funeral directors 114 49
Garbage removal 111 31A
Ice cream manufacture 94 65I
Livery stable 111 155
Methyl alcohol 94 303A
Milk 94 40
Mobile homes park 140 32B
Motels 140 32B
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the
Inspector of Buildings:
Description Chapter Section
Buildings 143 3, 3A
Elevators 143 62
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Chief of
Police:
Description Chapter Section
Bicycles20 85 11A
Certain work 136 7, 15
Coasting* 85 10A
Excavation in public way* 83 8
20.Editor's Note: MGL c. 85, § 11A, was repealed by St. 2008, c. 525, § 2.
§ 9-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-101
1:253
Description Chapter Section
Firearms 140 121
Gunsmith 140 122
Moving buildings in public
ways*
85 18
Shellfish 130 52
Taxicabs 40 22
* In coordination with the Director of Public Works and Inspector of
Buildings.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Fire
Chief:
Description Chapter Section
Automatic sprinkler
systems
148 27A
Blasting operations 148 19
Explosives, storage,
manufacture, or sale
148 13
Fires, open 48 13
Fireworks 148 39A
Gasoline service stations 148 13
Storage and sale of
gasoline and other
explosives
148 13
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Gas
Inspector:
Description Chapter Section
Gas appliances 143 3N, 3O
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Board
of Licensing Commissioners:
Description Chapter Section
Alcoholic beverages, sale/
manufacture
138 2
Auctioneers 100 2
Automatic amusement devices 140 177A
§ 9-101 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-101
1:254
Description Chapter Section
Automobile "graveyards" 140 54A
Automobiles: Class I, new car
dealer
140 58, 59
Automobiles: Class II, used car
dealer
140 58, 59
Automobiles: Class III, junkyard 140 58, 59
Billiards, pool, sippio table,
bowling alleys
140 177
Board and lodging houses 140 23
Boats (rental) 140 194
Boats: conveyance of
passengers
140 191ff
Body art 111 31
Clubs, associations dispensing
food or beverage to members
140 21E
Coffee and tea houses 140 47
Common victuallers,
restaurants
140 2
Dancing schools 140 185H
Entertainment on common day
of rest, holidays
136 4
Entertainment provided by
innholder or common victualler
140 183A
Ferris wheels 140 186
Food vehicles, lunch carts 140 49
Fortune tellers 140 185I
Furnaces and steam engines 140 115
Hawkers, transient vendors 101 5, 17
Junk collector or dealer 140 54
Lodging houses 140 23, 30
Pawnbrokers 140 70
Picnic groves* 140 188
Pinball machines 140 177A
Sales of articles for charitable
purpose
101 33
Secondhand dealers 140 54
Skating rinks 140 186
Soft drinks 140 21A and 21B
§ 9-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-101
1:255
Description Chapter Section
Theatrical events, public
exhibition
140 181
* License approval subject to recommendation of the Recreation
Department.
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Mayor:
Description Chapter Section
Cable television 166A 3
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Town
Council:
Description Chapter Section
Parking lots 148 56
Pole location permits for utility
wires
166 22
Signs projected over public ways 85 8
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the
Plumbing Inspector:
Description Chapter Section
Plumbing 142 13
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the School
Superintendent:
Description Chapter Section
Children, work permits 149 69
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Town
Clerk:
Description Chapter Section
Dog kennels 140 137A
Dogs, collar licenses 140 137
Fishing, hunting, trapping 131 12
Marriage 207 28
§ 9-101 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-101
1:256
The following licenses or permits under the following provisions of the
Massachusetts General Laws shall be within the jurisdiction of the Wiring
Inspector:
Description Chapter Section
Wiring 143 32
§ 9-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-101
1:257

SECTION 9-200
Food Vendors
§ 9-201. Regulation of food vendors.
License required; violations and penalties. No person shall offer food
for sale to the public in a food service establishment, as hereinafter
defined, unless licensed as a common victualler or an innholder under
the provisions of MGL c. 140, without first obtaining a food vendor's
license under the provisions of this section. Any person who violates
this section shall be liable for a fine of $100 per violation. Each day
of operation without a food vendor's license shall constitute a separate
violation.
(a)
Food service establishments. Food service establishments shall include
any fixed or mobile place, structure or vehicle, whether permanent,
transient or temporary, private, public or nonprofit, that routinely
serves the public or any other eating and drinking establishment or
place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service to the
public on the premises or elsewhere.
(b)
Application. Each applicant for such license shall submit, on forms to
be provided by the Board of Licensing Commissioners, the following
information: name and address of applicant; name and address of place
of business; evidence, in form satisfactory to the Board of Licensing
Commissioners, that the applicant has upon the premises the necessary
implements and facilities for cooking, preparing and furnishing food
to the public; a parking plan; and such other information pertinent to
the license as the Board of Licensing Commissioners shall require. The
Board of Licensing Commissioners may require applicants to submit a
plan showing, if any, the location of fixtures and other facilities and
the general arrangement of the premises, including, in the case of
applications for premises not yet completed, estimates of the cost of the
proposed arrangement and of the facilities indicated on the plan.
(c)
Trash removal. No license shall be issued under this section until
the applicant submits a plan acceptable to the Board of Licensing
Commissioners that establishes procedures and requirements for the
control and elimination of litter. The plan must set forth procedures
to be followed for the pickup and disposal of litter resulting from or
generated by the sale of food under the license.
(d)
Approval. Such license shall not be issued or be valid until it has been
signed by a majority of the Board of Licensing Commissioners. The
Board of Licensing Commissioners may refuse to grant such a license
if, in its opinion, the public good does not require it.
(e)
Term; fee. A food vendor's license shall be valid for a term of one
year from the first day of January until the 31st day of December.
A nonrefundable fee established by the Board of Licensing
(f)
§ 9-201 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-201
1:259
Commissioners in accordance with § 5-305 of these ordinances shall be
submitted with the application for such license.
Suspension and revocation. If the Board of Licensing Commissioners
finds that a licensee ceases to be engaged in the activity licensed
hereunder or fails to maintain upon the premises on which such activity
is licensed the implements and facilities required by this section, the
Board of Licensing Commissioners shall, after due notice and a hearing,
revoke his license. If the licensee at any time conducts his licensed
business in an improper manner, the Board of Licensing
Commissioners, after notice to the licensee and public hearing, may,
upon satisfactory proof thereof, suspend or revoke his license.
(g)
§ 9-201 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-201
1:260
SECTION 9-300
Hawkers and Peddlers
§ 9-301. Regulation of hawkers and peddlers.
Licensed activity. No person shall conduct the activity of a hawker
or peddler unless licensed in compliance with MGL c. 101 and the
provisions of this section.
(a)
License required for certain food peddling. No person shall go from
place to place in this Town selling or bartering or carrying or exposing
for sale or barter any fruits, vegetables or fish in or from any cart,
wagon or other vehicle, or in any other manner, without a license
therefor from the Board of Licensing Commissioners; provided,
however, that this subsection shall not apply to any person who sells
only fruits or vegetables raised or produced by himself or his family or
fish which is obtained by his own labor or the labor of his family.
(b)
Sale of articles enumerated by General Laws. No hawker or peddler
shall offer for sale any of the articles enumerated in MGL c. 101,
§ 17, until the name and residence of the hawker or peddler has been
recorded in writing with the Weymouth Police Department.
(c)
Identification on vehicle. Every vehicle or receptacle used by a licensee
as a conveyance for articles offered or exposed for sale shall have
attached thereto, on each side, an identification plate or placard
bearing his license and the number and date of expiration of the
license.
(d)
Interference with traffic. A hawker or peddler shall not engage in
conduct of its business in such a manner as to obstruct or interfere with
the flow of traffic, the maintenance of public ways, or the removal of
snow.
(e)
Signs. A hawker or peddler may not display signs without first obtaining
a permit for such signs from the Building Inspector.
(f)
Nonapplicability. The provisions of this section regulating hawkers and
peddlers shall not apply to the sale or barter or offering for sale or
barter or exposing thereof of goods or wares at parades, celebrations
or other special events conducted on public property or within a public
way when the sponsor of the parade, celebration or event has secured
the written consent of the appropriate municipality and when such
hawker or peddler participates with the express written consent of
the sponsor. While engaged in the conduct of the business under the
provisions of this subsection, the hawker or peddler should at all times
submit, as part of any permit application or request for permission,
a list of all hawkers and peddlers which the sponsor has sanctioned
to participate in said event. The appropriate municipal authority, upon
granting such permit or permission, shall forward a copy of the list to
the Town Clerk and Chief of Police.
(g)
§ 9-301 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-301
1:261
Term of license; fees. Said licenses, unless sooner revoked by the Board
of Licensing Commissioners, shall expire one year after grant thereof,
and each resident so licensed shall pay therefor a fee as set by the
Board of Licensing Commissioners in accordance with § 5-305 of these
ordinances.
(h)
Crying of wares; condition of vehicles. No person hawking, peddling
or carrying or exposing any article for sale shall cry his wares to the
disturbance of the peace and comfort of the inhabitants of the Town,
nor otherwise than in vehicles and receptacles which are neat and clean
and do not leak.
(i)
Badges. Every hawker and peddler licensed by the Board of Licensing
Commissioners shall be assigned a number and shall be provided by
said Board of Licensing Commissioners with a badge, which shall be
conspicuously worn. Whoever neglects to wear, or wears such badge
without authority, shall be punished by a fine of $300 in the manner
provided in § 1-109 of these ordinances.
(j)
Certification of weighing and measuring devices. No person shall be
registered or assigned a badge or number plate under the provisions
of these ordinances relating to hawkers and peddlers until a certificate
from the Sealer of Weights and Measures is filed with the Board of
Licensing Commissioners stating that all weighing and measuring
devices intended to be used by such person have been duly inspected
and sealed as required by law. The use or possession by such person
with intent to use of any false or unsealed weighing or measuring
devices shall be sufficient cause for the revocation of his license or the
cancellation of his registration.
(k)
Conflicting with other laws. Nothing in these ordinances shall be
construed as conflicting with any license issued under the authority of
the commonwealth.
(l)
Revocation of license. Any license granted under these ordinances or
any ordinance amendatory or additional thereto may be revoked by the
officer or agency granting the same.
(m)
§ 9-301 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-301
1:262
SECTION 9-400
Canvassers, Solicitors and Outdoor Businesses
§ 9-401. Regulation of canvassers and solicitors.
Consent of owner and registration required; registration information.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a
canvasser or solicitor calling at residences without the previous
consent of the occupant, for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales,
subscriptions or business of any kind or seeking information or
donations, without first having registered with the Mayor or with
such board or officer designated by the Mayor.
1.
The registrant shall give:
a. His/Her complete identification;
b. His/Her signature;
c. The name of his/her employer;
The nature of the products or services in which he/she is
interested;
d.
The names of the manufacturers of such products or the
organization which he/she is representing;
e.
f. The proposed method of operation in the Town.
2.
(a)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER — Any person who, for himself or another
person, firm or corporation, travels by foot, automobile or any other
type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from
street to street taking or attempting to lease or to take orders for retail
sale of goods, wares, merchandise, services or donations, including
without limitation selling, distributing, exposing for sale or soliciting
orders for magazines, books, periodicals or other articles of a
commercial nature, the contracting of all home improvements or for
services to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual
has, carries or exposes for retail sale a sample of the subject of such
sale or whether he is collecting advance payment on such retail sales.
(b)
Exceptions. This section should not be construed to prevent route
salesmen or other persons having established customers to whom they
make periodic deliveries from calling upon such customers.
(c)
Registration fee. Each registrant shall pay to the board or officer as
designated by the Mayor a registration fee as established by said board
or officer in accordance with § 5-305 of these ordinances for a period
expiring one year from the date of said registration.
(d)
§ 9-401 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-401
1:263
§ 9-402. Outdoor business licenses.
Issuance of certificate; nighttime solicitation; carrying and display of
certificate.
Each applicant who shows evidence of good character and pays the
fee provided for herein shall be furnished a certificate indicating
that he or she has registered and showing the dates covered by
such registration, said certificate also bearing the registrant's
signature.
1.
Such registration certificate shall expressly require and be issued
only upon the condition that each person who intends to solicit or
canvass in the Town after the hour of 6:00 p.m. shall, on every
such day, inform the Weymouth Police Department of the streets or
neighborhood in which the intended solicitation or canvassing is to
occur.
2.
Each person shall, at all times while soliciting or canvassing in the
Town, carry upon his person the registration certificate, and the
same shall be exhibited by such registrant whenever he is required
to do so by any police officer or by any person solicited.
3.
(e)
Nonapplicability. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
officers or employees of the Town, county, state or federal government,
or any subdivision thereof, when on official business, or to a person
soliciting solely for religious, charitable or political purposes; nor shall
this section apply to neighborhood youth and students who solicit for
the shoveling of snow or cutting of lawns.
(f)
Revocation of registration. Any such registration may be revoked by the
Mayor or the Chief of Police because of any violation by the registrant
of this section or of any other ordinance of the Town or any state
or federal law or whenever the registrant shall cease to possess the
qualifications and character required in this section for the original
registration.
(g)
Misrepresentation prohibited. No solicitor or canvasser licensed or
exempted from license may use any plan, scheme or ruse which
misrepresents the true status or mission of the person making the call
in order to gain admission to a prospective buyer's home, office or other
establishment with the purpose of making a sale of consumer goods or
services.
(h)
Penalties. Any person who commits an unlawful act, described in this
section, or violates any of the provisions of this section or carries on the
business after such person's registration is revoked shall be punished
for each offense by a fine of not more than $300 per offense.
(i)
Unless in a building, no business, professional or artistic enterprise
shall be conducted without first having obtained an outdoor business
license from the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
(a)
§ 9-401 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-402
1:264
The provisions of this section shall not apply to: amusements licensed
under MGL c. 140; agricultural enterprises; sale of fruits and
vegetables; flower and garden products and supplies when displayed
out of doors but sold from a building on the property maintained
primarily for that purpose; display of vehicles, including rented or
leased, from a building on the property maintained primarily for that
purpose; recreational activities; sporting events; building supplies
where displayed out of doors but sold from a building on the property
maintained primarily for that purpose; sale of newspapers and religious
publications; licensed hunting and fishing activities; appropriately
authorized activities on Town-owned property; construction and
maintenance of buildings, property, roads, sidewalks, etc.; activities of
a restaurant when properly licensed; transportation activities; fueling
and refueling activities; licensed kennels and stables; communications
activities; unauthorized activities of a properly licensed hawker or
peddler; activities of public utilities; collection and disposal of waste; or
the display of merchandise when displayed out of doors but sold from a
building maintained primarily for this purpose.
(b)
No person shall be relieved or exempted from the provisions of this
section by reason of temporary association with any local dealer, trader
or merchant, or by lease of all or part of a parcel of land, or by
conducting his business in connection with, or as part of, the business
of, or in the name of, any local dealer, trader or merchant.
(c)
The fee for an outdoor business license shall be $400 annually. The fee
for an outdoor business license shall be $200 when issued after October
15. Licenses issued under this section shall expire on December 31
annually. The Board of Licensing Commissioners may, under such
conditions as it may deem proper, grant to any organization engaged in
charitable work, a special license authorizing it, for a particular time
period not to exceed a total of four days, to be stated in the license,
and for a charitable purpose stated in such license, to conduct under its
control an outdoor business, professional, or artistic enterprise for a fee
of $25, provided that the applicant demonstrates a substantial benefit
to the charity and to the Town. The Board of Licensing Commissioners
may issue a special license for charitable purposes authorizing the sale
of Christmas trees for a period not to exceed 45 days.
(d)
The Board of Licensing Commissioners may make regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this section for clarifying the
provisions of this section and to describe the methods, conditions,
and form of application, and may place reasonable restrictions on any
license granted under this section when, in its opinion, it is in the best
interest of the Town of Weymouth to do so.
(e)
Copies of all permits issued hereunder shall be forwarded to the Chief
of the Weymouth Police Department, where they shall be kept on file for
enforcement purposes.
(f)
§ 9-402 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-402
1:265
Penalties. Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $300. Any violation of this section may
be enforced by the methods provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
(g)
§ 9-402 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-402
1:266
SECTION 9-500
Used Car Dealers
§ 9-501. Regulation of Class II licensees.
§ 9-502. Regulation of Class III licensees.
Submission of plot plan required. All applicants for a Class II used car
dealer's license under MGL c. 140, § 59, shall submit to the Board of
Licensing Commissioners a plot plan of the premises to be licensed, in
triplicate, said plan to show dimensions of the premises to be licensed,
location of existing structure or structures, names of abutting owners
of land according to latest records of the Assessor's Office of the Town
of Weymouth and location of the area where motor vehicles are to be
displayed, kept or stored.
(a)
Adequate repair facilities required. All applicants for licenses must
have adequate facilities to repair, maintain and service motor vehicles.
(b)
Paving of display areas. All areas on the licensed premises that are to
be used for display of motor vehicles offered for sale shall be paved or
have a macadam surface.
(c)
Regulation of number of motor vehicles. The Board of Licensing
Commissioners shall regulate the maximum number of motor vehicles
that may be kept, stored, placed or maintained on the licensed
premises.
(d)
Suspension or revocation of license. Violation of any of the foregoing
provisions shall be cause for suspension or revocation of the license
granted by the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
(e)
Submission of plot plan required. All applicants for a Class III license
under MGL c. 140, § 59, shall submit to the Board of Licensing
Commissioners a plot plan of the premises to be licensed, in triplicate,
said plan to show dimensions of the premises, location of existing
structure or structures and names of all abutting owners of land
according to latest records of the Assessor's Office.
(a)
Adequate repair facilities required. No motor vehicle shall be kept,
stored, placed or maintained on the licensed premises within 150 feet
from the street or property line.
(b)
Fencing. The Board of Licensing Commissioners may require the holder
of a Class III License to erect a fence, not less than four feet high,
around the whole or any portion of the licensed premises if such is
deemed necessary and in the best interests of the public good.
(c)
Regulation of number of motor vehicles. The Board of Licensing
Commissioners shall regulate the maximum number of motor vehicles
that may be kept, stored, placed or maintained on the licensed
premises.
(d)
§ 9-501 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-502
1:267
Suspension or revocation of license. Violation of any of the foregoing
subsections shall be cause for suspension or revocation by the Board of
Licensing Commissioners of the license granted.
(e)
§ 9-502 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-502
1:268
SECTION 9-600
Junk and Precious Metals Dealers
§ 9-601. Regulation of junk dealers and dealers in precious metals.
Powers of Board of Licensing Commissioners regarding licensing and
control of junk dealers.
The Board of Licensing Commissioners may license suitable
persons to be dealers in and keepers of shops for the purchase, sale
or barter of junk, old metals or secondhand articles in the Town.
1.
The Board may also license suitable persons as junk collectors to
collect, by purchase or otherwise, junk, old metals and secondhand
articles from place to place in the Town.
2.
The Board may provide that such collectors shall display badges
upon their persons or upon their vehicle, or upon both, when
engaged in collecting junk, old metals or secondhand articles, and
may prescribe the design thereof.
3.
The Board may also provide that such shops and all articles of
merchandise therein, and any place, vehicle or receptacle used for
the collecting or keeping of the articles aforesaid, may be examined
at all times by the Board of Licensing Commissioners or by any
person by it authorized thereto.
4.
(a)
Licensing and regulation of dealers in precious metals.
No person shall collect, deal in or keep a shop for the purchase,
sale or barter of precious metals in any building or place within the
limits of the Town without a license from the Board of Licensing
Commissioners.
1.
For the purpose of this subsection, the term "precious metals"
shall include any precious metal, such as gold, silver or platinum,
without regard to the form or amount of such precious metal
or whether or not such precious metal is an incidental or minor
component of some other article such as jewelry, bric-a-brac,
statuary or the like.
2.
The Board of Licensing Commissioners may license suitable
persons to be dealers in and keepers of shops for the purchase,
sale or barter of precious metals at such places within the Town
as may be designated in such licenses under such conditions and
restrictions as are prescribed in this subsection, which shall be
incorporated in every such license. The fee for granting such
license shall be established by the Board of Licensing
Commissioners in accordance with § 5-305.
3.
No dealer or keeper of a shop, as described in this subsection, shall
directly or indirectly make any purchase or receive by way of barter
4.
(b)
§ 9-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-601
1:269
or exchange from a minor knowing or having reason to believe him
to be such.
No item described in this subsection, purchased or received, shall
be sold or altered in appearance, form or substance, or any other
means of disposing until a period of at least 30 days from the date
of its purchase, except when such period is waived by the Chief of
Police or his designee. For numismatic metals there will be a sevenday
hold period before they can be sold or altered in appearance.
5.
Every such licensee shall complete and electronically submit the
required audit sheet to the Chief of Police, or his designee, on
a daily basis, and on an approved form provided by the Police
Department, the following information: a legible and correct list
containing an accurate and complete description of all precious
metals purchased and the prices paid for said items during the
preceding day.
Included with this information will be the following: name, address,
date of birth, license number and phone number from whom
purchased, along with what identification was presented. A
Massachusetts driver's license, Massachusetts identification card
or a valid ID from any other state is acceptable. A photocopy of
said identification shall be copied on the provided form. Additional
information shall be the time of day when purchased and the
number of items purchased. The licensee shall also supply a
colored photograph of each purchased item that is identifiable,
unique or unusual. Also, any engraved writing or printing on said
goods shall be noted on the reporting form. The licensee shall
also supply a colored copy of said Massachusetts driver's license,
Massachusetts identification card or valid ID of the seller. The
required audit sheet shall be transmitted electronically to the Chief
of Police, or his designee, including all information, forms and
colored copies of said identification, using the format that is
approved by the Chief of Police.
6.
Every keeper of a shop licensed as provided in this subsection
shall put in some suitable and conspicuous place on his shop a
sign having his name and occupation legibly described thereon and
shall keep a book in which shall be written in English, at the time of
every purchase, a description of the precious metal so purchased,
the name, age and residence of the person from whom purchased
and the day and hour when such purchase was made. Such book
and all articles purchased shall at all times be available for the
inspection of the Chief of Police or his designee.
7.
Every dealer in precious metals shall have suitable scales approved
by the Town's Sealer of Weights and Measures. Said scales shall be
annually tested and sealed.
8.
§ 9-601 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-601
1:270
No dealer or keeper of a shop, as described in this subsection,
shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive by way of
barter or exchanging any of the articles of a minor, knowingly or
having reason to believe him/her to be such.
9.
Whoever, not being licensed as required by this subsection, deals
in, keeps a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of precious metals
or whoever, being licensed, is a dealer in any place or manner other
than that designated in his license or whoever, after notice to him
that his license has been revoked or whoever violates any rule,
regulation or restriction contained in his license shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200, and each day of
such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
10.
§ 9-601 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-601
1:271

SECTION 9-700
Medical Marijuana
§ 9-701. Regulation of medical marijuana.
Statement of purpose. The citizens of Massachusetts voted in
November of 2012 to declare there should be no punishment under
state law for qualifying patients and health care professionals, personal
caregivers for patients or registered marijuana dispensary agents for
the medical use of marijuana.
The Town of Weymouth aims to abide by the aim of this state law (105
CMR 725.000) and ensure that registered marijuana dispensaries abide
by further regulations to ensure the public health and public safety of
our residents.
Now, therefore, it is the intention of the Town of Weymouth to regulate
the sale of medical marijuana.
(a)
Authority. This section is promulgated pursuant to the authority
granted to the Weymouth Board of Licensing Commissioners in Chapter
9 of the Town Ordinances.
(b)
Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words shall
have the following meanings. Terms not herein defined shall be used as
defined in 105 CMR 725.000.
BOARD OF LICENSING COMMISSIONERS — The five-member board
established pursuant to § 3-215 of the Weymouth Code of Ordinances.
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the
owner or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise
in charge of said establishment.
CARD HOLDER — A registered qualifying patient, a personal caregiver,
or a dispensary agent of a registered marijuana dispensary who has
been issued and possesses a valid registration card by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
DISPENSARY AGENT — A board member, director, employee,
executive, manager, or volunteer of a registered marijuana dispensary,
who is at least 21 years of age and who has received approval from
the state under 105 CMR 725.030. "Employee" includes a consultant
or contractor who provides on-site services to a registered marijuana
dispensary related to the cultivation, harvesting, preparation,
packaging, storage, testing, or dispensing of marijuana.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
trust or other organized group of individuals that uses the services of
one or more employees.
(c)
§ 9-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-701
1:273
HARDSHIP CULTIVATION REGISTRATION — A registration issued to
a registered qualifying patient under the requirements of 105 CMR
725.035.
LICENSE HOLDER — Any person engaged in the sale of marijuana who
applies for and receives a license or any person who is required to apply
for a license pursuant to this section, or his or her business agent.
LICENSE TO OPERATE A REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY
(hereafter referred to as "LICENSE") — A license issued by the Board
of Licensing Commissioners, to be renewed annually, that permits a
registered marijuana dispensary to operate in the Town of Weymouth.
MARIJUANA — All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether
growing or not; the seeds thereof; and resin extracted from any part of
the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the
mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake
made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture,
salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except
the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil, or cake or the sterilized seed
of the plant which is incapable of germination. The term also includes
marijuana-infused products (MIPs) except where the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
MARIJUANA-INFUSED PRODUCT (MIP) — A product infused with
marijuana that is intended for use or consumption, including but not
limited to edible products, ointments, aerosols, oils, and tinctures.
These products, when created or sold by a registered marijuana
dispensary, shall not be considered a food or a drug as defined in MGL
c. 94, § 1.
PARAPHERNALIA — "Drug paraphernalia" as defined in MGL c. 94C,
§ 1.
PERSONAL CAREGIVER — A person, registered by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health, who is at least 21 years old, who has
agreed to assist with a registered's medical use of marijuana, and is not
the registered qualifying patient's certifying physician. An employee
of a hospice provider, nursing, or medical facility or a visiting nurse,
personal care attendant, or home health aide providing care to a
qualifying patient may serve as a personal caregiver, including to
patients under 18 years of age as a second caregiver.
QUALIFYING PATIENT — A Massachusetts resident 18 years of age or
older who has been diagnosed by a Massachusetts licensed certifying
physician as having a debilitating medical condition, or a
Massachusetts resident under 18 years of age who has been diagnosed
by two Massachusetts licensed certifying physicians, at least one of
whom is a board-certified pediatrician or board-certified pediatric
subspecialist, as having a debilitating medical condition that is also a
life-limiting illness, subject to 105 CMR 725.010(J).
§ 9-701 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-701
1:274
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (RMD) — A not-for-profit
entity registered under 105 CMR 725.100 that acquires, cultivates,
possesses, processes (including development of related products such
as edible MIPs, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers,
transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana,
products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational
materials to registered qualifying patients or their Ns. Unless otherwise
specified, "registered marijuana dispensary" refers to the site(s) of
dispensing, cultivation, and preparation of marijuana.
REGISTRATION CARD — An identification card issued by the
Department, valid for one year from the date of issue, to a registered
qualifying patient, personal caregiver, or dispensary agent. The
registration card verifies either that a certifying physician has provided
a written certification to the qualifying patient and the patient has
been registered with the Department; that a patient has designated
the individual as a personal caregiver; that a patient has been granted
a hardship cultivation registration; or that a dispensary agent has
been registered with the Department and is authorized to work at a
registered marijuana dispensary. The registration card allows access
into appropriate elements of a Department-supported, interoperable
database in which detailed information regarding certifications and
possession criteria are stored. The registration card identifies for the
Department and law enforcement authorities, those individuals who are
exempt from Massachusetts criminal and civil penalties for the medical
use of marijuana in compliance with 105 CMR 725.000 and MGL c. 369.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may
select a marijuana product without assistance from a dispensary agent
or store personnel.
SIXTY-DAY SUPPLY — That amount of marijuana, or equivalent amount
of marijuana in MIPs, that a registered qualifying patient would
reasonably be expected to need over a period of 60 calendar days for
his or her personal medical use, which is 10 ounces, subject to 105 CMR
725.010(I).
SMOKING — The lighting of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco
product or possessing a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other tobacco
or non-tobacco product designed to be combusted and inhaled.
WRITTEN CERTIFICATION — A form submitted to the Department by a
Massachusetts licensed certifying physician, describing the qualifying
patient's pertinent symptoms, specifying the patient's debilitating
medical condition, and stating that in the physician's professional
opinion the potential benefits of the medical use of marijuana would
likely outweigh the health risks for the patient.
License to operate a registered marijuana dispensary (RMD).
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute marijuana or marijuana
products within the Town of Weymouth without first obtaining
a license to operate a registered marijuana dispensary issued
1.
(d)
§ 9-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-701
1:275
annually by the Board of Licensing Commissioners. Only RMDs
with a permanent, nonmobile location in Weymouth, meeting
zoning restrictions, are eligible to apply for a license to maintain a
supply of marijuana or marijuana products at the specified location
in Weymouth.
As part of the license application process, the applicant will submit
the detailed summary of operating policies and procedures for
the RMD as submitted with its Phase II application per 105 CMR
725.100, including, but not limited to, provisions for security,
prevention of diversion, storage of marijuana, transportation of
marijuana, inventory procedures, procedures for quality control
and testing of product for potential contaminants, procedures for
maintaining confidentiality as required by law, personnel policies,
dispensing procedures, recordkeeping procedures, plans for
patient education, and any plans for patient or personal caregiver
home delivery.
2.
As part of the license application process, the applicant will be
provided with this section. Each applicant is required to sign a
statement declaring that the applicant has read this section and
that the applicant is responsible for instructing any and all
dispensary agents who will be responsible for sales.
3.
Each applicant is required to provide proof of a current RMD
registration, issued by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
before a license can be issued.
4.
As a condition of license issuance, the RMD agrees to provide to
the Town of Weymouth a copy of its certificate of registration issued
by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health (DPH), annual
renewals thereafter, any changes to the business as described in
105 CMR 725.100(F) and current written operating procedures
required in 105 CMR 725.105.
5.
The term of the license shall be annual and, regardless of when
applied for, will expire on December 31 of each year.
6.
There will be an initial application fee and an annual RMD license
fee. The fees shall be set in accordance with Weymouth Code of
Ordinances § 5-305 after review and consent of the Mayor.
7.
At any given time, there shall be no more than one RMD license
issued in Weymouth.
8.
License holders agree that the RMD will comply with the standard
operating hours of 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. and is subject to review
by the Board of Licensing Commissioners.
9.
A separate license is required for each retail establishment selling
marijuana and/or marijuana products and for each location, not
10.
§ 9-701 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-701
1:276
being the same address as the retail establishment, where the RMD
is approved by the state to cultivate marijuana or prepare MIPs.
11. The RMD license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place.
A license is nontransferable. A new owner of a registered
marijuana dispensary must apply for a new license. No new license
will be issued unless and until all outstanding penalties incurred by
the previous license holder are satisfied in full.
12.
RMDs are prohibited from selling alcohol, tobacco products and/or
nicotine delivery products and alcohol.
13.
14. No applicant is permitted to be a Massachusetts lottery dealer.
Issuance of and maintaining a license shall be conditioned on an
applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic inspections of the
licensed establishment to ensure compliance with this section and
105 CMR 725.000. Inspections may be performed by the Weymouth
Police Department, Weymouth Health Department or other
Weymouth departments deemed necessary.
15.
Issuance of and maintaining a license shall be conditioned on an
applicant's ongoing compliance with current Commonwealth of
Massachusetts requirements and policies regarding marijuana
sales.
16.
RMDs must fully comply with all security requirements under 105
CMR 725.110, including, but not limited to:
Allow only registered qualifying patients, personal caregivers,
dispensary agents or approved vendors to enter the premises.
a.
b. Keep all locks and security equipment in good working order.
Ensure the outside perimeter of the RMD is sufficiently lit to
facilitate surveillance.
c.
d. "DO NOT ENTER" signage at all limited-access areas.
Duress alarm, panic alarm or holdup alarm connected to local
public safety authorities.
e.
Twenty-four-hour video surveillance with recording inside the
RMD, at all points of entry and in the parking lot. All
surveillance equipment must be commercial-grade and able to
operate during power outages.
f.
17.
No license holder shall allow any dispensary agent to sell
marijuana or marijuana products until such dispensary agent reads
this section regarding the sale of marijuana and signs a statement,
a copy of which will be placed on file in the office of the license
holder and on file at the Weymouth Office of Licensing and
Inspections.
18.
§ 9-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-701
1:277
Dispensary agents must present their registration card to any law
enforcement official or municipal agent who questions the agent
concerning their marijuana-related activities.
19.
A license will not be renewed if the license holder has failed to pay
all fines issued and the time period to appeal the fines has expired
and/or has not satisfied any outstanding license suspensions.
20.
Marijuana sales by registered marijuana dispensaries.
No person shall sell marijuana from any location other than an
RMD that possesses a valid license.
1.
RMDs shall only permit dispensary agents to transport marijuana
or MIPs on their behalf, whether between dispensaries, dispensary
sites, or to registered qualifying patients or personal caregivers,
and shall follow Massachusetts Department of Public Health
guidelines found in 105 CMR 725.110(E).
2.
Licensed RMDs must deliver medical marijuana and medial
marijuana infused products to any and all cardholders within the
borders of the Town of Weymouth.
3.
Registered marijuana dispensaries shall permit entry to the
registered marijuana dispensary, to specifically engage in activity
expressly or by necessary implication permitted by MGL c. 369 and
105 CMR 725.000, to only registered qualifying patients, personal
caregivers, dispensary agents, persons authorized by 105 CMR
725.105(P) and, subject to the requirements of 105 CMR
725.110(C)(4), outside vendors, contractors and visitors.
4.
Registered marijuana dispensaries shall limit entry to their
"limited-access areas" to dispensary agents and outside vendors,
contractors and visitors meeting the requirements found at 105
CMR 725.110(C).
5.
Dispensary agents shall verify the registration card of the card
holder by means of a valid government-issued photographic
identification. No separate identification is required for valid
registration cards bearing a photograph of the holder.
6.
All retail sales of marijuana must be face-to-face between the
dispensary agent and the card holder and occur at the licensed
location.
7.
No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, any free
samples of marijuana or marijuana products.
8.
Registered marijuana dispensaries are prohibited from using selfservice
displays, vending machines or nonresidential "roll-yourown"
machines.
9.
(e)
§ 9-701 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-701
1:278
The owner or other person in charge of a registered marijuana
dispensary shall conspicuously post signage at all entrances
indicating that the entry to persons not possessing a valid
registration card is prohibited. The notice shall be no smaller than
8.5 inches by 11 inches and shall be posted conspicuously in the
retail establishment or other place in such a manner so that it may
be readily seen by a person approaching the registered marijuana
dispensary.
10.
Dispensary agents.
Prior to any dispensary agent being allowed to work at a licensed
RMD in Weymouth, the owner or business agent must submit to the
Board of Licensing Commissioners a copy of the dispensary agent's
registration card issued by the Department of Public Health.
1.
The RMD must notify the Board of Licensing Commissioners no
more than one business day after a dispensary agent ceases to be
associated with the RMD.
2.
(f)
Registration card holders.
A qualifying patient, personal caregiver or a dispensary agent must
carry his or her registration card at all times while in possession of
marijuana.
1.
A registered qualifying patient with a hardship cultivation
registration, or his or her personal caregiver(s), must abide by the
provisions of 105 CMR 725.035.
2.
(g)
Marijuana sales by individuals prohibited.
The sale of marijuana by any person outside of a registered
marijuana dispensary, including card holders and dispensary agent
permit holders, is prohibited and shall be punishable in accordance
with all applicable state and local laws.
1.
The use of marijuana by persons who are not card holders,
including personal caregivers who are card holders, shall be
punishable in accordance with applicable state and local laws.
2.
(h)
Marijuana possession.
A card holder must present his or her registration card to any
law enforcement official who questions the patient or caregiver
regarding use of marijuana.
1.
A card holder must not possess an amount of marijuana that
exceeds his/her sixty-day supply.
2.
Growing marijuana is prohibited except for those possessing a valid
hardship cultivation registration issued by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
3.
(i)
§ 9-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-701
1:279
Marijuana use.
The smoking of any marijuana is prohibited in locations governed
by the Massachusetts Smoke-Free Workplace Law (MGL c. 270,
§ 22) and by any Weymouth regulations, ordinances or policies that
further ban smoking.
1.
The use of marijuana by all persons, including card holders, is
prohibited in public schools, on public school grounds and on
public school buses, with the exception of emergency shelter
operations in Town schools and buildings. During shelter events,
marijuana will be treated as any other medicine and be kept in a
secure location and made available to the card holder as needed.
Marijuana should be used outdoors unless the card holder/
occupant of the shelter is not mobile.
2.
(j)
Violations.
License holder.
It shall be the responsibility of the license holder, his or her
business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this
section pertaining to his or her distribution of marijuana and/or
marijuana products. The violator may receive:
a. In the case of a first violation, a fine of $300.
In the case of a second violation within 24 months of the date
of the current violation, a fine of $300 and the license shall be
suspended for seven consecutive business days.
b.
In the case of three or more violations within a twenty-fourmonth
period, a fine of $300 and the license or permit shall be
suspended for 30 consecutive business days.
c.
1.
Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this section shall
result in the suspension of the license to operate for 30 consecutive
business days.
2.
In addition to the monetary fines set above, any license holder or
permit holder who engages in the sale or distribution of marijuana
or marijuana products while his or her license or permit is
suspended shall be subject to the suspension or revocation of all
Weymouth-issued permits and licenses.
3.
The Board of Licensing Commissioners shall provide notice of the
intent to suspend a license, which notice shall contain the reasons
therefor and establish a time and date for a hearing, which date
shall be no earlier than seven days after the date of said notice.
The license holder or its business agent shall have an opportunity
to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of the Town of
Weymouth's decision and the reasons therefor in writing. After a
hearing, the Board of Licensing Commissioners shall suspend the
4.
(k)
§ 9-701 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-701
1:280
license if it finds that a violation of this section or 105 CMR 725.000
occurred. For purposes of such suspensions, the Board of Licensing
Commissioners shall make the determination notwithstanding any
separate criminal or noncriminal proceedings brought in court
hereunder or under the Massachusetts General Laws for the same
offense. All marijuana and marijuana products shall be removed
from the retail establishment upon suspension of the license.
Failure to remove all marijuana and marijuana products shall
constitute a separate violation of this section.
Qualifying patients or personal caregivers.
1. A qualifying patient or personal caregiver who violates
Subsections (i) and (j) of this section shall be subject to a
penalty of:
a. First offense: $100 for each violation.
b. Second offense: $200 for each violation.
c. Third offense: $300 for each violation.
Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this section may be penalized by the
noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, or
by filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue.
Each day a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(l)
Enforcement.
Enforcement of this section shall be by the Board of Licensing
Commissioners, Weymouth Police Department, Weymouth Health
Department or any other agents of the Town of Weymouth.
Any resident who desires to register a complaint pursuant to this
section may do so by contacting the Board of Licensing Commissioners
or its designated agent(s) and they shall investigate.
(m)
Severability. If any provision of this section is declared invalid or
unenforceable, the other provisions shall not be affected thereby but
shall continue in full force and effect.
(n)
(o) Effective date. This section shall take effect August 6, 2014.
§ 9-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 9-701
1:281
Chapter 10
HUMAN RESOURCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Offices, officials and multiple-member
bodies — See Ch. 3.
Administrative organization — See Ch. 4.
§ 9-701 WEYMOUTH CODE § 9-701
1:282
SECTION 10-100
Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual
§ 10-101. Authority and responsibility.
The Director of Human Resources shall establish, maintain and keep
current a Human Resources Policy and Procedures Manual which shall
address all aspects of the relationship between the Town as employer and
the individuals who are the employees of the Town.
§ 10-102. Amendments and revisions.
§ 10-103. Distribution of Manual and changes/revisions.
The Director of Human Resources shall provide one copy of the Human
Resources Policy and Procedures Manual to the head of each office, agency,
division and department of the Town.
The Director of Human Resources shall provide one copy of each change or
revision made in the Human Resources Policy and Procedures Manual to the
head of each office, agency, division and department of the Town forthwith
following its approval by the Mayor.
The head of each office, agency, division and department of the Town shall
make its copy of the Human Resources Policy and Procedures Manual
available to Town employees upon request and shall, upon receipt, post
a copy of each change made in a place where it can readily be seen by
employees of the office, agency, division or department.
Notice. The Director of Human Resources shall post notice of any
proposed change or revision to the Human Resources Policy and
Procedures Manual on the Town bulletin boards and in other
conspicuous places in the Town where Town employees are likely to see
the notice, and copies of the proposed change or revision, or the places
at which copies of the proposed change or revision are available for
distribution.
(a)
Hearing. Not less than seven days nor more than 14 days following the
date the notice has been posted of a proposed change or revision to
the Human Resources Policy and Procedures Manual, the Director of
Human Resources shall hold a hearing at which employees (and the
public) shall have the opportunity to express their views with respect to
the proposed change or revision.
(b)
Review by the Mayor. The Director of Human Resources shall submit
a copy of any change or revision to the Policy and Procedures Manual
to the Mayor and a summary of any comments, or testimony received
at the hearing held concerning such proposed change or revision.
The Mayor shall, forthwith, approve or reject the proposed change or
revision.
(c)
§ 10-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-104
1:283
§ 10-104. Suspension and removal of Town employees.
Unless some other procedure is made for an employee in the Weymouth
Home Rule Charter, or by the provisions of a collective bargaining
agreement to which such employee is subject, or by Civil Service Law or
other applicable law, the discipline and termination of an employee shall
follow the guidelines prescribed in this section.
§ 10-105. Discharge for violations of Town policies and procedures.
§ 10-106. Dismissal for cause.
§ 10-107. Appeal/Grievance process.
In the event that an employee becomes subject to an unfavorable
employment action, the employee may file a written grievance with the
Mayor. The Mayor will review the employee's grievance and issue a written
response within a period not to exceed 10 days from receipt of the
grievance. The decision of the Mayor is final.
Violations of Town policies and procedures may subject the employee to
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
(a)
In the event that such a violation would subject an employee to
termination, the employee will be suspended with pay pending an
investigation of the incident.
(b)
An investigation of the incident will be jointly conducted by the
department head and the Director of Human Resources.
(c)
The employee may appeal the findings of the investigation by filing a
written grievance with the Mayor.
(d)
An employee may be dismissed for his/her inability to adequately
perform his/her job.
(a)
The employee will be given the opportunity to address performance
deficiency, through a remedial action process.
(b)
At a minimum, the employee will be given a verbal warning, a formal
written warning and a one-day suspension with pay before any
termination action is taken.
(c)
The employee may appeal the outcome of this process by filing a written
grievance with the Mayor.
(d)
§ 10-104 WEYMOUTH CODE § 10-107
1:284
Chapter 11
PUBLIC HEALTH
§ 10-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-107
1:285

ARTICLE 11-100
Public Health Laws, Ordinances and Regulations
§ 11-101. Violation of Health Department laws, ordinances and
regulations.
Provisions subject to noncriminal enforcement. Violation of the
following subsections may be enforced in the manner provided in MGL
c. 40, § 21D, and, at the discretion of the enforcing person, by either
a warning or a citation upon the first offense. Each day on which
a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense. For the
purpose of this section, the specific penalty which is to apply for
violation of each such subsection shall be as listed below, and the
municipal officers or employees whose titles are listed under each
subsection shall be deemed to be the enforcing officer for each such
subsection:
Health Department Regulation No. 1: Renting a Dwelling Unit Without
Certification.
Penalty: $20.
Enforcement personnel: Health Department inspectors as designated
by the Director of Health.
State Sanitary Code, Chapter II, 105 CMR 410.602: Maintenance of
Areas Free from Garbage and Rubbish.
Penalty: $20.
Enforcement personnel: Health Department inspectors as designated
by the Director of Health.
Massachusetts General Laws c. 111, §§ 122 and 123: Nuisances and
Failure to Abate a Nuisance.
Penalty: $20.
Enforcement personnel: Health Department inspectors as designated
by the Director of Health.
State Sanitary Code, Chapter II, 105 CMR 410.910: Failure to Comply
with an Order Issued Pursuant to the Provisions of 105 CMR 410.000,
Minimum Standards of Fitness for Human Habitation, i.e., failure to
correct a housing code violation.
Penalty: $20. Each day's failure to comply with an order shall
constitute a separate violation.
Enforcement personnel: Health Department inspectors as designated
by the Director of Health.
(a)
§ 11-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-101
1:287
§ 11-102. Fats, Oils, and Grease (FOG) Ordinance.
State Sanitary Code, Chapter X, Minimum Sanitation Standards for
Food Establishments, 105 CMR 590.000: Failure to Correct any
Condition Cited as a Violation Under the Above Sanitary Code within
the Time Allowed by the Inspector and/or the Code.
Penalty: $20. Each day's failure to comply with an order shall
constitute a separate violation.
Enforcement personnel: Health Department inspectors as designated
by the Director of Health.
Hazardous Materials: Failure to Comply with any Order to Correct a
Violation of § 7-401 of these Ordinances.
Penalty: not more than $200.
Enforcement personnel: Health Department inspectors as designated
by the Director of Health.
Enumeration of nuisances. The following list shall serve to enumerate
those conditions which will be considered a nuisance and which are to
be enforced either by ticketing or criminal prosecution:
1. Overflowing sewage.
2. Accumulated manure, dung or feces from any animal.
3. Release of any harmful chemical substance.
4. Noise over 10 dB over ambient background.
5. Sickening and/or obnoxious odors.
6. Existence of accident/injury hazard.
7. Pumping or leading clear water into the municipal sewer.
(b)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect residents, businesses
and the environment within the Town of Weymouth from blockages
of the Town's sanitary sewer caused by fats, oils, and grease (FOG)
discharged from food service establishments located in Town. All new
and existing facilities that generate and discharge FOG in the
wastewater flow shall install, operate, and maintain a FOG
pretreatment system, as further defined herein. The requirements of
this section shall supplement and be in addition to the requirements
of the Town of Weymouth Board of Health regulations and the Town of
Weymouth's Sewer Use Rules and Regulations.
(a)
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
(b)
§ 11-101 WEYMOUTH CODE § 11-102
1:288
AGENT — Any duly authorized agent of the Weymouth Health
Department as specified under MGL c. 111, § 30.
DIRECTOR — The Mayoral-appointed Director of the Weymouth Health
Department.
DISCHARGE LIMIT — One hundred milligrams of fats, oils, and grease
per liter of wastewater, or a concentration which will cause blockage to
the municipal sewer system.
FOG — Fats, oils, and grease.
FOG PRETREATMENT SYSTEM — One of the following grease removal
systems:
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment issued a permit to
operate a food establishment by the Weymouth Health Department
under FC 1-201.10(B)(31); any facility that prepares or sells food and
as a by-product discharges fat, oil, or grease into the municipal sewer
system.
GREASE TRAP — Also referred to as a "grease interceptor" by the
State Plumbing Code; a device designed to remove undissolved and/or
suspended waste grease and oil from wastewater.
INDOOR AUTOMATIC GREASE TRAP — An active automatic grease
trap which separates and removes fats, oils, and grease from effluent
discharge, and cleans itself of accumulated grease, fats and oils at
least once every 24 hours, utilizing electromechanical apparatus to
accomplish removal.
INDOOR PASSIVE GREASE TRAP — A passive grease trap installed
inside a building and designed to remove fats, oils and grease from
flowing wastewater while allowing wastewater to flow through it; also
known as an "indoor grease trap."
OUTDOOR/UNDERGROUND GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A passive
grease trap installed outside a building (having a capacity of 1,500
gallons or more) and designed to remove fats, oils and grease from
flowing wastewater while allowing wastewater to flow through it; also
known as an "outside grease trap."
PERMITTED OFFAL/SEPTAGE HAULER — Any offal/septage hauler
who is issued a permit to haul FOG and/or septage by the Weymouth
Health Department.
SEWER PIPE — Any building or Town sanitary sewer piping, including
but not limited to interior and exterior building sanitary sewer piping,
any main, or lateral sanitary sewer piping, regardless of whether it is
located on private or municipal land.
1. Indoor passive grease traps.
2. Indoor automatic grease traps.
3. Outdoor/Underground grease interceptors.
§ 11-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-102
1:289
SUBSTANTIAL RENOVATION — Any renovation to a food service
establishment that would increase the number of existing permitted
seats or would alter in any way the kitchen facility.
WASTE GREASE OR OIL — Waste grease or oil generated by a food
service establishment during the cooking process.
WEYMOUTH OFFICIALS — Any representative from the Weymouth
Health Department, Building Department or the Water and Sewer
Division.
General provisions.
In every case where a food establishment is preparing or selling
food or other business in which FOG is a by-product, a suitable FOG
pretreatment system that conforms to the Massachusetts State
Plumbing Code, 248 CMR 10.09(2), must be installed according to
this section.
1.
The Weymouth Health Department may at any time require the
installation, upgrade and/or relocation of a FOG pretreatment
system, as it may deem necessary to maintain any particular
building sewer pipe, any lateral sewer pipe, or sewer main pipe
free from obstructions caused by waste grease or oil emanating
from a food establishment. Each establishment must pay all costs
for installing and maintaining the systems.
2.
New or substantially remodeled food establishments must install
an outdoor/underground grease interceptor, with a minimum
capacity of 1,500 gallons, or an indoor automatic grease trap. Both
must be sized according to the manufacturer and in compliance
with 248 CMR.
NOTE — Passive indoor grease traps will not be permitted.
3.
Internal automatic and passive grease traps must be cleaned
monthly (unless a variance is given by the Director) by a
professional drain cleaner, licensed plumber, or permitted offal/
septage hauler.
4.
Outdoor/Underground grease interceptors must be pumped and
inspected by a permitted offal/septage hauler every three months
or more frequently so as to prevent any grease blockage.
5.
A copy of the Health Department grease trap maintenance log must
be completed and kept on-site for any operation/maintenance to
FOG pretreatment systems. The log must be readily accessible for
agents and Weymouth officials to review.
6.
All pumping and hauling records must be maintained on a monthly
basis and be readily accessible to Weymouth officials.
7.
Waste grease and oil shall not be disposed of by way of the sanitary
sewer. All waste grease and oil must be collected in an appropriate
8.
(c)
§ 11-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 11-102
1:290
container provided by an approved vendor and stored in an
approved location on the premises. The container must be stored
on an impervious surface such as concrete or pavement. Containers
must be capable of being sealed or be stored in a sheltered area
to prevent entry of precipitation and vermin. All waste grease
and oil shall be removed by a permitted offal/septage hauler; said
material should be removed from the premises as needed. While
being stored, all grease containers and surrounding areas must be
kept in sanitary conditions at all times.
All automatic electrical/mechanical grease removal units shall be
sized in accordance with the manufacturer's written
recommendations and be in compliance with 248 CMR.
9.
A separate suitable sampling location as approved by the Director
or his/her designee shall be provided for sampling the discharge
from any indoor passive or automatic system. The sampling valve
must be installed on the discharge piping with a minimum
clearance of eight inches to allow samples to be taken by an agent
and Weymouth officials.
10.
Dishwasher wastewater must discharge into the grease trap per
248 CMR 10.09(2)(c)(5).
11.
Food waste grinders must comply with the requirements of 248
CMR 10.09(2)(f)(3).
12.
All connections to the grease removal unit shall be equipped with
a flow control device. Flow control devices must conform with 248
CMR 10.09(2)(i).
13.
Enforcement and inspection.
It shall be the responsibility of agents to review cleaning and
maintenance records for all grease removal systems as part of
regular food service inspections.
1.
All records pertaining to storage and removal of grease-related
waste shall be retained by the owner or operator on premises for
no less than two years. Upon request by a Weymouth official, an
owner or operator shall furnish all records required to enforce and
monitor compliance with this regulation.
2.
Weymouth officials may use oil-soluble dyes to identify (by color)
the FOG of any given establishment in order to determine if said
establishment is a cause of failure or obstruction in a sewer lateral
or main.
3.
Agents may order the suspension of a permit to operate a food
establishment or the termination of one or more particular
operations for:
a. Serious or repeated violations of this section;
4.
(d)
§ 11-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-102
1:291
Interference with the any Weymouth official in the
performance of his/her duty;
b.
Failure to maintain required records or keeping or submitting
any misleading or false records or documents required by this
section.
The effective date and length of a suspension will be
determined by the Director.
c.
Two or more suspensions at an individual food establishment may
result in the revocation of the permit to operate.
5.
Weymouth officials may inspect a facility if, in their judgment, they
feel that there has been an infraction of the discharge limits to the
wastewater.
6.
Violation. Written notice of any violation of this section shall be given
to the owner and operator by an agent, specifying the nature, time and
date of the violation and any preventative measure required to avoid
future violations, and a correction time frame.
(e)
Variances. The Director may issue variances from the requirements of
this section for the following items:
Operation and maintenance (O&M) frequencies (Applications for
variances for O&M must be accompanied by a written letter from
the food establishment's O&M contractor.);
1.
2. The type of FOG pretreatment system required;
Time lines for connection.
Any requests for a variance must be applied for by completing the
Health Department variance application form and returning it to
the Health Department. The reasons for the request must be clear
and specific. Financial hardship will not be grounds for a variance.
Any request for a variance for a food establishment to use an
alternative method, system or product that does not comply with
248 CMR 3.00 through 10.00 must apply for the variance in
writing to the State Board for Plumbers and Gas Fitters per 248
CMR 3.04(2).
3.
(f)
Hearing. The person or persons to whom any order or notice is issued
pursuant to this section may request a hearing before the Director.
Such request shall be in writing and shall be filed in the office of the
Health Department within seven days after receipt.
(g)
Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section may be
punished, under MGL c. 111, § 31, as a criminal offense or MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, as a noncriminal offense, by fines of:
1. First offense: warning.
(h)
§ 11-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 11-102
1:292
2. Second offense: $100.
3. Third offense: $250.
Fourth offense: $1,000.
or by criminal complaint at the appropriate venue. Each day or
portion thereof during which a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense. Failure to correct violations of any provision
of this section may result in the suspension or revocation of a
permit to operate a food establishment as provided in 105 CMR
590.012 or 105 CMR 590.014. Any person violating the provisions
of this section shall be liable to the Town of Weymouth for any loss,
expense or damage, including consequential damage, caused by
such violation. The Town of Weymouth may enforce the provisions
of this section by any and all civil and equitable procedures.
4.
Severability. If any word, clause, phrase, sentence, paragraph, or
section of this regulation shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, that portion shall be severed and all other provisions of this
section shall remain in full force and effect.
(i)
Time line for connection.
If a food establishment is found to be causing blockage to the
municipal sewer system, the Health Department may order the
installation of either an indoor automatic grease trap or an
underground passive interceptor.
1.
Newly built food establishments or those undergoing substantial
renovations must install the appropriate FOG pretreatment system
according to this section as part of the building project. Locations
of grease traps and interceptors must comply with 248 CMR
10.09(2)(a), (b) and (c).
2.
All other food establishments must install either an indoor
automatic grease trap or an outdoor/underground grease
interceptor within one year of adoption of this section unless a
variance is granted by the Director.
3.
(j)
Weymouth Board of Health regulations. The Weymouth Health
Department may from time to time promulgate and amend regulations
pertaining to the maintenance of grease traps and removal of grease
from food establishments. In addition to this section, food
establishments are required to adhere to all requirements as set forth
in the Health Department regulations. In the event the regulations
conflict with any section or subsection of this section, it is this section
which shall take precedence.
(k)
§ 11-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 11-102
1:293
Chapter 12
WATERWAYS
§ 11-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 11-102
1:294
SECTION 12-100
Waterways
§ 12-101. Harbor and docking regulations.
Definitions. As used herein, words shall be given their normal meanings
in common usage. The following words, however, shall have the
meanings hereafter set forth wherever they are used in this section:
10-A PERMIT — An annual permit granted by the Harbormaster for any
float, raft or dock which is bottom-anchored in place.
BACK RIVER AREA OF CRITICAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN —
The Weymouth waters of the Back River located south of the Route 3A
Bridge.
FLEXIBLE CONTROL BOOM — A boom floating in the water and
principally made out of rubber, plastic, Styrofoam or other similar
materials, and projecting above the surface of the water at least 12
inches and extending below the surface of the water at least 20 inches;
said boom to be so constructed to permit any portions or sections
thereof to be interchanged or linked together and to be of sufficiently
lightweight construction that it may be moved or towed from one
location to another.
HARBORMASTER — A person appointed by the Police Chief pursuant
to the provisions of § 3-312 of this Code of Ordinances.
HEADWAY SPEED — Minimum speed forward (no wake); not to exceed
six miles per hour.
MOOR — To secure a vessel to the bottom of a body of water by the use
of mooring tackle.
MOORING — A place where buoyant vessels are secured to the bottom
of the body of water by mooring tackle or berthed at a slip, pier, float or
dock.
MOORING TACKLE — The hardware used to secure a vessel to a
mooring.
OIL AND/OR LIQUID CARGO — Any oil, petroleum product or
petroleum by-product, liquid chemical, flammable liquid or any other
liquid which could contaminate, pollute or otherwise be dangerous or
harmful to Weymouth waters or shorelines.
PENNANTS — A length of nylon line or equal, for mooring the buoy to
the vessel; its length and diameter will be determined by the length of
the vessel.
PERMIT OWNER — A person who has been issued a Weymouth mooring
permit.
PERSONAL WATERCRAFT — A small vessel which uses an inboard
motor powering a water jet pump as its primary source of motive power
and which is designed to be operated by persons sitting, standing or
(a)
§ 12-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-101
1:295
kneeling on the vessel. The term includes, but is not limited to, a Jet
Ski, wet bike or surf jet, so called.
TERMINAL — An installation on land adjacent to the shore where a
mooring or a dock or docks is available for tying up vessels so they may
load or unload flammable liquid cargo in bulk, which installation shall
include the mooring, dock or docks and equipment and buildings on the
adjacent shore location for receiving or loading such cargo.
TERMINAL OPERATOR — The owner, lessee or agent, person, firm or
corporation in possession of and legally liable for the operation of a
terminal.
TRANSFER OPERATIONS — The movement of oil and/or liquid cargo
into or out of a vessel, from or to a shore tank or from or to another
vessel, and shall include either loading or unloading.
VESSEL — Any vessel, ship or barge or other floating liquid carrier,
whether self-propelled or not.
WEYMOUTH WATERS — All waters within the corporate limits of the
Town of Weymouth.
Transfer operation precautions. Every caution shall be exercised during
transfer operations to prevent discharge of petroleum products into the
waters of Weymouth Harbor, Fore River or Back River.
(b)
Prevention of seepage or leaks. Whenever any vessel enters any wharf,
terminal or anchorage for the purpose of transferring oil or liquid
cargo, the terminal operator shall provide such vessel with a flexible
control boom, which shall be placed in the water around such vessel so
as to control and prevent any seepage overflow, leak or other excess oil
or liquid cargo from entering into Weymouth waters, Fore River or Back
River.
(c)
Pollution report. A written report entitled "Inspection Report - Pollution
Prevention," on a form provided by the Harbormaster, shall be filled
out for each vessel berthing and signed in the required spaces by
the terminal operator. The form, duly executed, shall be forwarded
promptly to the Harbormaster after completion of transfer.
(d)
Enforcement; right of entry by Harbormaster. It shall be the duty of
the Harbormaster to enforce the provisions of this section. All terminal
operators shall be deemed to have authorized the Harbormaster to
enter upon their premises, or any vessel therein, whenever the
Harbormaster shall deem it necessary to make an inspection, unless
the terminal operator shall have filed written notice of his refusal to
grant such authorization with the Harbormaster and with the Division
of Natural Resources of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(e)
Penalties. Violations of this section shall be prosecuted by the
Harbormaster in courts of competent jurisdiction and shall be
punishable by the maximum penalty permitted by the Massachusetts
General Laws to be imposed by towns. Each day or portion thereof
(f)
§ 12-101 WEYMOUTH CODE § 12-101
1:296
§ 12-102. Motorboats.
§ 12-103. Harbor boating and mooring.
during which a violation continues after notice thereof has been given
by the Harbormaster to the terminal operator shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.
Dangerous operation prohibited. No person shall operate a motorboat
upon any pond, lying within the Town, in a manner which endangers the
safety of the public or is detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood
or to the value of property therein.
(a)
Evidence of violation. It shall be evidence of the violation of this section
if such motorboat is operated by a motor not having underwater
exhaust or in a noisy or obnoxious manner, or at any unreasonable rate
of speed, or without slowing down and exercising due caution while
approaching and passing persons bathing or any other watercraft.
(b)
Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to a penalty.
(c)
General regulations.
Speed.
a. Boat operators shall watch their wake at all times.
Watercraft shall proceed at headway speed only when
operating within the confines of moored or docked vessels or
where fuel is pumped. This is to include marinas, yacht clubs,
launching ramps or assigned anchorage areas. Headway speed
will also be maintained when the operator's vision is obscured
under bridges or bends or other matters. The following are
the boundaries of headway speed areas both inbound and
outbound:
Weymouth Back River: starting from lighted navigational
aid No. 4 fl r4s, 200 yards NE off the tip of Lower Neck
through the entire Weymouth Back River area.
(i)
Weymouth Fore River: starting from navigational aid No.
22 fl r4s, 900 yards NNW off the flagpole on Great Hall to
the fixed bridge at East Braintree.
(ii)
b.
1.
Waterskiing. Waterskiing shall be permitted only in areas
designated by the Harbormaster. All permitted areas shall be
posted at the Harbormaster's office.
2.
Harbor pollution.
a. No oil shall be dumped or pumped overboard into the harbor.
3.
(a)
§ 12-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-103
1:297
No untreated sewage, rubbish, debris, garbage or dead fish
shall be discharged into Weymouth waters.
b.
No boats or vessels shall run their engines with propellers
engaged while tied to the docks. Boats requiring dock trials
may do so with permission of the Harbormaster.
c.
Derelict boats, motors or foreign debris shall not be allowed in
the harbor or on the shores. Removal of the same is not the
responsibility of the Harbormaster.
d.
Temporary berthing.
Tie-up periods at Town floats or on the launching ramps will
be limited to 15 minutes. A tie-up time limit at the Town floats
or piers for visitors overnight or boats with breakdowns will be
limited at the discretion of the Harbormaster.
a.
All crafts entering Weymouth Back River or Fore River are
subject to the discretion of the Harbormaster, who should be
consulted before anchoring or tying up to any of the facilities
or moorings.
b.
Boats shall not be tied to Town docks in dead storage for
over four weeks time, after which, upon notice from the
Harbormaster, they shall be removed.
c.
4.
Float and pier rules.
No fishing gear, equipment or any other matter shall be
allowed to remain on the Town docks or Town floats for over 24
hours without permission of the Harbormaster.
a.
No swimming will be allowed from the state pier, Town pier or
floats attached to public docks in Weymouth Fore River or Back
River.
b.
c. There will be no soliciting from Town-owned floats.
All floats and gangways must have the owner's name and
assigned number (given by the Harbormaster) clearly
displayed and also in a concealed location known only to the
owner.
d.
An annual 10-A permit must be on file with the Harbormaster
for any bottom-anchored float, raft or dock. The Harbormaster
will inspect all such floats annually. The owner's means of
bottom anchoring must be demonstrated to the Harbormaster
for approval, once every five years. The expense for such a
visual inspection shall be the responsibility of the owner.
e.
All floats, rafts or docks without an approved 10-A permit may
be removed at the owner's expense within the two weeks after
f.
5.
§ 12-103 WEYMOUTH CODE § 12-103
1:298
§ 12-104. Mooring regulations.
receipt of a written notice from the Harbormaster defining the
defects.
Conduct.
Noise. Unmuffled noise from engines, outboards, amplifying
systems, radios and the like shall be kept at a minimum when
in the proximity of piers, floats or yacht anchorages.
a.
Negligent operation. No person shall operate any motorboat or
any vessel in a reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger
the life, safety or property of any person.
b.
6.
Fees.
Commercial interest, party boats, fishing boats, associations or
companies using the Town pier for permanent moorings, float
access or gangways will pay an annual fee fairly determined by
the Harbormaster.
a.
All persons tying tenders to the Town pier shall be charged an
annual fee to be fairly determined by the Harbormaster.
b.
7.
Personal watercraft. The operation of personal watercraft is
prohibited in the Weymouth waters of the Back River area of
critical environmental concern.
8.
Channel obstructions. No private markers, moorings or anchorage
buoys, lobster pot buoys or other temporary or permanent markers
may be placed in the fairway or channel of Weymouth at any
time without the expressed permission of the Harbormaster. Any
such markers or buoys so placed in any fairway or channel within
Weymouth waters shall be construed as a hazard to navigation
and, upon the order of the Harbormaster, shall be removed by the
person causing it to be in place. If necessary, the Harbormaster or
his agent may remove the hazard.
9.
Trawling restrictions. There shall be no trawling with nets within
the waterways of the Town of Weymouth starting from navigational
aid No. R12 Weymouth Back River to the Weymouth Back River
headwaters (Herring Brook).
10.
Mooring permits. No vessel shall be moored or located within
Weymouth waters without a current Weymouth mooring permit.
(a)
Applications.
Applications for a mooring shall be dated, signed and filed with
the Harbormaster. Permits may be granted by the Harbormaster
in the order of application, dated as locations become available. If
the Harbormaster denies a mooring application and the applicant
1.
(b)
§ 12-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-104
1:299
can show just cause, he/she may request and receive a hearing
before the Town Council on his/her rights to have a mooring in
the Weymouth Back River or Fore River. All future moorings will
be assigned a suitable space in accordance with the requirements
of the boat (i.e., length, draft, type of rig) and shall be placed
at a location designated by the Harbormaster. A mooring is not
transferable. However, the Harbormaster may approve the transfer
of a mooring to a person within the immediate family of the permit
owner.
Any boat owner who has not placed his/her assigned boat on the
mooring will be given one year to place an assigned boat without
forfeiting his/her mooring location. An extension of one year may
be granted by the Harbormaster.
2.
Special areas.
Moorings are to be spaced at a distance to allow the vessel scope of
360° in order to prevent damage or contact to surrounding vessels
in all weather and tide conditions. When moored, the vessel shall
not be allowed to encroach upon any navigable channel.
1.
Only mushroom anchors, granite or concrete blocks and augertype
mooring devices will be allowed. The specifications for said
mooring devices and ground tackle will be available at the
Harbormaster's office.
2.
(c)
All areas.
The use of spars for chain flotation shall be prohibited. Only balls
or styrene-type chain flotation shall be used. In all types of chain
flotation buoys, other than metal, chain or metal rod must be
passed through the buoy connecting the mooring pennant to the
mooring chain.
1.
All chain flotation buoys shall be plainly and clearly visible above
any tide level at all times.
2.
The above-described moorings shall be painted white with a blue
band and shall contain the owner's boat name, length of boat and
mooring number on the can or buoy; the owner's name shall also
be labeled on the mooring block or mushroom anchor.
3.
All moorings located within the Town of Weymouth shall conform
to the regulations and will be placed at a location designated by
the Harbormaster. Any mooring that has not been assigned by the
Harbormaster may be immediately removed at the direction of the
Harbormaster or his agent at the owner's expense and a penalty of
$50 shall be imposed on the boat owner.
4.
Where winter spars or buoys are used, they shall be clearly visible
or marked at all times except during ice conditions.
5.
(d)
§ 12-104 WEYMOUTH CODE § 12-104
1:300
Winter spars or buoys shall not be installed prior to September
15 and must be removed by June 1. If any winter spar buoys are
not removed by June 1, after 14 days' notice by the Harbormaster,
the Harbormaster, by direction, may remove said spar buoy at
the owner's expense. All winter spar buoys must display their
assigned mooring location number so that it is visible at all times
(except during ice conditions), and all spar buoys must be painted
in contrasting color to the sea.
6.
The Harbormaster may inspect all moorings within the Town of
Weymouth waterways. Except in an emergency, no unauthorized
use of a private mooring or float will be allowed without the express
permission of the owners. Furthermore, there shall be no
anchoring allowed within a mooring area without prior permission
from the Harbormaster.
7.
All pennants shall be nylon or equivalent with regards to the size of
the vessel with adequate mooring devices including, but not limited
to, thimbles on all line ends and secured shackle pins to eliminate
the hazard of chafing.
a. Pennants may be checked annually by the Harbormaster.
A certificate of inspection for defective moorings found by the
Harbormaster will be held in his files, showing conditions at
the time of inspection.
b.
8.
Owners of defective moorings shall be allowed 14 days after
receiving notice from the Harbormaster to correct the defective
conditions. If the defect is not corrected after this time, the owner
will be subject to penalties in conformance with this section. The
Harbormaster, upon finding a defective mooring, shall properly
mark said mooring to show danger or obstruction.
9.
The Harbormaster may request owners of moorings to have said
moorings lifted or inspected at the owner's expense for faulty
ground tackle. The Harbormaster will determine the repair or
replacement of any defective ground tackle. In lieu of lifting
moorings, replacements may be made. Upon certification of a
mooring's fitness or replacement, the owner may replace the
mooring at its original location or as directed by the Harbormaster.
10.
The Harbormaster shall keep a detailed description of all moorings,
their location and owner's name, telephone number, home and
business address, date of moorings and length and rig of boat.
11.
Vessel listing. The owners or persons in control of any vessel habitually
moored or berthed in Weymouth waters shall, prior to April 1 of each
year, list with the Harbormaster each and every vessel in excess of 12
feet in length so moored, berthed or kept, on forms provided by him, the
owner's name, home or business address, date of purchase of vessel, its
description and registration number. In order to defray the cost of this
(e)
§ 12-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-104
1:301
listing, each owner or person in control shall pay a service fee to the
Harbormaster, which fee shall be established as provided in § 5-305 of
these ordinances.
Mooring permits. All boats that are habitually moored, berthed or kept
as of July 1 within the waters of the Town of Weymouth shall not be
placed on a mooring, dock or float until all applicable excise taxes and
penalties past and current have been paid, as well as other related fees.
A current mooring permit must be issued and properly affixed to the
port quarter, aft of the vessel. The mooring permit is not transferable
to any person. The mooring decal must be affixed on assigned vessel
when the vessel is launched. The assigned Weymouth mooring location
number and the owner's last name must be on the mooring buoy and
visible at all times. If the vessel is in a slip at a yacht club or marina, the
vessel owner must be able to show proof of the location at the request
of the Harbormaster. If a vessel remains on a mooring, dock or float
without a current mooring permit after May 1, a mooring violation will
be tied to the vessel. If the mooring violation is not resolved within 14
days, the vessel will be impounded per court order.
(f)
Trailered vessels. All trailered vessels that are registered in the Town
of Weymouth will be subject to the provisions of this section and must
display a mooring decal or proof of payment of the excise tax and other
related fees.
(g)
Yacht clubs and marinas. Applications for mooring spaces in all yacht
clubs and marinas shall be dated, signed and filed with the
Harbormaster.
(h)
Violations and penalties.
A penalty of $50 per day shall be imposed if the infraction is
punished pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D, and
§ 1-109 of these ordinances. If the infraction is punished pursuant
to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21, and § 1-110 of these
ordinances, the court may impose the highest fine allowed by law.
1.
Offenders will be prosecuted by the Harbormaster and all other
enforcement agents.
2.
Violations of the Weymouth Harbor Ordinance may be sufficient
cause for the Harbormaster to refuse an individual or his vessel the
use of Town-owned or -controlled facilities for such period of time
as may be determined by the Harbormaster with the approval of
the Mayor, in addition to necessary court action in case of violation
of the Motor Boat Law.
3.
(i)
§ 12-104 WEYMOUTH CODE § 12-104
1:302
Chapter 13
REGULATIONS AFFECTING MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 12-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-104
1:303

SECTION 13-100
Motor Vehicles
§ 13-101. Definitions.
For the purpose of this section, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUS — Any motor vehicle operated upon a public way in any city or town for
the carriage of passengers for hire in such a manner as to afford a means of
transportation similar to that afforded by a railway company.
BUS STOP — An area in a public way designated by the Town Council set
aside for boarding of or alighting from a parked bus.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle being used in the transportation of
goods, wares or merchandise for commercial purposes or being registered
as such.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, HEAVY — Any commercial vehicle of 2 1/2 tons'
capacity or over.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections,
or at any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines on the road surface or by other markings or signs.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Fire vehicles, police vehicles, ambulances and
emergency vehicles of federal, state and municipal departments or public
service corporations when the latter are responding to an emergency in
relation to the Police or Fire Department.
FUNERAL — Any procession of mourners properly identified as such
accompanying the remains of a human body.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the extensions of the lateral
curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of intersecting ways
as defined in MGL c. 90, § 1, including divided ways.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width
to accommodate the passage of a single lane of vehicles.
MOTOR SCOOTER — Any two-wheeled tandem or three-wheeled device
with handlebars or other steering device designed to be stood upon or
seated upon by the operator and powered by electric or gas-powered motor
that is capable of propelling the device with or without human propulsion.
The definition of "motor scooter" shall not include a motorcycle or
motorized bicycle or a three-wheeled motorized wheelchair.
OFFICER — Any police officer, investigator, examiner or inspector of the
Registry of Motor Vehicles, any constable, special officer or crossing guard,
provided he has his badge of office displayed.
§ 13-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-101
1:305
OFFICIAL CURB MARKING — That portion of a curbing the painting of
which has been authorized by the Town Council and which has the written
approval of the Massachusetts Highway Department.21
OFFICIAL STREET MARKING — Any painted line, legend marking or
markers of any description painted or placed upon any way which purports
to direct or regulate traffic and which has been authorized by the Town
Council, and which has the written approval of the Massachusetts Highway
Department.22
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS — All signs, markings and devices, other than
signals, not inconsistent with this section, and which conform to the
standards prescribed by the Massachusetts Highway Department23 and
which are placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning, or regulating
traffic.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS — All signals conforming to the standards
prescribed by the Massachusetts Highway Department,24 not inconsistent
with this ordinance, placed or erected by authority of a public body or
official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of directing or warning traffic.
ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS — Highways or streets designated as one-way and
upon which vehicular traffic may move only in the direction indicated by
signs.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading, or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals, or while
making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being
made to move such vehicles.
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by
human power, except bicycles or tricycles.
RAILROAD CROSSING — Any intersection of ways with a railroad right-ofway.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and
intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
ROTARY/ROUNDABOUT TRAFFIC — Counterclockwise operation of a
motor vehicle around an object, structure, or island in the roadway. All
motor vehicles approaching a roundabout shall properly observe the "Yield"
signs and give priority to motor vehicles in the roundabout.
21.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
22.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
23.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
24.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
§ 13-101 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-101
1:306
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every
way open to the use of the public for the purposes of travel.
TAXICAB STAND — An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are
required to park while waiting to be engaged.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden animals, vehicles or other conveyances,
either singly or together, while using any street or highway for the purpose
of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS — Any device using colored lights, which
conforms to the standards as prescribed by the Massachusetts Highway
Department,25 whether, manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by
which traffic may be alternately directed to stop or proceed.
TRAFFIC ISLAND — Any area or space set aside, within a roadway, which
is not intended for use by vehicular traffic.
U-TURN — The turning, by backing or otherwise, of a vehicle on a street or
way so as to head or drive the vehicle along the same street or way in the
opposite direction.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including bicycles when the
provisions of this section are applicable to them.
§ 13-102. Operation of motor vehicles.
Officers to direct traffic. It shall be the duty of officers designated
by the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of this section. Such
officers are hereby authorized to direct all traffic either in person or by
means of visible or audible signals in conformance with the provisions
of this section.
(a)
Police may close streets temporarily. The Director of Public Works as
well as the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, are hereby authorized
to close temporarily any street or highway in any impending or existing
emergency, or for any lawful assemblage, construction project,
demonstration or procession, provided there is reasonable justification
for the closing of such street.
(b)
Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to operators
actually engaged in work upon a street or highway closed to travel
or under construction or repair. It does not apply to officers when
engaged in the performance of public duties or to drivers of emergency
vehicles while operating in an emergency and in the performance of
public duties when the nature of the work of any of these necessitates
a departure from any part of this section. These exemptions shall not,
however, protect the driver of any vehicle from the consequences of a
reckless disregard of the safety of others.
(c)
25.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
§ 13-101 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-102
1:307
Drive within marked lanes. When any roadway has been divided into
lanes, a driver of a vehicle shall drive so as to be entirely within a single
lane and shall not move from the lane in which he is driving until he has
first ascertained if such movements can be made with safety.
(d)
Use right lane. Upon all roadways, the driver of a vehicle shall drive
in the lane nearest the right side of the roadway when said lane is
available for travel, except when overtaking another vehicle or when
preparing for a left turn.
(e)
Impoundment of vehicle after operating under the influence (OUI). No
motor vehicle impounded pursuant to an arrest for operating under
the influence (OUI) of drugs and alcohol may be released prior to the
passing of 12 hours following arrest.
(f)
Overtaking and passing a vehicle.
The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass a vehicle
proceeding in the same direction unless there is sufficient clear
space ahead on the right side of the roadway to permit the
overtaking to be completed without impeding the safe operation of
any vehicle ahead.
1.
The driver of a vehicle, when about to be overtaken and passed
by another vehicle approaching from the rear, shall give way to
the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle, on suitable and audible
signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle, and shall
not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
2.
The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake and pass any other
vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any intersection of
streets, except that this subsection shall not apply at intersections
where traffic is controlled by traffic stop-and-go signals or by police
officers.
3.
Whenever any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk, or at
any intersection, to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway,
no operator of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle.
4.
(g)
Obstructing traffic.
No person shall drive in such a manner as to obstruct unnecessarily
the normal movement of traffic upon any street or highway. Officers
are hereby authorized to require any driver who fails to comply
with this subsection to drive to the side of the roadway and wait
until such traffic as has been delayed has passed.
1.
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk and on the right half of the roadway to accommodate the
2.
(h)
§ 13-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-102
1:308
vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal
indication to proceed.
Following too closely. The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another
vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard
to the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and condition of the
street or highway.
(i)
Obedience to traffic control signals. Colors and arrow indications in
traffic control signals shall have the commands ascribed to them in
this subsection, and no other meanings. Every driver of a vehicle,
railway car, or other conveyance shall comply therewith, except when
otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful traffic regulating sign
(other than a stop sign), signal or device. In no case shall a driver enter
or proceed through an intersection without due regard to the safety
of other persons within the intersection, regardless of what indications
may be given by traffic control signals.
Green. While the green lens is illuminated, drivers facing such
signal may proceed through the intersection, but shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk
or intersection at the time such signal was exhibited. Drivers
making a right turn or left turn shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians crossing with the flow of traffic.
1.
Right, left and vertical green arrows. When a right arrow is
illuminated, drivers facing the signal may turn right. When a left
green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing the signal may turn left.
When a vertical green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing the
signal may go straight ahead. When a green arrow is exhibited
together with a red or yellow lens, drivers may enter the
intersection to make the movement permitted by the arrow but
shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles and pedestrians proceeding
from another direction on a green indication.
2.
Yellow. While the yellow lens is illuminated, waiting drivers shall
not proceed and any other drivers approaching the intersection
or marked stop line shall stop at such point unless so close to
the intersection that a stop cannot be made in safety; provided,
however, that if a green arrow is illuminated at the same time,
drivers may enter the intersection to make the movement
permitted by such arrow.
3.
Red.
While the red lens is illuminated, drivers facing a steady
circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line or, if none, before entering the crosswalk or the near
side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the
intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to
proceed is shown, except as allowed by MGL c. 89, § 8.
a.
4.
(j)
§ 13-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-102
1:309
No driver of a vehicle facing a circular red signal indication
shall make a right turn where official traffic signs are installed
and maintained prohibiting such turn at the intersection.
b.
Red and yellow. While the red and yellow lenses are illuminated
together, drivers shall not enter the intersection, and during such
time the intersection shall be reserved for exclusive use of
pedestrians.
5.
Flashing red. When a red lens is illuminated in a traffic control
signal by rapid intermittent flashes, and its use has been
specifically authorized by the Massachusetts Highway
Department,26drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a stop line when marked,
and the right to proceed shall then be governed by the provisions
of MGL c. 89, § 8.
6.
Flashing yellow. When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or pass such signal with caution.
7.
Flashing green. A flashing green lens shall indicate an intersection
or pedestrian crosswalk in use or subject to use by entering or
crossing traffic. Drivers may proceed only with caution and shall be
prepared to comply with a change in the signal to a red or red and
yellow indication.
8.
Obedience to isolated stop signs. Every driver of a vehicle, railway
car or other conveyance approaching an intersection of ways where
there exists facing him an official sign bearing the word "STOP" or a
flashing red signal indication, said signs or signal having, apart from
these ordinances, the written approval of the Massachusetts Highway
Department,27 such approval being in effect, shall, before proceeding
through the intersection, bring such vehicle, railway car or other
conveyance to a complete stop at such a point as may be clearly marked
by a sign or line, or if a point is not so marked, then at the nearer
line or crosswalk of the intersection. This subsection shall not apply
when the traffic is otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful traffic
regulating sign, signal or device.
(k)
Authorization and erection of stop signs. The erection of stop signs or
flashing red signals is authorized so as to face the streets designated,
upon a majority vote by the Town Council. The Town Council shall,
before approving the erection of such sign or signal, review reports
from the Town Traffic Engineer and the Police Department.
(l)
26.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
27.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
§ 13-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-102
1:310
Obedience to "yield" signs. Every driver of a vehicle or other
conveyance approaching an intersection of ways where there exists
facing him an official sign bearing the word "Yield," said sign having
been erected in accordance with the written approval of the
Massachusetts Highway Department,28 such approval being in effect,
shall surrender to oncoming traffic his right to enter the intersection
until such time as he has brought his vehicle or other conveyance to
a complete stop at a point between the "Yield" sign and the nearer
line of the street intersection; provided, however, that this requirement
to stop before entering the intersection shall not apply when a driver
approaching a "Yield" sign can enter the intersection in safety without
causing interference to approaching traffic. This subsection shall not
apply when the traffic is otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful
traffic regulating sign, signal or device.
(m)
Emerging from alley or private driveway. The operator of a vehicle
emerging from an alley, driveway or a garage shall stop such vehicle
immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across an alleyway or driveway.
(n)
Flags or lights at end of a load. Every person operating or controlling
any vehicle loaded with any material extending more than four feet
beyond the front or rear of such vehicle shall provide same with a red
flag by day and red light or lights at night placed at the front and rear
of such load.
(o)
Warning at garage exits. Where buildings are used for the keeping of
more than four vehicles and the exits therefrom are within 10 feet of
the line of a public street, warning by a mechanical or electrical device
visible for a distance of 15 feet on either side of said exits, or by a
person stationed at said exits, shall be given when vehicles are about to
leave such building.
(p)
Transfer of merchandise over sidewalk restricted. No one shall transfer
merchandise from or to trucks or other vehicles over the sidewalk by
the use of planks or skids, except when such transfer is reasonably
necessary and provided the sidewalk is not unreasonably obstructed
and then only for such period of time as is necessary, and any police
officer may order such skids or planks removed or caused to be
removed.
(q)
Exclusion of heavy commercial vehicles.
The use and operation of heavy commercial vehicles is hereby
restricted on those streets or parts of streets described in Appendix
A of this chapter, in the manner outlined and during the period of
time set forth.29
1.
(r)
28.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
29.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 13-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-102
1:311
Exemptions. Subsection (r)(1) of this section shall not apply to
heavy commercial vehicles going to or coming from places upon
said streets for the purpose of making deliveries to or collections
from abutting lands or buildings or adjoining streets or ways to
which access cannot otherwise be gained, or to vehicles used in
connection with the construction, maintenance and repair of said
streets or public utilities therein, or to federal, state, municipal or
public service corporation owned vehicles.
2.
This subsection shall be effective only during such times that
official traffic signs are displayed setting forth its provisions.
3.
Accident reporting. The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in the injury or death of any person or property damage to
any one vehicle or other property in an apparent extent of $1,000 or
more shall, within five days after such accident, report in writing to
the Weymouth police station; provided, however, the Weymouth Police
Department shall accept a report filed by an owner or operator whose
vehicle has been damaged in an accident in which another person
has unlawfully left the scene of an accident. A driver who has been
incapacitated as a result of such accident, and to such extent as to
make reporting impossible or unfavorable to his recovery, shall not be
required to report such accident until he has recovered sufficiently to
be able to do so. The report shall be made on a form furnished by the
Registry of Motor Vehicles, copies of which shall be available at the
police station. Compliance with this subsection shall not relieve such
driver from the additional responsibility of reporting to the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles any accident in which a person is killed or injured.
The Weymouth police may require any driver or a vehicle involved
in an accident, of which a report must be made as provided in this
subsection, to file supplementary reports whenever the original report
is insufficient in the opinion of the Police Department.
(s)
Vehicle owner ultimately responsible. If any vehicle is found upon any
street or highway in violation of any provisions of this section and the
identity of the driver cannot be determined, the owner, or person in
whose name such vehicle is registered, shall be prima facie responsible
for such violation.
(t)
Unlawful operation of vehicles. No person shall operate any motor
vehicle, including, but not limited to, automobiles, mopeds, dune
buggies, motorcycles, dirt bikes, motor scooters or any other motorized
vehicle, on any publicly owned lands within the Town of Weymouth
which have not been laid out as a way, or designated by the Recreation
Division for the use by such vehicles.
(u)
Riding restrictions on vehicles.
Restrictions generally; exceptions. No person shall ride upon any
portion of a vehicle not designed or intended for use of passengers.
This subsection shall not apply to an employee engaged in the
1.
(v)
§ 13-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-102
1:312
necessary discharge of his duty, or to a person riding within truck
bodies in space intended for merchandise.
Riding on handle bars prohibited. No operator of any motorcycle,
bicycle, scooter or moped when upon the street shall carry any
other person upon the handle bar, frame, mudguard or tank of any
such vehicle nor shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle.
2.
Clinging to moving vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle,
motorcycle, scooter, moped, coaster, sled, roller skates or boards,
or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself without said toy
to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.
3.
Material from vehicles falling upon public ways. Whoever drops or lets
fall or permits or allows to drop or fall, upon any way or highway of the
Town, from any truck, cart or vehicle, any piece of stone or granite, or
other article of such size or character as may endanger public travel,
shall immediately cause same to be completely removed from the limits
of the way or highway.
(w)
Roller skate and toy vehicle restrictions. No person upon roller skates,
roller blades, skateboards or a similar toy device, or riding in or by
means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device shall go upon
any sidewalk, crosswalk, traffic island or roadway which has been
designated by the Town Council as prohibiting such activity.
(x)
Starting, stopping, turning and backing signals. The driver of any
vehicle, before starting, stopping, turning from a direct line or backing,
shall first see that such movement can be made safely. If such
movement cannot be made safely or if it interferes unduly with the
normal movement of other traffic, such driver shall wait for a more
favorable opportunity to make such movement. If the operation of
another vehicle should be affected by a stopping or turning movement,
the driver of such other vehicle shall be given a plainly visible signal.
(y)
U-turns. No operator shall turn a vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction, unless such can be made without backing, and
without causing any approaching operator to slacken speed or change
his course, except that the preceding provisions shall not apply on
any dead-end street, nor to applicants for driver's licenses while being
tested by examiners of the Registry of Motor Vehicles and in
accordance with specific directions of such examiners.
(z)
Designation of left-turn-prohibited areas.
No operator shall make a left turn on a Town street where a "No
Left Turn" sign is posted as authorized by the Town Council.
1.
The erection of "No Left Turn" signs may be authorized upon a
majority vote of the Town Council. The Town Council shall, before
approving the erection of such sign, review reports from the Town
Traffic Engineer and the Police Department.
2.
(aa)
§ 13-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-102
1:313
§ 13-103. Parking.
Operation of vehicles on roads under construction or repair. No
operator shall enter upon the road surface of any street or highway
or section thereof when, by reason of construction, surface treatment,
maintenance or the like, or because of some unprotected hazard, such
road surface is closed to travel, and one or more signs, lights or signals
have been erected to indicate that all or part of the road surface of the
street or highway is not to be used, or when so advised by an officer,
watchman, member of a street or highway crew or employee of the
Town, either audibly or by signals.
(bb)
Driving on sidewalks prohibited. The driver of a vehicle shall not drive
upon any sidewalk except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(cc)
Operation of vehicles in a procession.
It shall be the duty of each driver in a funeral or other procession
to keep as near to the right edge of the roadway as is feasible and
to follow the vehicle ahead as closely as practicable and safe.
1.
At an intersection where a traffic control signal is operating, the
driver of the first vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be
the only one required to stop for a red or yellow indication.
2.
At an intersection where a lawful stop sign exists, the driver of the
first vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only one
required to stop before proceeding through the intersection.
3.
Each vehicle within a funeral or other procession shall be
conspicuously marked so as to alert other motorists of the
procession.
4.
(dd)
Driving through a procession. No operator of any vehicle shall drive
between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession, provided that such vehicles are conspicuously so
designated.
(ee)
General prohibitions. No person shall park a vehicle in any of the
following places; vehicles found parked in violation of the provisions
of this section may be moved by or under the direction of an officer
and at the expense of the owner to a place where parking is permitted
pursuant to § 13-103(o) and (p).
1. Within an intersection;
2. Upon any sidewalk;
3. Upon any crosswalk;
Upon the roadway in a business or residential district where
parking is permitted unless both wheels on the right side of the
4.
(a)
§ 13-102 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-103
1:314
vehicle are within 12 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway,
except where angle parking is required;
Upon the roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a
clear and unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic;
5.
6. Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
7. In front of any private road or driveway;
Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of any intersecting way,
except alleys;
8.
Within 15 feet of the wall of a fire station or directly across the
street from such station, provided signs are erected acquainting
the driver of such restriction;
9.
Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstructions when
such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
10.
Within the limits of private ways furnishing means of access for fire
apparatus to any part of a tenement house or apartment house;
11.
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street in such manner as to constitute a double line or
multiple line parking;
12.
Adjacent to any center division strip or island placed upon or being
a part of any public way.
13.
Prohibited on certain streets. The Town Council, upon considering
reports from the Town Traffic Engineer and Police Department, may,
by majority vote, designate streets or highways or parts thereof where
parking is hereby prohibited or restricted.
(b)
Police may prohibit parking temporarily. The Chief of Police or his
or her designee is hereby authorized to prohibit, temporarily, parking
on any street or highway or part thereof in an impending or existing
emergency or for a lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession,
provided there is reasonable justification for such prohibition. Vehicles
parked in places where parking is prohibited temporarily may be moved
by or under the direction of an officer pursuant to Subsections (o) and
(p) of this section.
(c)
Bus stop.
1. No person shall park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop.
No person shall park a bus upon any street within a business
district or a residential district at any place other than a bus stop.
2.
(d)
(e) Angle parking.
§ 13-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-103
1:315
The Town Council, upon review of recommendations issued by the
Town Traffic Engineer and the Police Department, shall determine
upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall mark
or sign such streets or cause the same to be marked or signed.
1.
Upon streets which have been marked or signed for angle parking,
vehicles shall be parked with one wheel within 12 inches of the
curb and at the same angle to the curb indicated by such marks or
official signs. The vehicle shall be parked so that all four wheels of
the vehicle shall be placed wholly within the painted lines provided.
2.
Parallel parking. Upon a roadway where parking is permitted, both
wheels on the right side of the vehicle are to be within 12 inches of
the curb or edge of the roadway, except upon those streets which are
designated as one-way streets. On such one-way streets, a vehicle shall
be parked in the direction in which such vehicle is moving and with both
wheels on one side of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curb. This shall
not apply to streets or parts of streets where angle parking is required
by this chapter.
(f)
No all-night parking. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle,
other than one acting in an emergency, to park said vehicle on any
street for a period of time longer than one hour between the hours of
12:01 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day.
(g)
Parking time limited in designated places.
No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than
30 minutes on the streets or parts of streets where signs are
adequately posted limiting parking to 30 minutes.
1.
No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one
hour on the streets or parts of streets where signs are adequately
posted limiting parking to one hour.
2.
No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two
hours on the streets or parts of streets where signs are adequately
posted limiting parking to two hours.
This subsection shall be effective only during such time as
sufficient official traffic signs are displayed setting forth its
provisions.
3.
(h)
Municipal parking lots.
Municipal parking areas shall be designated by a majority vote
of the Town Council. The following are designated as municipal
parking areas:
a. Columbian Square.
b. Upper Jackson Square.
1.
(i)
§ 13-103 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-103
1:316
c. Commercial Square (aka "Lower Jackson Square").
d. Weymouth Landing.
e. Old Wessagusett Beach Parking Lot.
f. George East Lane Beach Parking Area.
g. Pleasant Street and Iron Hill Street area.
Hours. No person shall park a vehicle in said parking areas for a
period of time longer than one hour between the hours of 12:01
a.m. and 7:00 a.m. or for longer than two hours between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
2.
Litter prohibited. No person shall throw or cause to be thrown or
placed upon said parking areas any nails, glass, bottles, tin cans,
rubbish or filth of any kind or commit any nuisance thereon.
3.
Preparation of rules and regulations; form of permit; fee. The
Town Council shall prepare rules and regulations governing the
use of said municipal parking areas and the parking of vehicles
therein and may alter, rescind or add to any rules and regulations
previously made by them, which shall include the issuance of
permits by the Chief of Police or his designee to the owner or
owners of each motor vehicle of a person entitled to such a permit.
Such permit may be in the form of a window sticker, so-called,
for the display of such sticker on the window of each vehicle so
covered by such permit or tags. A fee in an amount set by the Town
Council shall be charged for each permit, and such fee shall be
turned into the Town Treasurer.
4.
Posting of regulations. Signs warning all persons of the provisions
of these regulations shall be erected at the entrances and exits of
said parking areas, and no person shall be held liable for violation
of these regulations except when such signs are actually in place.
5.
George East Lane Beach and Old Wessagussett Beach parking
areas.
Use limited to Town residents. The use of the George East Lane
Beach and Wessagussett Beach parking areas shall be limited
to inhabitants of the Town of Weymouth as defined herein, and
no other person or persons shall use the same as a parking
area or space for vehicles or trespass upon the same for any
purpose whatsoever.
a.
Definition. As used in this subsection, "inhabitants" shall have
the following meaning: residents occupying dwelling units
within the Town, their families and household guests.
b.
6.
(j) Parking for handicapped.
§ 13-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-103
1:317
Use of spaces restricted; number of spaces required. No person
shall park a motor vehicle, motorcycle or like means of
transportation in a designated parking space that is reserved for
vehicles owned and operated by disabled veterans or by
handicapped persons unless said vehicle bears the distinctive
number plates or placards authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2.
1.
Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or private
way or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking
areas for businesses, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums,
sporting or recreational facilities, cultural centers, residential
dwellings or for any other place where the public has a right
of access as invitees or licensees shall be required to reserve
parking spaces in said off-street parking areas for any vehicle
owned and operated by a disabled veteran or handicapped person
whose vehicle bears the distinguishing license plate authorized by
MGL c. 90, § 2, according to the following formula:
If the number of parking spaces in any such area is:
a. More than 15 but not more than 25: one parking space.
More than 25 but not more than 40: 5% of such spaces, but not
less than two.
b.
More than 40 but not more than 100: 4% of such spaces, but
not less than three.
c.
More than 100 but not more than 200: 3% of such spaces, but
not less than four.
d.
More than 200 but not more than 500: 2% of such spaces, but
not less than six.
e.
More than 500 but not more than 1,000: 0.5% of such spaces,
but not less than 10.
f.
More than 1,000 but not more than 2,000: 1% of such spaces,
but not less than 15.
g.
More than 2,000 but not more than 5,000: 0.75% of such
spaces, but not less than 20.
h.
i. More than 5,000: 0.5% of such spaces, but not less than 30.
2.
Designation of spaces. Parking spaces designated as reserved
under the provisions of Subsection (i) shall be identified by use of
abovegrade signs with white lettering against a blue background
and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking: Special Plate
or Placard Required. Unauthorized Vehicles May be Removed at
Owner's Expense"; shall be as near as possible to a building
entrance or walkway; shall be adjacent to curb ramps or other
unobstructed methods permitting sidewalk access to a
3.
§ 13-103 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-103
1:318
handicapped person; and shall be 12 feet wide or two eight-footwide
areas with four feet of cross-hatch between them.
Regulation of unauthorized vehicles. Unauthorized vehicles shall
be prohibited within parking spaces designated for use by disabled
veterans or handicapped persons as authorized by Subsection (j) of
these ordinances or in such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp
designated for use by handicapped persons as a means of egress to
a street or public way.
4.
Vehicle weight limits.
Rules and regulations. It is unlawful to park a motor vehicle with
a registered gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more,
or any tractor or trailer as defined in MGL c. 90, § 1, or any
motor vehicle requiring hazardous material placards for a period
of time exceeding one hour on any street or Town-owned parking
facility, unless the operator of such vehicle is employed in loading
or unloading such vehicle or trailer.
1.
Violations and penalties. A vehicle as described in this subsection
left standing over 24 hours may be towed and stored at the owner's
expense.
2.
(k)
Fire lanes; vehicles in private ways.
Obstruction of private way. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block
a private way with a vehicle or any other means so as to prevent
access by fire apparatus or equipment to any schools and places of
public assembly.
1.
Obstruction of fire lanes. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park
a vehicle in any clearly marked fire lane, such fire lanes to be
designated by the Chief of the Fire Department or his designee
and posted as such. Said fire lanes shall be a distance of 12 feet
from the curbing of a sidewalk in a shopping center, apartment
complexes and similar locations. Where no sidewalk with curbing
exists, the distance and location shall be established by the Chief
of the Fire Department or his or her designee.
2.
Removal of objects obstructing access. Any object or vehicle
obstructing or blocking any fire lane or private way may be
removed or towed by the Town under the direction of a police
officer at the expense of the owner and without liability to the Town
of Weymouth.
3.
Installation of signs and road markings. The owner of record of
any building affected by these subsections shall provide and install
signs and road markings as provided in Subsection (l)(2) of this
subsection. Said signs shall be no less than 12 inches by 18 inches
and shall read "Fire Lane - No Parking - Tow Zone."
4.
(l)
§ 13-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-103
1:319
Parking restricted for vehicles for sale. It is unlawful for any person to
park upon a street, sidewalk or highway any vehicle displayed for sale.
(m)
Parking for maintenance and storage. No person shall stop, stand or
park any vehicle or other conveyance upon any public way in order
to repair such vehicle or other conveyance or cause it to be repaired
upon any public way of the Town, nor shall any person occupy any part
of any public way as storage room for any vehicle; except that in an
emergency, temporary repairs may be made.
(n)
Authority to remove illegally parked cars. Vehicles found standing or
parked in violation of any of the provisions of this section, except those
specifically exempted by law, may be removed to a convenient location
under the direction of an officer of the Police Department of a rank of
sergeant or higher as the Chief of Police may designate, and the owner
of the vehicle so removed or towed shall be liable for the cost of such
removal and storage, if any, as set forth in this section.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed or
removed under the provisions of § 13-103. Such record shall be
retained for one year and shall contain the following information:
1. The registration of the vehicle;
The location from which it was towed, and time and date of tow
order;
2.
3. The location to which it was moved;
4. The fee charged for the towing;
5. Name of towing contractor;
6. Name and rank of the officer who authorized the tow.
(o)
Recovery of towed vehicle. An owner may not recover a towed vehicle
until all charges lawfully imposed for such removal and storage
following the same have been paid, and, if in the calendar year in which
such vehicle is so removed, and in the preceding year, five or more
notices, in the aggregate, have been affixed to said vehicle as provided
in MGL c. 90, § 20A, until due notice has been received that either
the fines provided in such notices have been paid or security for the
payment thereof has been deposited.
(p)
Parking fines. Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 90, § 20A, the
following schedule of fines is enacted: [Amended 6-15-2015 by Ord.
No. 15-031]
Fines of $25:
1. Right wheels more than 12 inches from curb;
2. Overtime parking;
3. All-night parking;
(q)
§ 13-103 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-103
1:320
4. Within 20 feet of an intersection;
5. Wrong direction;
6. Restricted or prohibited area, including Town Hall and municipal
lots;
7. Beach permit parking;
8. Improper parallel parking;
9. Improper angle parking;
10. Lack of ten-foot passage;
11. Blocking a driveway or private road;
12. Double parking;
13. Restricted area.
Fines of $50:
1. Truck parking restriction;
2. Vehicle on crosswalk;
3. Interfering with snow removal;
4. Fire station entrance;
5. Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
6. Block private way/obstruct fire apparatus;
7. On a sidewalk;
8. Within an intersection;
9. Uninspected motor vehicle on a public way;
10. Unauthorized parking on any municipal property.
Fines of $100:
1. Unregistered motor vehicle in a public way;
2. Vehicle parked in a bus stop shall be subject to a fine of $100 for
the first offense and $200 for any second or subsequent offense;
3. Parking in fire lane.
Fines of $200:
1. Handicapped parking zone;
2. Blocking handicap ramp;
3. Blocking handicap access.
Penalties for violation of parking ordinance. Any person violating any
provision of this chapter regulating parking of motor vehicles shall be
dealt with as provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A, and any person violating
any of the rules and regulations applicable to state highways made
by the Massachusetts Highway Department30 under authority of MGL
c. 85, § 2, shall be subject to the penalty provided in such rules and
regulations.
(r)
§ 13-103 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-104
1:321
§ 13-104. Traffic signs, signals, markings and zones.
Traffic signs and signals.
The Town Council, upon reviewing reports from the Traffic
Engineer and Police Department, shall by majority vote be
authorized and have the duty to designate the placement of all
official traffic signs, signals, markings and safety zones required
hereunder. All signs, signals, markings and safety zones shall
conform to the standards as prescribed by the Massachusetts
Highway Department,31 Federal Highway Administration Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The maintenance of traffic
signs shall be the responsibility of the Department of Public Works
as set forth in ordinance.
1.
With the exception of § 13-103(c), prohibiting or restricting parking
within § 13-103 shall be effective only during such time as a
sufficient number of signs are erected and maintained in each block
designating the provisions of such section and located so as to be
easily visible to approaching drivers.
2.
Sections relating to one-way streets shall be effective only during
such time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected and
maintained at each of the exits for each one-way street, so that at
least one sign will be clearly visible for a distance of at least 75 feet
to drivers approaching such an exit.
3.
(a)
Display of unauthorized signs, signals and markings prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon or in
view of any street any unofficial sign, signal, marking or device which
purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign,
signal, marking or device or which attempts to direct the movement of
traffic or which hides from view any official sign or signal.
(b)
Placement of structures or property in streets prohibited.
No person shall place, erect or cause to be placed or erected
within any sidewalk, street or highway any fixture or structure
unless a permit issued by the Mayor, in the case of Town ways,
or by the Massachusetts Highway Department,32 in the case of
state highways, authorizing such placement or erection has been
granted and is in effect.
1.
No person, other than one employed, directly or indirectly, by the
Town or the Massachusetts Highway Department and while in the
performance of necessary public duties, shall at any time place
2.
(c)
30.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
31.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
32.Editor's Note: The former Highway Department is now the Highway Division of the
Massachusetts Department of Transportation.
§ 13-104 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-104
1:322
§ 13-105. Pedestrians.
or leave in any sidewalk, street or highway any article, material
or merchandise, or park a vehicle or cart on any sidewalk, street
or highway for the purpose of displaying merchandise unless a
permit issued by the Town Council, in the case of Town ways,
or the Massachusetts Highway Department, in the case of state
highways, authorizing such use of the sidewalk, street or highway
has been granted and is in effect, except as may be necessary for
the reasonable and expeditious loading or unloading of any such
vehicle; provided, however, that such property shall never be left so
as to obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
Any such fixture, structure or property as referred to in this
subsection which has been erected, placed or left illegally in any
street, highway or sidewalk may be removed by or under the
direction of the Mayor or his designee and at the owner's expense.
3.
One-way streets. The Town Council, upon reviewing reports from the
Traffic Engineer and Police Department, shall by majority vote be
authorized and have the duty to designate streets or highways or parts
thereof as one-way streets.
(d)
Obedience to police officers and traffic control signals; crosswalks
defined. Pedestrians shall obey the directions of police officers directing
traffic and, whenever there is an officer directing traffic, a traffic
control signal or a marked crosswalk, shall remain within the limits of
a marked crosswalk and as hereinafter provided in this chapter. For
the purpose of this section, a marked crosswalk shall only be construed
to be that area of a roadway reserved for pedestrian crossing located
between two solid white reflectorized, twelve-inch pavement markings
in rural areas or markings not less than six inches wide in urban areas,
said markings or lines being no less than six feet apart.
(a)
Definition and duty to obey traffic control signals. Traffic control signal
color indications and legends shall have the commands ascribed to
them in this section and no other meanings, and every pedestrian shall
comply therewith, except when otherwise directed by an officer.
Red and yellow or the word "Walk." Whenever the red and yellow
lenses are illuminated together or the single word "WALK" is
illuminated, pedestrians facing such indication may proceed across
the roadway and in the direction of such signal only.
1.
Red only or "Don't Walk." Whenever the words "Don't Walk" or
any indication other than red and yellow shown together are
illuminated in a traffic control signal where pedestrian indications
are provided, pedestrians approaching or facing such indication
shall wait on the sidewalk edge of the roadway or in the pedestrian
refuge area of a traffic island and shall not enter upon or cross
a roadway until the proper indication is illuminated in the traffic
2.
(b)
§ 13-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-105
1:323
control signal; but any pedestrian who has partially completed
his crossing on the walk indication shall proceed or return to the
nearest sidewalk or safety island on the yellow indication, the red
indication or when the words "Don't Walk" are illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes.
Green only. At traffic control signal locations where no pedestrian
indication is given or provided, pedestrians facing the signal may
proceed across the roadway within any marked crosswalk in the
direction of the green indication.
3.
Yellow only, red only, or flashing "Don't Walk." Pedestrians
approaching or facing a yellow, red or flashing "Don't Walk"
illuminated indication shall not start to cross the roadway.
4.
Flashing red, yellow or green. At any traffic control signal locations
where a flashing red, flashing yellow or flashing green indication
is being given facing a crosswalk, pedestrians shall actuate, where
provided, the pedestrian signal indication and cross the roadway
only on the red-yellow or "Walk" indication when such indication is
in operation. If no pedestrian signal is provided, pedestrians shall
cross within crosswalks with due care.
5.
Required use of traffic control signals. At a traffic control signal
location where pedestrian indications are provided but which are
shown only upon actuation by means of a pedestrian push button, no
pedestrian shall cross a roadway unless or until the pedestrian control
signal push button has been actuated, and then cross only on the proper
pedestrian signal indication. At traffic control signal locations where no
pedestrian indication is provided, pedestrians shall cross only on the
green indication. If necessary, the green indication shall be actuated by
the pedestrian by means of a push button.
(c)
Right-of-way through traffic control signals. At a traffic control signal
location, pedestrians shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles of a funeral
or other procession or authorized emergency vehicle while in
performance of emergency duties regardless of the signal indication
given, and they shall not attempt to cross the roadway until such
vehicles or procession has passed, at which time pedestrians shall then
cross the roadway only as provided in this section.
(d)
Improper use of traffic control signal. It is unlawful for any person
to actuate a pedestrian control signal or to enter a marked crosswalk
unless a crossing of the roadway is intended.
(e)
Hitchhiking and soliciting; permission required. No person shall stand
in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride, employment or
business from the operator or occupant of any vehicle without the
written permission of the Mayor or his designee pursuant to § 9-401 of
these ordinances.
(f)
§ 13-105 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-105
1:324
§ 13-106. Buses, taxicab stands and service zones.
No motor vehicle operated upon a public way in any city or town for the
carriage of passengers for hire in such a manner as to afford a means of
transportation similar to that afforded by a railway company shall stand
such vehicle in a street unless to take on or let off a passenger, and then only
at such places as may be designated by the Town Council and for such time
as may be sufficient to enable the passenger to take a seat or to leave such
omnibus or vehicle; and provided, further, that no operator of such vehicle
shall operate it in a street other than those designated by the Town Council.
Provisions of this section not exclusive. The provisions of this section
shall in no way abrogate the provisions of MGL c. 90, § 14, Precautions
for safety of other travelers, and § 14A, Protection of blind pedestrians
crossing or attempting to cross ways." Furthermore, notwithstanding
the provisions of this section, every operator of a vehicle shall exercise
due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon the roadway and
shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary and shall
exercise proper precautions which may become necessary for safe
operation.
(g)
Exemptions from § 13-105. The provisions of this section governing
the use of ways by pedestrians shall not apply to: pedestrians actually
engaged in work upon a roadway closed to travel or under construction
or repair; municipal, state, federal or public service corporation
employees while in the performance of their duties; officers engaged in
the performance of their public duties; or to pedestrians acting in an
emergency when such emergency necessitates departure from any part
of this section.
(h)
Violations and penalties. Pursuant to MGL c. 90, § 18A, any person who
violates the provisions of this section which deal with the proper use of
ways by pedestrians shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $25 for
each offense.
(i)
Location of bus stops, taxicab stands and service zones. The Town
Council, upon reviewing reports from the Traffic Engineer and Police
Department, shall by majority vote be authorized and have the duty
to designate the location of all bus stops, taxicab stands and service
zones. In the case of taxicab stands, the Town Council shall designate
by majority vote who may use them as such.
(a)
Enforcement. The Town of Weymouth Police Department shall enforce
this section of Chapter 13 governing the implementation of bus stops
pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D, as amended.
(b)
Penalties for violation of bus ordinance. Any person or entity who or
which violates the provisions of this section of Chapter 13 governing
the implementation of bus stops shall be liable to a fine of $100 for the
first offense and $200 for any second or subsequent offense.
(c)
§ 13-105 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-107
1:325
§ 13-107. Abandonment of motor vehicles.
General provisions. No person shall abandon any vehicle within the
Town, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the
Town for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such
vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. No person shall
leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked
vehicle on any street or highway within the Town.
Noncriminal provisions. Notwithstanding the provisions of MGL c.
90, § 22B, Subsection (a), or any other general or special law to
the contrary, proceeding under the provisions of Subsection (a)(2)
through (10), inclusive, shall be deemed noncriminal.
1.
Automobile owner. As used in Subsection (a)(2) through (10),
inclusive, the word "owner" shall mean the person or entity
registered as the owner of a motor vehicle in the records of the
Registry of Motor Vehicles or the person or entity who or which last
had custody or possession of a motor vehicle, legally or otherwise,
including, without limitation, operators and owners of automobile
graveyards or junkyards as defined in MGL c. 140B, § 1; provided,
however, that the owner of a motor vehicle which has been stolen
from said owner and subsequently abandoned shall not be subject
to the penalties provided for in this section.
2.
Violations and penalties. A person who abandons a motor vehicle,
registered or unregistered, upon any public or private way or
upon the property of another, without the permission of the owner
or lessee of said property, shall pay a civil penalty of $250 for
the first such abandonment and $500 for each such abandonment
thereafter and, in addition thereto, shall be liable for costs incurred
by the Town in removing or disposing of such motor vehicle,
including, but not limited to, towing, storage, processing and
disposal charges.
3.
Identification upon discovery. A police officer or a person assigned
responsibility for abandoned motor vehicles by the Parking Clerk
who determines that a motor vehicle has been abandoned shall
attach a tag to said vehicle containing, but not limited to, the
following information: the current date, the location of said vehicle,
its make, color, registration number, if any, and its vehicle
identification number, a telephone number or address at which
the owner may obtain information regarding the status of the
motor vehicle; the hearing procedure regarding abandoned motor
vehicles, as provided herein; and a statement that after a specified
period of time, the vehicle may be towed and disposed of.
4.
Notice to owner. After said tag has been affixed to such vehicle,
if the owner's identity is ascertained and the motor vehicle is
still deemed to be abandoned pursuant to MGL c. 90, § 22C, the
Parking Clerk or his designee shall send a written notice, in a
5.
(a)
§ 13-107 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-107
1:326
form approved by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, by first class
mail to the owner's last known address as contained in records
of said Registrar of Motor Vehicles. Such notice shall be deemed
sufficient, whether or not actually received by the addressee, if
mailed to the address furnished by said Registrar. Such notice shall
contain, but not be limited to, the following information regarding
the abandoned vehicle: the current date; the location of said
vehicle, make, color, registration number, if any, and its vehicle
identification number; the amount of the fine and costs assessed for
the offense; and the scheduled date, time and place of the hearing
before a hearing officer. Notwithstanding the hearing scheduled
by the Parking Clerk, the owner shall be granted a hearing prior
to the scheduled hearing date by appearing at the office of the
Parking Clerk during its regular business hours and requesting an
immediate hearing regarding the apparently abandoned vehicle.
Notwithstanding the hearing scheduled by the Parking Clerk, the
owner may elect to have the matter adjudicated in accordance with
the provisions of Subsection (a)(7) herein.
Hearing. All such hearings shall be held before a person
hereinafter referred to as a "hearing officer," who shall be the
Parking Clerk or a designee of said Parking Clerk. Such hearings
shall be informal, the rules of evidence shall not apply and
decisions of the hearing officer shall be subject to judicial review
as provided by MGL c. 30A, § 14. No appeal or exception shall
operate to stay the imposition of the fine and costs, the revocation
or nonrenewal of the license or the prohibition of registration as
provided for herein.
6.
Disposition of case. A person so notified to appear before the
hearing officer may appear and contest or confess the alleged
violation, either personally or through an agent duly authorized in
writing, or, in the alternative, may confess the alleged violation by
mailing to the Parking Clerk the notice, accompanied by the fine
and any costs assessed; provided, however, that such payment shall
be made only by postal note, money order, or registered check
made payable to the Town of Weymouth.
7.
Failure to appear at hearing or pay fine. If the owner fails to appear
at a hearing or fails to pay the fine and costs, the Parking Clerk
shall, in the case of a person, notify the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
who shall place the matter on record and not renew the license of
such person to operate a motor vehicle and, in the case of an entity,
notify the appropriate person to revoke or not renew the owner's
license or permit to operate a business pertaining to the towing,
storing, servicing or dismantling of vehicles, including, without
limitation, automobile graveyards and junkyards. If the abandoned
vehicle is registered in such owner's name or was last registered in
his name, the registrar shall prohibit the registration and renewal
of registration of any such vehicle under such owner's name. Such
8.
§ 13-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-107
1:327
notice shall be in a form approved by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles. Upon notification to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles of
the owner's name, an additional charge of $10 shall be assessed
against such owner of the abandoned vehicle. Said charge of $10
shall be collected by the Town, and notification of such collection
shall be made to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles each month. On
or before September 1 of each year, the Registrar shall certify the
total number of ten-dollar charges to be assessed against the Town.
This number shall equal the total number of notifications of actual
collections by the Town. The Registrar shall transmit such certified
assessments to the Treasurer of the Commonwealth, who shall
include such assessments in the warrants prepared in accordance
with MGL c. 59, § 20. All such actions taken by the Registrar shall
remain in effect until the Registrar receives notice from the Parking
Clerk that the matter has been disposed of in accordance with the
law.
Effect on driver's license. Notwithstanding any other general or
special law, ordinance or regulation to the contrary, if an owner
has abandoned a vehicle on three occasions and has incurred a fine
therefor, each subsequent abandonment, in addition to the fines
and costs assessed herein, shall result, in the case of a person,
in the revocation for one year of the owner's license to operate a
motor vehicle and, in the case of an entity, in the revocation for
one year of the owner's license or permit to operate a business
pertaining to the towing, storing, servicing or dismantling of motor
vehicles, including, without limitation, automobile graveyards and
junkyards. Such one-year time period shall commence on the date
on which the Parking Clerk's records indicate that a hearing was
held and a fourth or subsequent abandonment was found or that
a fine was received in the mail confessing a fourth or subsequent
abandonment.
9.
Disposal. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section of
this chapter, whenever the Parking Clerk or a person designated
or appointed by said Parking Clerk shall deem that an abandoned
vehicle is worth less than the cost of its removal, transportation
and three days' storage and expenses incidental to its disposal, said
Parking Clerk or designee shall direct a carrier to take possession
of such vehicle and dispose of it as refuse. A record of such disposal
shall be made and kept in the office of said Parking Clerk for
a period of two years. Neither said Parking Clerk, carrier nor
the Town shall be liable for such disposal. The owner of such
vehicle shall be notified as hereinbefore provided and shall pay to
said carrier all charges for removal, transportation, storage and
disposal of such vehicle within 14 days after the mailing of said
notice or shall be subject to the fine herein provided as well as
nonrenewal of such owner's license to operate and registration of a
motor vehicle.
10.
§ 13-107 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-107
1:328
§ 13-108. Operation of motor scooters.
Construal of terms. An "abandoned vehicle" is a motor vehicle
which has either expired or no registration plates; has another
vehicle's registration attached to it; is missing or has an expired
inspection sticker; is missing parts or has excessive damage; or
is considered a safety hazard, as determined by the Department
Traffic Officer. Vehicles towed from the scene of an accident, if
unclaimed by the owner, will also fall under the provisions of this
section.
11.
Preliminary procedure for abandoned vehicles. If the vehicle in
question is properly parked and registered and the condition of
the vehicle is not an immediate threat to public safety, before a
determination is made that the vehicle is abandoned, the Police
Department must attempt to locate the owner, up to and including
the following:
(a) Question residents in the immediate area;
(b) Observe the vehicle for 72 hours;
Run the vehicle identification number to identify the current or
last-known owner;
(c)
Attempt to contact said owner, either through certified mail or
by telephone; and
(d)
Issue a citation for abandonment and send it by certified mail
to the last registered owner of record.
(e)
12.
Towing of the vehicle. Subject to Subsection (a)(11) and (12) above,
when no contact can be made, the vehicle will be towed by
authority of the Traffic Officer, after which the garage is required,
within five days, to send a registered letter to the owner of record.
13.
Purpose: to serve the public interest and safety by regulating the use
of motorized scooters on any way, street, sidewalk, highway, boulevard,
avenue, court, lane, alley, square, and place, school grounds,
playgrounds, parks, or any other property where the public has a right
of access.
(a)
Exemptions. The following vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions
of § 13-108:
Vehicles licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts as motor
vehicles;
1.
Vehicles manufactured and designed for the transport of
handicapped persons as those persons have been defined by state
and federal law;
2.
3. Any vehicle owned or leased by the Town of Weymouth;
(b)
§ 13-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-108
1:329
Vehicles licensed or used by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
or any state agency, instrumentality or entity, federal government
or any federal agency, instrumentality or entity, including the
United States Postal Service, performing service to the public;
4.
Personal motorized vehicles used by governmental law
enforcement personnel, including police officers.
5.
Operator's rights. No person shall operate a motorized scooter on
any way, street, sidewalk, highway, boulevard, avenue, court, lane,
alley, square, and place, school grounds, playgrounds, parks, or any
other property where the public has a right of access without a valid
learner's permit or driver'S LICENSE Issued by the Massachusetts
Registry of Motor Vehicles or other state-recognized department of
motor vehicles. Every person operating a motorized scooter shall have
all the rights and is subject to all the provisions applicable to the driver
of any other motor vehicle as established under MGL c. 90, including,
but not limited to, laws concerning driving under the influence of
alcoholic beverages or drugs, except those provisions which, by their
very nature, can have no application.
Under Massachusetts law, motor scooters fall into the category of
"motorized bicycles" (with or without pedals) and are therefore
regulated by driver's license rules. Operators of motor scooters must
obey the same traffic control and right-of-way laws as Massachusetts
licensed drivers.
(c)
Operation: motor capable of disengagement.
A motorized scooter operated on any way, street, sidewalk,
highway, boulevard, avenue, court, lane, alley, square, and place,
school grounds, playgrounds, parks, or any other property where
the public has a right of access shall comply with one of the
following:
Operate in a manner so that the motor is disengaged or ceases
to function when the brakes are applied;
a.
Operate in a manner so that the motor is disengaged through a
switch or mechanism that, when released, will cause the motor
to disengage or cease to function.
b.
1.
It is unlawful and a violation of this section for a person to operate
a motorized scooter that does not meet one of the requirements of
Subsection (d)(1).
2.
(d)
Operation: right-hand curb. Any person operating a motorized scooter
upon any way, street, sidewalk, highway, boulevard, avenue, court, lane,
alley, square, and place, school grounds, playgrounds, parks, or any
other property where the public has a right of access shall ride as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or right edge of the street except
under the following situations:
(e)
§ 13-108 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-108
1:330
When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
1.
When preparing for a left turn, the operator shall stop and
dismount as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or right
edge of the street and complete the turn by crossing the street on
foot;
2.
When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions, including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, vehicles, bicycles, pedestrians,
animals, surface hazards, or substandard-width lanes, which make
it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or right edge of the
street.
3.
Operator restrictions. No person shall, while operating a motorized
scooter upon any way, street, sidewalk, highway, boulevard, avenue,
court, lane, alley, square, and place, school grounds, playgrounds,
parks, or any other property where the public has a right of access, do
any of the following:
Operate a motorized scooter on a highway as defined under
Chapter 90 of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
1.
Operate a motorized scooter in violation of any federal, state, or
local traffic and parking laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.
2.
Operate a motorized scooter without wearing a properly fitted
and fastened protective helmet or other headgear that meets the
standards set by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
or which is otherwise approved by the Massachusetts Department
of Public Safety.
3.
Operate a motorized scooter without a braking system that enables
the operator to bring the scooter traveling at a speed of 15 miles
per hour to a smooth, safe stop within 30 feet on a dry, clean, hard,
level surface.
4.
Operate a motorized scooter with any passengers in addition to the
operator.
5.
Operate a motorized scooter carrying any package, bundle, or
article that prevents the operator from keeping at least one hand
upon the handlebars.
6.
Operate a motorized scooter with the handlebars raised so that the
operator must elevate his or her hands above the level of his or her
shoulders in order to grasp the normal steering grip area.
7.
Operate a motorized scooter in a careless, reckless or negligent
manner so as to endanger the life or safety of any person or the
property of any other person.
8.
(f)
§ 13-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-108
1:331
Leave a motorized scooter lying on its side on any sidewalk, or park
a motorized scooter on a sidewalk in any other position, so that
there is not an adequate path for pedestrian traffic.
9.
Attach the motorized scooter or himself or herself while on the
street, by any means, to any other vehicle on the street.
10.
Operate a motorized scooter at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
11.
Operate a motorized scooter upon any public street with a posted
speed limit greater than 30 miles per hour.
12.
When preparing for a left turn, the operator shall stop and
dismount as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or right
edge of the street, roadway or alley and complete the turn by
crossing the street, roadway or alley on foot, subject to the
restrictions placed on pedestrians.
13.
Operate a motorized scooter upon a sidewalk, except as may be
necessary to enter or leave adjacent property.
14.
Operate a motorized scooter upon any way, street, sidewalk,
highway, boulevard, avenue, court, lane, alley, square, and place,
school grounds, playgrounds, parks, or any other property where
the public has a right of access which prohibits bicycles.
15.
Pass or overtake another motorized scooter traveling in the same
direction.
16.
Whenever a bicycle lane has been established on a public street,
any person operating a motorized scooter upon that street shall
ride within the bicycle lane, except that the person may move out
of the lane under any of the following situations:
When overtaking and passing another vehicle or pedestrian
within the lane or when about to enter a lane if the overtaking
and passing cannot be done safely within the lane.
a.
When preparing for a left turn, the operator shall stop and
dismount as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or
right edge of the roadway and complete the turn by crossing
the roadway on foot, subject to the restrictions placed on
pedestrians.
b.
When reasonably necessary to leave the bicycle lane to avoid
debris or other hazardous conditions.
c.
d. When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.
17.
No person operating a motorized scooter shall leave a bicycle lane
until the movement can be made with reasonable safety and then
only after giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in
18.
§ 13-108 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-108
1:332
Chapter 90 or the General Laws in the event that any vehicle may
be affected by the movement.
Operate a motorized scooter in or around school property while
school is in session so as to disturb the peace.
19.
Operate a motorized scooter in places of public access, such as
malls, parking lots or other places where the public has a right of
access as an invitee.
20.
Operate a motorized scooter during hours of darkness (before
sunrise or after sunset).
21.
Enforcement; violations and penalties.
The provisions of this section may be enforced by any police officer
or any special police officer designated by the Chief of Police to do
so.
1.
A person who is charged with violating this section shall give his or
her name and address to the enforcing authority.
2.
The following penalties shall be applicable for violations of this
section:
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a fine in accordance with MGL c. 90, § 1B, not more
than $25 for the first offense, not less than $25 nor more than
$50 for a second offense and not less than $50 nor more than
$100 for subsequent offenses committed.
a.
As an alternative to initiating a criminal proceeding, violation
of this section may be enforced in a manner provided in the
Town of Weymouth Ordinances and MGL c. 40, § 21D, which
procedures are incorporated herein by reference. The penalty
for each violation shall be as set forth in Subsection (g)(3)(a)
above for each day or part of a day during which the violation
is committed, continued or permitted; provided, however, that
if a violator fails to follow the procedures and requirements of
said MGL c. 40 § 21D, the fine or fines shall be recovered by
indictment or a complaint pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21.
b.
Upon the violation of any provision of this section, any police
officer or any special police officer designated by the Chief of
Police may impound the motorized scooter until the operator
appears in court. If the operator is a minor (yet to attain the
age of 17 years), the motorized scooter may only be released
to the offender's parent or legal guardian. If an operator is
an adult and is convicted of violating any provision of this
section, the motorized scooter may be subject to a forfeiture
proceeding under the General Laws. If the operator is a minor,
the motorized scooter may be subject to a forfeiture
c.
3.
(g)
§ 13-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-108
1:333
proceeding under the General Laws if the minor is adjudicated
delinquent or has his or her case continued without a finding.
§ 13-108 WEYMOUTH CODE § 13-108
1:334
Chapter 120
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Regulations affecting use of private
property — See Ch. 7.
Public works — See Ch. 8.
§ 13-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 13-108
1:335

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 120-1. Title.
This regulation shall be known and may be cited as the "Weymouth Zoning
Ordinance."
§ 120-1.1. Transition.
This ordinance is a transition of the Weymouth Zoning Bylaw. By way of
transition, the following interpretations shall be made:
§ 120-2. Purpose. [Amended October 1975 STM by Art. 18,
approved 1-26-1976; June 1978 STM by Art. 3, approved 11-2-1978]
A. Wherever the word "bylaw" appears, it shall mean "ordinance."
All effective dates under the Zoning Bylaw shall be applicable to the
Zoning Ordinance.
B.
Zoning adopted September 1969 Special Town Meeting by Articles
4 and 5, approved by the Attorney General January 21, 1970.
Amendments are noted in the ordinance where applicable.
C.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be the special permit granting
authority, and all sections referring to the Board of Selectmen and
Planning Board as the special permit granting authority shall mean the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
D.
All references to a board or commission that has been changed by the
Weymouth Home Rule Charter shall mean the appropriate agency as
established under the Charter. Any interpretation as to Town agency
applicability shall be the made by the Inspector of Buildings.
E.
Copies of special permit legal notices and applications shall be
distributed to all Councilors. The Town Council may, after review of the
application at a regular meeting with citizen input, submit comments
and recommendations to the Board of Zoning Appeals for the public
hearing.
F.
The purpose of this bylaw is to:
Promote the health, safety, morals, convenience and general
welfare of the inhabitants of the Town of Weymouth.
(1)
(2) Lessen congestion in the streets.
(3) Conserve health.
(4) Secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers.
(5) Provide adequate light and air.
A.
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-2
1:337
§ 120-3. Scope.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this bylaw shall not
in any way impair or interfere with the provisions of other regulations or
laws or with the provisions of private restrictions placed upon property by
covenant, deed or other private agreement or with provisions of restrictive
covenants running with the land to which the Town is a party. Where this
bylaw imposes a greater restriction upon land, buildings or structures than
is imposed or required by any of the aforesaid provisions, the provisions of
this bylaw shall prevail.
(6) Prevent overcrowding of land.
(7) Avoid undue concentration of population.
(8) Encourage housing for persons of all income levels.
Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, water
supply, drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open spaces and other
public requirements.
(9)
Conserve the value of land and buildings, including the
conservation of natural resources and the prevention of blight and
pollution of the environment.
(10)
(11)Encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town.
Preserve and increase amenities by the promulgation of
regulations to fulfill said objectives.
(12)
This bylaw includes but is not limited to restricting, prohibiting,
permitting or regulating:
Uses of land, including wetlands and lands deemed subject to
seasonal or periodic flooding.
(1)
Size, height, bulk, location and use of structures, including
buildings and signs.
(2)
(3) Uses of bodies of water, including watercourses.
(4) Noxious uses.
Areas and dimensions of land and bodies of water to be occupied or
unoccupied by uses and structures, courts, yards and open spaces.
(5)
(6) Density of population and intensity of use.
Accessory facilities and uses, such as vehicle parking and loading,
landscaping and open space.
(7)
The development of the natural, scenic and aesthetic qualities of
the community.
(8)
B.
§ 120-2 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-4
1:338
§ 120-4. Severability.
Should any section or provision of this bylaw be declared by the courts to
be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the bylaw as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to
be unconstitutional or invalid.
§ 120-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-4
1:339

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 120-5. Word usage.
Words used in the present include the future; the singular includes the
plural and the plural the singular. The word "used" includes "designed,
intended or arranged to be used." The word "shall" is mandatory; the word
"may" is permissive; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word
"land" includes the words "marsh" and "water." The following terms, for the
purpose of this bylaw, are defined below.
§ 120-6. Definitions.
In this bylaw, the following terms and words, unless a contrary meaning is
specifically prescribed, shall have the following meanings:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, the use of which is
customarily incidental to that of a principal building and the principal use
of the lot.
ACCESSORY HOME OFFICE — An office of a business located within the
principal building of the premises of a resident conducting a business,
such as consulting, marketing, mail order, data processing, an office for
any service business person or any trades person and other similar office,
but not including any storage of product or materials for resale, stock of
materials for use in a service business, open lot storage, dispatching or
repair service of any kind.[Added May 1999 ATM by Art. 19, approved
8-19-1999]
ACCESSORY USE — The subordinate use of a building or premises for a
purpose customarily incidental to a main or principal use permitted in the
district in which it is located.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having, as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines, videos and other
matter which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis
depicting, describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as
defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.[Added June 1994 STM by Art. 5, approved
8-25-1994]
ADULT CLUB — An establishment which, as a form of entertainment, allows
a person or persons to perform in a state of nudity, as defined in MGL c.
272, § 31, or allows a person or persons to work in a state of nudity, as
defined in MGL c. 272, § 31.[Added May 1996 ATM by Art. 54, approved
9-9-1996]
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — An enclosed building used for
presenting material distinguished by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to sexual conduct or sexual excitement as defined
in MGL c. 272, § 31.[Added June 1994 STM by Art. 5, approved
8-25-1994]
§ 120-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6
1:341
ALLEY — Any public space or narrow thoroughfare 20 feet or less, but not
less than 12 feet, in width, which has been dedicated or deeded to the public
for public travel and which affords secondary access to abutting property.
ALTERATION — A change in or addition to a building which modifies its
location, plan, manner of construction or the kind of materials used, or in
any way varies the character of its use.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling unit."
APARTMENT HOTEL — A building containing four or more apartments
which do not have kitchens, primarily for persons who have their residence
therein.
APARTMENT HOUSE — See "dwelling, multiple."
ATTACHED — Connected to or united with.
ATTIC — The space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable story
and the roof rafters.
BASEMENT — A story of a building or structure having 1/2 or more of its
clear height below grade.
BILLBOARD — A structure, either freestanding or affixed to a building, the
surface of which is for hire for advertising purposes.
BUILDING — A structure forming a shelter for persons, animals or property
and having a roof, exclusive, however, of such frameworks and tents as
are customarily used exclusively for outdoor carnivals, lawn parties or like
activities. When the content allows, the word "building" shall be construed
as though followed by the words "or part thereof."
BUILDING LINE — The line established by law parallel to the street line
beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by
law.
BUSINESS — The transacting or carrying on of a trade or commercial
enterprise, with a view to profit or for a livelihood.
CORNER LOT — A lot bounded on two or more sides by intersecting streets
or ways.
COURT — An unoccupied open space, other than a yard, on the same lot
with a building, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such
building.
COURT, INNER — A court enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of a
building or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable.
COURT, OUTER — A court enclosed on not more than three sides by exterior
walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable, with one side or end open
to a street, driveway, alley or yard.
CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION — Occupations customarily conducted
entirely within a dwelling unit, such as custom dressmaking, millinery,
tailoring, fabric sewing, home cooking and preservation and similar
§ 120-6 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-6
1:342
domestic crafts, but not including barbershops, beauty parlors,
hairdressers, dance studios, schools and repair services of any kind.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT — A restaurant which has a primary function of
window or curb service.
DRIVEWAY — A private way for vehicles to move between the frontage and
a location within a lot, provided that a driveway shall not be used to connect
a lot through any portion of another lot.[Amended May 1985 ATM by Art.
44, approved 7-25-1985]
DUPLEX HOUSE — A house containing two apartments adjoining side by
side, that is, one in which no part of one apartment is over any part of
another apartment. A duplex house shall be considered as one main building
occupying one lot for the purpose of determining yard requirements.
DWELLING — A building or portion thereof used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one-family, two-family and multifamily dwellings, but
not including hotels, motels, lodging houses, boardinghouses or touring
homes.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE — A building or portion thereof used for occupancy
by three or more families living independently.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY — A detached building containing one dwelling
unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A detached building containing two dwelling
units.
DWELLING UNIT — A room or suite of rooms used by one family as a
habitation which is separate from other rooms or suites of rooms and which
contains cooking and sanitation facilities.
EARTH or EARTH PRODUCTS — Includes sod, topsoil, loam, sand, stone
and gravel taken from the land.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions
of underground or overhead electrical, gas, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems; collection, communication, supply or disposal systems,
including essential physical construction, equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, but not including buildings.
FAMILY — A person or group of persons of immediate kindred who live
together as a single housekeeping unit under one head.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building measured from exterior faces of walls, including enclosed
porches.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The fixed relation between the lot area and
the floor area of all multiple-family residential buildings, excluding the floor
area of garages, carports, breezeways, stairways, hallways and balconies
and excluding the area of any floor more than four feet below average grade
where no part of such basement is used for sleeping rooms or other living
§ 120-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6
1:343
quarters, and expressed as a fraction of floor area/lot area.[Added June
1976 STM by Art. 25, approved 10-18-1976]
FRONTAGE — The lot line separating a lot from a street layout line
providing vehicular access and egress between the lot and the
street.[Added May 1985 ATM by Art. 44, approved 7-25-1985]
FRONTAGE WIDTH — The horizontal distance parallel to the front lot
line or, in the case of a curved or irregular lot line, a line parallel to a
straight line drawn between the front lot corners, measured between the
side lot lines starting at the front lot line and extending to the minimum lot
width at the building line.[Added May 1997 ATM by Art. 42, approved
8-11-1997]
FUNERAL HOME — A place of business duly licensed by law for preparing
the dead for burial and/or conducting funerals.
GARAGE, PRIVATE or CARPORT — A building or part thereof, accessory
to a principal building, providing storage for automobiles and in which no
business or occupation for profit is carried on.
GARAGE, PUBLIC PARKING — A building, other than a private garage,
available to the public and operated for gain and which is used for the
storage of motor vehicles.[Added May 1989 ATM by Art. 47, approved
7-28-198933]
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building, other than a private garage, available
to the public and operated for gain and which is used for the repair,
rental, lubrication, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of motor
vehicles.[Added May 1989 ATM by Art. 47, approved 7-28-1989]
GRADE — With reference to a building or structure, the average elevation
of the ground adjoining the building or structure on all sides.
GRAVEL PIT — A lot or parcel of land or portion thereof which is used for
the primary or principal purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel or other
earth materials.
GROSS FLOOR AREA — The total area of all floors of a building, including
the basement and mezzanines, measured to the exterior walls thereof, and
including partitions, stair halls, corridors and covered porches.
HALF STORY — Any story which is under a pitched roof, where the point
of intersection of the rafters and the face of the wall is less than three feet
above the floor level.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of physical, chemical,
or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual or potential hazard
to water supplies or other hazards to human health if such substance
or mixture were discharged to land or water in the Town of Weymouth.
Hazardous materials include, without limitation: synthetic organic
chemicals; petroleum products; heavy metals; radioactive or infectious
wastes; acids and alkalis; solvents and thinners in quantities greater than
33.Editor's Note: This article also repealed the definition of "garage, public."
§ 120-6 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-6
1:344
normal household use; and all substances defined as hazardous or toxic
under MGL c. 21C and c. 21E and 310 CMR 30.00.[Added 2-2-2004 by
Ord. No. 04-041]
HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITY — Any facility as defined in Chapter 21D
of the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.[Added
2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-041]
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance of the highest point of the
roof above the mean finished grade of the ground adjoining the building,
excluding penthouses, bulkheads and other permitted superstructures
above the roof.
HOSPITAL — A duly licensed institution established or maintained for the
purpose of caring for persons admitted thereto for diagnosis, medical,
surgical or restorative treatment.[Added May 1990 STM by Art. 3,
approved 8-29-1990]
HOTEL — A building used for the more or less temporary occupancy of
individuals who are lodged with or without meals, having 10 or more guest
rooms, in which no provision is made for cooking in any individual room or
suite.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Material or a structure on, above, or below
the ground that does not allow precipitation or surface water to penetrate
directly into the soil.[Added 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-041]
JUNK — Articles such as old iron (including old abandoned cars or parts),
brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals, cordage, old bags, rags,
wastepaper, paper clippings, scraps, slips, rubber, glass, empty bottles,
empty cans and all other articles discarded and no longer used as a
manufactured article, composed of any one or more of the materials
mentioned, but which may be converted into another product by means of a
manufacturing process of any kind.
KENNEL — One pack or collection of dogs on a single premises, whether
maintained for breeding, boarding, sales, training, hunting or other
purposes, and including any shop where dogs are on sale and also including
every pack or collection of more than three dogs three months old or over
owned or kept by a person on a single premises, irrespective of the purpose
for which they are maintained.
LANDSCAPING — An area designed and developed, using a combination
of trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass and other elements, such as natural
features of the lot, walks and terraces, for the purpose of enhancing the
natural, scenic and aesthetic qualities of the lot.[Added May 1992 ATM by
Art. 35, approved 10-1-1992]
LODGING HOUSE — A house where lodgings are let to four or more
persons not within the second degree of kindred of the person conducting
it, but not including dormitories of charitable, educational or philanthropic
institutions.[Added October 1982 STM by Art. 3, approved 1-11-1983]
LOT — A parcel of land in single, joint or multiple ownership, whether or
not plotted, and not divided by a public street.
§ 120-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6
1:345
LOT AREA — The horizontal area of the lot exclusive of any area in a public
or private way open to public use and exclusive of any freshwater area more
than 10 feet from the shoreline and exclusive of any saltwater area below
the mean high-tide line.
LOT COVERAGE — The fixed relation between the lot area and the area
of ground coverage of all buildings, including accessory buildings, and
expressed as a percentage.[Added May 1989 ATM by Art. 53, approved
7-28-1989]
LOT LINE — The division line between adjoining properties or a division
line between lots established by a plan filed in the Registry of Deeds or Land
Court.
LOT LINE, FRONT — All lines separating any lot from the street layout
lines.[Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 53, approved 7-28-1989]
LOT LINE, REAR — A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the
front lot line; in the case of a triangular or irregular lot, a line 10 feet long
within the lot, parallel to and farthest from the front lot line. In the case of
a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be the line opposite the street line of the
street on which the principal building faces.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line not a front or rear lot line.34
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance parallel to the front lot line or, in
the case of a curved or irregular lot line, a line parallel to a straight line
drawn between the front lot corners, measured between the side lot lines
at the building line.[Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 53, approved
7-28-1989]
MARINA — A dock or basin providing secure moorings for boats and yachts.
MEDICAL LABORATORY — A facility performing tests, analysis or
procedures of a diagnostic, medical, surgical or restorative health related
nature.[Added May 1990 STM by Art. 3, approved 8-29-1990]
MEDICAL OFFICE — The offices of one or more medical or dental
professionals providing medical or allied care on an ambulatory
basis.[Added May 1990 STM by Art. 3, approved 8-29-1990]
MOTEL — A hotel primarily for transients traveling by automobile, with a
parking space on the lot for each lodging and with separate access to each
lodging directly from the outside or from a central corridor.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use of a building, structure or lot lawfully
existing at the effective date of this bylaw, or any subsequent amendment
thereto, which does not conform to one or more provisions of the
bylaw.[Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 3, approved 11-2-1978]
NONSANITARY WASTEWATER — Wastewater discharges from industrial
and commercial facilities containing wastes from any activity other than
collection of sanitary sewerage, including, but not limited to, activities
34.Editor's Note: The definition of "lot line, side street," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed May 1989 ATM by Art. 53, approved 7-28-1989.
§ 120-6 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-6
1:346
specified in the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes set forth in
310 CMR 15.004(6).[Added 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-041]
OCCUPANCY — Use or occupancy, character of use or designed purpose of
a building, structure or land.
OFF-STREET LOADING — Accommodations off the street for loading and
unloading of trucks, in the form of one or more truck berths located within
a building or in an open space on the same lot.
OFF-STREET PARKING — Accommodations for the parking of motor
vehicles off the street.
OUTPATIENT CLINIC — Any ambulatory medical, surgical, dental, physical
rehabilitation or mental health facility.[Added May 1990 STM by Art. 3,
approved 8-29-1990]
PARKING SPACE — An area within a structure or in the open on a lot to be
used exclusively as a temporary storage space for one motor vehicle.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — A form of development which is usually
characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units,
clustering of buildings, providing for common open space and a mix of
building types and land uses.[Added June 1978 STM by Art. 2, approved
11-2-1978]
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The main or most important building on a lot.
Attached structures such as garages, greenhouses and similar units shall be
considered as an integral part of the principal building.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A person employed in the practice of
engineering as defined in MGL c. 112, § 81D, and amendments thereto.
PROFESSIONAL HOME OFFICE — An office or studio located within the
principal building of the premises of a resident, architect, artist, author,
attorney, clergyman, dentist, engineer, physician or other member of a
recognized profession.
RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT, MAJOR — Boats and boat trailers, travel
trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers and
similar devices.
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (RMD) — A building or structure
used for a medical marijuana treatment center approved and licensed by
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health pursuant to 105 CMR
725.100 and the local Board of Licensing Commissioners that acquires,
cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products
such as marijuana-infused products, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments),
transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers
marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational
materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
Unless otherwise specified, "RMD" refers to the site(s) of dispensing,
cultivation, and preparation of marijuana.[Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No.
14-078]
§ 120-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6
1:347
SANITORIUM or SANITARIUM — An establishment for the recuperation or
treatment of invalid or convalescent persons.
SELF-SERVICE GAS STATION — That type of gas station wherein the
licensed motor vehicle operator dispenses his own motor fuel.[Added
January 1977 STM by Art. 1, approved 4-26-1977]
SERVICE ENTERPRISE — Any enterprise conducted for profit which deals
directly with and is accessible to the ultimate customer or patron and which
has for its principal purpose the performance of any act for the convenience,
service or benefit of such customer or patron.
SERVICE STATION — A building, other than a private garage, available to
the public and operated for gain, which supplies fuel, oil and automobile
accessories to motor vehicles and which may include grease racks or
elevators and which may provide minor automobile repair services,
excluding body work and painting.
SETBACK — The minimum required distance between the street line on
which the principal building faces and the parts of said building nearest to
such street line, such distance extending the entire width or distance across
the lot.
SIGN — Includes a structure, device, letter, word, model, banner, pennant,
insignia, trade flag or representation used as, or which is in the nature of,
an advertisement, announcement or direction.
SIGN AREA —
STABLES, LIVERY — A building in which any hoofed animals are kept for
private use, hire, remuneration or sale.
STABLES, PRIVATE — An accessory building where not more than two
hoofed animals are kept for private use and not for hire, remuneration or
sale.
STORY — That part of a building between any floor and the floor or roof next
above, except that a space used exclusively for the housing or mechanical
services of the building shall not be considered to be a "story" if access to
such space may be had only for maintenance of such services.
STORY, FIRST — The lowest story of which 65% or more of the height is
above the mean grade from which the height of the building is measured.
For a sign, either freestanding or attached, the area shall be considered
to include all lettering, wording and accompanying designs and
symbols, together with the background, whether open or enclosed, on
which they are displayed, but not including any supporting framework
and bracing which are incidental to the display itself.
A.
For a sign painted upon or applied to a building, the area shall be
considered to include all lettering, wording, accompanying designs or
symbols, together with any background of a different color than the
natural color of the building.
B.
§ 120-6 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-6
1:348
STREET — A way, whether public or private, used or dedicated for use
for all purposes of passage, and including streets, avenues, boulevards,
parkways, roads, alleys, lanes and viaducts; provided, however, that the way
is either in actual use or is shown on a plan endorsed under the Subdivision
Control Law.35[Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 2, approved
11-2-1978]
STREET LINE — The line separating the street layout line from a lot.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed location
that is safe and stable to give support or shelter, such as a building, bridge,
trestle, tower, framework, retaining wall, tank, tunnel, tent, stadium,
reviewing stand, swimming pool, platform, bin, fence, sign, flagpole or the
like. The word "structure" shall be construed, where the context allows, as
though followed by the words "or part thereof."
SWIMMING POOL — Any constructed pool which is used, is designed for
use as or is intended to be used as a swimming pool, so-called, and which
has a minimum capacity of 5,000 gallons and a minimum depth of 36 inches.
TRAILER — An automobile trailer, mobile home, trailer coach and any
portable structure or vehicle so constructed and designed as to permit
occupancy thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes, to include any of the
above units with a foundation thereunder.
TRAILER CAMP — A parking space for two or more trailers used as
dwellings and licensed by the Board of Health under the General Laws.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any and all devices, processes and properties,
real or personal, used in the collection, pumping, transmission, storage,
treatment, disposal, recycling, reclamation, or reuse of waterborne
pollutants, but not including any works receiving a hazardous waste from
off the site of the works for the purpose of treatment, storage or
disposal.[Added 2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-041]
UPLAND — Land not considered a wetland as defined in MGL c. 131, § 40,
the Wetlands Protection Act, including but not limited to oceans, ponds,
streams, bogs, wet meadows and swamps.[Added May 1998 ATM by Art.
43, approved 10-23-1998]
USE — As a verb, shall be construed as if followed by the words "or is
intended, arranged, designed, built, altered, converted, rented or leased to
be used."
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION, ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT — Wireless
communication equipment, including but not necessarily limited to any
equipment, antenna, satellite dishes over three feet in diameter, panel,
fixtures and protective covering located on the same lot with and customary
and incidental to a permitted as of right, by special permit, by variance or
as a preexisting nonconforming use.[Added November 1997 STM by Art.
36, approved 2-26-1998]
35.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
§ 120-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-6
1:349
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION, BUILDING-MOUNTED EQUIPMENT —
Wireless communication equipment mounted on a building, including but
not necessarily limited to any equipment, antenna, satellite dishes over
three feet in diameter, panel, fixtures and protective covering mounted on,
erected or supported in whole or in part by an existing building or structure,
including but not necessarily limited to buildings, smokestacks and the
like, occupied and/or used primarily for any other purpose, excluding water
towers.[Added November 1997 STM by Art. 36, approved 2-26-1998]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION, FREESTANDING STRUCTURE — Wireless
communication structures including satellite dishes over three feet in
diameter, monopoles, lattice towers or any other similar freestanding
structure.[Added November 1997 STM by Art. 36, approved
2-26-1998]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION, INDOOR EQUIPMENT — Indoor wireless
communication equipment, including but not necessarily limited to any
equipment, antenna, panel, fixtures and protective covering mounted inside
or supported within an existing building or structure, including but not
necessarily limited to buildings, cupolas, church spires, inactive
smokestacks and the like, occupied and/or used primarily for any other
purpose.[Added November 1997 STM by Art. 36, approved 2-26-1998]
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the front lot line and the nearest point of the building.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending across the full width of the lot
and lying between the rear lot line and the parts of the principal building
nearest such rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — An open space within the lot, between the side lot line and
the parts of the principal building nearest such side lot line, and extending
from the front yard line to the rear yard line. In the case of a corner lot,
the side yard facing a street or way shall be the space required for the front
yard.
§ 120-6 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-6
1:350
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 120-7. Types of districts. [Amended May 1980 ATM by Art. 51,
approved 8-27-1980]
For the purpose of this bylaw, the Town of Weymouth is hereby divided into
zoning districts as follows:
Watershed Protection District WPD. [Added May 1985 ATM by Art.
46, approved 7-25-1985]
Groundwater Protection District [Added May 1995 ATM by Art. 58,
approved 7-31-1995]
A.
Residential districts.
R-1 Low Density (single-family)
R-2 Low Density (mixed low-density residential and office) [Added
May 1990 STM by Art. 1, approved 8-29-1990]
R-3 High Density A (garden-type multiple)
R-4 High Density B (multiple)
B.
Neighborhood Center District NCD. [Added May 1983 ATM by Art.
48, approved 8-26-1983]
C.
Business districts.
B-1 Limited Business
B-2 General Business
HT Highway Transition [Added May 1990 STM by Art. 2,
approved 8-29-1990]
MS Medical Service [Added May 1990 STM by Art. 3, approved
8-29-1990]
D.
Industrial districts.
I-1 Industrial Park
I-2 General Industrial
PIP Planned Industrial Park
POP Planned Office Park [Added October 1985 STM by Art. 23,
approved 1-27-1986]
E.
F. Public Facilities and Open Space POS.
Floodplain district.
Floodplain Overlay
G.
§ 120-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-8
1:351
§ 120-8. District boundaries; Zoning Map. [Amended June 1978
STM by Art. 3, approved 11-2-1978; May 1980 ATM by Art. 51,
approved 8-27-1980; January 1990 STM by Art. 15, approved
3-26-1990; May 1990 ATM by Art. 47, approved 9-13-1990;
6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-091]
The boundaries of all the zoning districts are hereby established as shown
on a map entitled the "Zoning Map of the Town of Weymouth," dated
January 1, 1969, and thereafter amended from time to time, and on file in
the office of the Town Clerk, which map, together with all amendments and
with all explanatory matters thereon, shall be deemed to be and is hereby
made a part of this bylaw. The Floodplain District is herein established as
an overlay district. The district includes all special flood hazard areas within
the Town of Weymouth designated as Zone A, AE, AO, or VE on the Norfolk
County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood
Insurance Program. The map panels of the Norfolk County FIRM that
are wholly or partially within the Town of Weymouth are panel numbers
25021C0089E, 25021C0093E, 25021C0226E, 25021C0227E,
25021C0228E, 25021C0229E, 25021C10231E, 25021C0233E,
25021C0236E, 25021C0237E, 25021C0238E, 25021C0239E,
25021C0241E, and 25021C0243E, dated July 17, 2012. The exact
boundaries of the district may be defined by the one-hundred-year base
flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Norfolk
County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 17, 2012. The FIRM
and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the
Town Clerk.
§ 120-9. Lots in two districts. [Amended May 1990 ATM by Art. 48,
approved 9-13-1990]
§ 120-10. Determination of boundary lines.
Where a district boundary is indicated as approximately following or
parallel to the center line of a street line or a street, highway, railroad
right-of-way or watercourse, such district boundary shall be construed as
following, or as being parallel to, such center line. Where a district
boundary is indicated as approximately following a lot line, such line shall
be construed to be said boundary. Whenever any uncertainty exists as to the
exact location of a district boundary line, the location of such line shall be
Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing at the time such
line is adopted, the regulations of the more restrictive zoning district
may extend not more than 30 feet into the less restrictive district.
A.
Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing at the time such
line is adopted, active uses of the land in conjunction with permitted
uses in the less restrictive zone, such as parking, drainage detention
or retention structures, retaining walls, access drives, buildings,
structures or the like, are prohibited in the more restrictive zone.
B.
§ 120-8 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-10
1:352
determined by the Inspector of Buildings by the use of the scale shown on
said Zoning Map.
§ 120-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-10
1:353

ARTICLE IIIA
Watershed Protection District
[Added May 1985 ATM by Art. 46, approved 7-25-1985; amended
May 1989 ATM by Art. 49, approved 7-28-1989; May 1990 STM by
Arts. 1 and 2, approved 8-29-1990; May 1990 ATM by Art. 49,
approved 9-13-1990; May 1993 ATM by Art. 55, approved 7-9-1993;
2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-041]
§ 120-10.1. Intent.
The Watershed Protection District is established for the following purposes:
§ 120-10.2. Establishment; determination of boundaries.
To preserve and protect the lakes, ponds, streams, brooks, marshes,
swamps, bogs and other water bodies and watercourses in the Town.
A.
To protect, preserve and maintain the water table and water recharge
areas within the Town, so as to preserve present and potential sources
of water supply for the public health and safety.
B.
To protect the community from detrimental use and development of
land and waters within the Watershed Protection District.
C.
To conserve the watershed areas of the Town of Weymouth for the
health, safety, welfare and enjoyment of its people.
D.
Watershed Protection District.
The Watershed Protection District includes those areas that fall
within the catchment or drainage areas of the Town's public water
supply. The district includes all areas delineated on the Zoning
Map.
(1)
The Inspector of Buildings shall use the procedure outlined in
§ 120-10 to determine boundary lines; however, where accurate
topographical data exists, the Watershed Protection District line
shall be the drainage area of the watershed as delineated by such
topography.
(2)
A.
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the district, the Building Inspector shall make the
necessary interpretation.
B.
The Watershed Protection District is an overlay district and shall be
superimposed on the other districts established by this bylaw. No use
not permitted in the portions of the districts so overlaid shall be
permitted within the district.
C.
§ 120-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-10.3
1:355
§ 120-10.3. Permitted uses.
The overlay district shall impose the following criteria and/or requirements
for each underlying zoning district:
§ 120-10.4. Prohibited uses.
The following are prohibited in the Watershed Protection District. Further
definitions, in addition to those supplied herewithin, describing the areas
listed below shall be found in the appropriate Massachusetts General Laws
and/or Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
Residential District R-1. No additional criteria or requirements.
[Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
A.
Residential R-2 and Highway Transition HT Districts. For permitted
residential uses over two dwelling units and all nonresidential uses, a
site plan review in accordance with Article XXVA is required.
B.
Highway Transition HT Districts. For permitted residential uses over
two dwelling units and all nonresidential uses, a site plan review in
accordance with Article XXVA is required.
C.
Business Districts B-1 and B-2. For all permitted uses, a site plan review
in accordance with Article XXVA is required.
D.
Industrial District I-1, PIP and POP. For all permitted uses, a site plan
review in accordance with Article XXVA is required.
E.
Solid waste disposal landfills or open dumps, as defined in 310 CMR
19.006.
A.
Surface waste impoundments designed to leach their wastes to the
ground.
B.
C. Open road salt storage and dumping of salt-contaminated snow.
Discharge to the ground or surface water of sanitary and/or nonsanitary
wastewater, provided that municipal sewage connections are available.
D.
Construction within 25 feet (horizontal) of the high water line of all
surface water bodies.
E.
Storage of liquid petroleum products, liquid propane, and liquid
hazardous materials defined in MGL c. 21E, with the following
exceptions:
Materials stored above ground on an impervious surface in an area
that provides 110% capacity of materials stored;
(1)
(2) Materials incidental to normal household use;
(3) Materials used for emergency generators;
F.
§ 120-10.3 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-10.4
1:356
§ 120-10.4.1. Land use requirements.
Materials incidental to a response action in accordance with MGL
c. 21E and 310 CMR 40.000 and which are exempt from a
groundwater discharge permit pursuant to 314 CMR 5.05.
(4)
Facilities that generate, treat, store or dispose of hazardous waste that
are subject to MGL c. 21 and 310 CMR 30.00, except for the following:
(1) Very small generators as defined by 310 CMR 30.00.
Household hazardous waste collection centers or events operated
pursuant to 310 CMR 30.390.
(2)
(3) Waste oil retention facilities required by MGL c. 21, § 52A.
Treatment works approved by DEP designed in accordance with
314 CMR 5.00 for the treatment of contaminated surface or
groundwater.
(4)
G.
Floor drains in existing or proposed facilities containing or using
hazardous materials or hazardous wastes in process or storage areas
that discharge to the ground or a surface water body.
H.
Storage of covered or uncovered commercial fertilizers, unless
containment is provided.
I.
Storage of covered or uncovered animal manure, unless containment is
provided.
J.
Structures for the stabling, boarding, hitching, standing, feeding or
grazing of livestock or other domestic animals within 100 feet of a
source water supply or tributary.
K.
The stockpiling and disposal of snow or ice removed from streets where
sodium chloride or other chemicals used for snow and ice treatment
have been applied.
L.
Hazardous materials and liquid petroleum products shall be stored in
either:
(1) A freestanding container within a building.
A freestanding covered container above ground with secondary
containment adequate to contain a spill the size of the container's
total storage capacity plus 10%.
(2)
A.
Uses that create impervious surfaces shall be designed so that all runoff
is recharged back into the groundwater supply. All artificial recharging
shall be done in a way that will not result in the degradation of the
groundwater quality.
B.
The removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel or any other mineral substances
shall not be within four feet of the historical high groundwater elevation
C.
§ 120-10.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-10.4.1
1:357
§ 120-10.4.2. Site plan review.
The following uses shall require a site plan review process subject to Article
XXVA:
§ 120-10.4.3. Special permit uses.
The following uses shall require a special use permit and are subject to the
conditions and requirements of Article XXV of this ordinance:
(as determined from test pits or borings certified by a registered
engineer, monitoring wells and historical water table fluctuation data
compiled by the United States Geological Survey) unless the substances
removed are redeposited within 45 days of removal on site to achieve
a final grading greater than four feet above the historical high water
mark, and except for excavations for the construction of building
foundations or the installation of utility works.
Any use that will render impervious any lot or parcel more than 15%
or 2,500 square feet, whichever is greater. A design for groundwater
recharge must be provided which does not degrade groundwater
quality. For nonresidential uses, recharge shall be by stormwater
infiltration basins or similar system covered with natural vegetation,
and dry wells shall be used only where other methods are infeasible.
For all nonresidential uses, all such basins and wells shall be preceded
by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contaminants.
Any and all recharge areas shall be permanently maintained in full
working order by the owner.
A.
Those activities that involve the handling of toxic or hazardous
materials in quantities greater than those associated with normal
household use, as permitted in the underlying zoning (except as
prohibited in § 120-10.4). Such activities shall require a special permit
to prevent contamination of the environment.
A.
B. The construction or expansion of cemeteries and mausoleums.
§ 120-10.4.1 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-10.4.3
1:358
ARTICLE IIIB
Groundwater Protection District
[Added May 1995 ATM by Art. 58, approved 7-31-1995; amended
2-2-2004 by Ord. No. 04-041]
§ 120-10.5. Intent.
The Groundwater Protection District is established for the following
purposes:
§ 120-10.6. Establishment; determination of boundaries.
§ 120-10.7. Prohibited uses.
The following are prohibited in the Groundwater Protection Overlay
District. Further definitions, in addition to those supplied herewithin,
describing the areas listed below shall be found in the appropriate
Massachusetts General Laws and/or Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection regulations.
To preserve, protect and maintain areas within the Town which supply
groundwater recharge to the municipal drinking water wells.
A.
To protect the community from detrimental use and development of
land and waters within the Groundwater Protection District.
B.
To protect the public health and preserve the future use of groundwater
supplies for the health, safety, welfare and enjoyment of the people of
the Town of Weymouth.
C.
The Groundwater Protection District includes those areas that fall
within the Hydrogeologic Zone II as approved by the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) under 310 CMR 22.00,
plus those areas of Zone III from which groundwater drains into Zone
II. The district includes all areas delineated on the Zoning Map.
A.
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the district, the Inspector of Buildings, with the
assistance and guidance of the Engineering Division of the Department
of Public Works, shall make the necessary interpretation.
B.
The Groundwater Protection District is an overlay district and shall
be superimposed on the other districts established by this bylaw. No
use not permitted in the portions of the districts so overlaid shall be
permitted within the district.
C.
All uses prohibited in the Watershed Protection District. (See
§ 120-10.4.)
A.
Storage of sludge and septage as defined in 310 CMR 32.05, unless
storage is in compliance with 310 CMR 32.30, 310 CMR 32.31, and 310
CMR 22.00.
B.
§ 120-10.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-10.7
1:359
§ 120-10.8. Site plan review.
The following uses shall require a site plan review process subject to Article
XXVA:
§ 120-10.9. Special permit uses.
The following uses shall require a special use permit and are subject to the
conditions and requirements of Article XXV of this ordinance:
Treatment or disposal works for nonsanitary wastewaters, except those
treatment works approved by the DEP.
C.
Any use that will render impervious any lot or parcel more than 15%
or 2,500 square feet, whichever is greater. A design for groundwater
recharge must be provided which does not degrade groundwater
quality. For nonresidential uses, recharge shall be by stormwater
infiltration basins or similar system covered with natural vegetation,
and dry wells shall be used only where other methods are infeasible.
For all nonresidential uses, all such basins and wells shall be preceded
by oil, grease, and sediment traps to facilitate removal of contaminants.
Any and all recharge areas shall be permanently maintained in full
working order by the owner.
A.
Those activities that involve the handling of toxic or hazardous
materials in quantities greater than those associated with normal
household use, as permitted in the underlying zoning (except as
prohibited in § 120-10.7). Such activities shall require a special permit
to prevent contamination of the environment.
A.
B. The construction or expansion of cemeteries and mausoleums.
§ 120-10.7 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-10.9
1:360
ARTICLE IV
Resident District R-1
§ 120-11. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 52,
approved 7-28-1989]
In a Resident District R-1, no building or premises shall be erected, altered
or used for any purpose except:
§ 120-12. Accessory uses.
Uses on the same lot with and customarily incident to any of the above
permitted uses and not detrimental to a residential neighborhood. The term
"accessory" in this section shall be limited to the following uses:
A. Detached one-family dwellings.
B. Municipal use.
Garage space for storage of not more than three automobiles. Single
story, detached garages shall not exceed 14 feet at the highest point.
[Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
A.
Parking or storage of one commercial motor vehicle, provided that the
permitted commercial motor vehicle is limited to two-axle vehicles,
and has a rated capacity which does not exceed one ton; except on a
farm, where vehicles used in the operation of the same may be stored.
[Added May 1999 ATM by Art. 8, approved 8-11-1999]
B.
The sale of produce or plants, provided that the major portion thereof
is raised on the premises.
C.
D. Major recreational equipment.
A customary home occupation carried on for gain in the residence of
the occupant, provided that there is no display of goods visible from the
street, that no nonresident help is employed and that such occupation
shall not occupy more than 1/3 of the gross floor area, excluding
attic, of the residence or apartment, and provided further that such
occupation shall not be carried on in an accessory building. [Added
May 1989 ATM by Art. 52, approved 7-28-1989; amended May
1999 ATM by Art. 19, approved 8-19-1999]
E.
A professional home office, provided that no more than one nonresident
office or laboratory assistant shall be allowed. [Added May 1989 ATM
by Art. 52, approved 7-28-1989]
F.
An accessory home office, carried on for gain in the residence of the
occupant, provided that customers, clients or delivery persons coming
to the premises are limited to one individual or group of individuals per
day, that no nonresident help is employed and that such office shall not
occupy more than 1/3 of the gross floor area, excluding attic, of the
residence or apartment, and provided further that the office shall not
G.
§ 120-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-12
1:361
§ 120-12.1. Special permit uses by Planning Board. [Added May
1998 ATM by Art. 40, approved 10-23-1998]
The following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, may be granted
as a special permit by the Planning Board, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
§ 120-13. Special permit uses by Board of Zoning Appeals.
[Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978; October
1982 STM by Art. 3, approved 1-11-1983; May 1990 STM by Art. 3,
approved 8-29-1990; 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 16-150]
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
be located in an accessory building. [Added May 1999 ATM by Art.
19, approved 8-19-1999]
Planned unit development, as defined in § 120-6 of this bylaw, and
subject to the district regulations in § 120-63 of this bylaw.
A.
A. Funeral home.
B. Garage space for or storage of more than three automobiles.
C. Noncommercial greenhouse.
The renting of rooms and/or furnishing of meals, limited to three
persons not members of the family of the occupant and who are not
casual or transient guests.
D.
§ 120-12 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-13
1:362
ARTICLE IVA
Resident District R-2
[Added May 1990 STM by Art. 1, approved 8-29-1990]
§ 120-13.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the R-2 District, mixed residential, is to:
§ 120-13.2. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55
and 56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved
8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. Any of the following uses, or uses
customarily accessory thereto, are permitted:
§ 120-13.3. Special permit uses by Board of Zoning Appeals.
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
§ 120-13.4. Special permit uses by Planning Board.
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Planning Board, subject to the conditions and requirements
of Article XXV:
Provide for a transitional zone between single-family districts and
multifamily or business districts.
A.
Recognize the changing character of major arterial roads by allowing
use changes to existing single-family dwellings.
B.
Preserve the residential character of the district while allowing lowdensity
multifamily and office uses.
C.
Limit traffic congestion by limiting the density and intensity of
permitted and special permit uses in the district.
D.
A. Any use permitted in Resident District R-1.
B. Two- or three-family dwelling, new construction.
Alteration, but not the expansion, of a dwelling existing at the time of
adoption of this bylaw for up to four dwelling units.
C.
Alteration and/or the expansion, not to exceed 10% of the existing gross
floor area, of a dwelling or structure existing at the time of the adoption
of this bylaw for up to 10 dwelling units.
A.
B. Funeral home.
§ 120-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-13.4
1:363
Alteration and/or the expansion, not to exceed 10% of the existing gross
floor area, of a dwelling or structure existing at the time of the adoption
of this bylaw for office space, not to exceed 2,000 square feet of gross
floor area.36
A.
36.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B, Licensed day-care nursery center, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed May 1992 ATM, Art. 46, approved 10-1-1992
§ 120-13.4 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-13.4
1:364
ARTICLE V
Resident District R-3
[Amended June 1976 STM by Art. 26, approved 10-18-1976]
§ 120-14. Intent.
The R-3 Resident District is intended to establish and preserve a multiplefamily
dwelling district whose density would be compatible with existing
multiple-family dwelling characteristics within the Town of Weymouth and
to provide varied housing opportunities. It is further intended that the R-3
District provide for low-rise structures with appropriate landscaping and
site planning to allow for garden-apartment types of developments. It is
further intended to exclude uses which are not compatible with residential
uses but permit certain nonresidential uses which are compatible in the
district and which are of particular convenience to the residents of the
district.
§ 120-15. Permitted uses. [Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 2,
approved 11-2-1978; May 1987 ATM by Art. 52, approved 8-27-1987;
May 1992 ATM by Art. 46, approved 10-1-1992; May 1993 ATM by
Arts. 55 and 56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43,
approved 8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. In a Resident District R-3, no
buildings or premises shall be erected, altered or used for any purpose
except:
§ 120-16. Accessory uses. [Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 2,
approved 11-2-1978; May 1992 ATM by Art. 46, approved 10-1-1992;
May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55 and 56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 by
Art. 43, approved 8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. Uses on the same lot with and
customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, as follows:
A. Any use permitted in Resident District R-1.
A building or group of buildings for occupancy by two or more families
in separate dwelling units.
B.
C. Nursing home or convalescent home.
A. Accessory uses under § 120-12 of this bylaw for single-family dwellings.
Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with apartment
developments, including swimming pools, recreation facilities, garages
and the like, and also including convenience grocery stores,
newsstands, barbers, hairdressers, drugstores and like facilities
B.
§ 120-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-16
1:365
§ 120-17. Special permit uses by Board of Zoning Appeals.
[Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978]
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
§ 120-18. Special permit uses by Planning Board. [Amended June
1978 STM by Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978]
The following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, may be granted
as special permit by the Planning Board, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
§ 120-18.1. Special permit uses by Board of Selectmen. [Added
October 1982 STM by Art. 3, approved 1-11-1983]
The following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, may be granted
as a special permit use by the Board of Selectmen, subject to the conditions
and requirements of Article XXV:
primarily for the use of on-site residents. Home occupations are
prohibited for multifamily dwellings in the R-3 District.
Accessory uses and structures customarily associated with nursing
homes and convalescent homes.
C.
Any use requiring a special permit in the Resident District R-1,
§ 120-13.
A.
B. Private club or lodge operated for members only.
Clinic or office of an architect, attorney, physician, dentist or other
similar professional person or firm, not accessory to a main residential
use.
C.
Planned unit development as defined in § 120-6 of this bylaw and
subject to the district regulations in § 120-63 of this bylaw.
A.
B. Hotel, motel or apartment hotel.
A building or group of buildings for occupancy by 20 or more families
in separate dwelling units. [Added May 1987 ATM by Art. 52,
approved 8-27-1987]
C.
A. Lodging house, not to exceed 10 lodgers.
§ 120-16 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-18.1
1:366
ARTICLE VI
Resident District R-4
[Amended June 1976 STM by Art. 24, approved 10-18-1976]
§ 120-19. Intent.
The R-4 Resident District is intended to establish and preserve a multiplefamily-
dwelling district whose density would be compatible with existing
multiple-family-dwelling characteristics within the Town of Weymouth and
to provide varied housing opportunities. It is further intended that the R-4
District provide for high-rise structures with appropriate site planning.
§ 120-20. Permitted uses. [Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 2,
approved 11-2-1978; May 1987 ATM by Art. 52, approved 8-27-1987;
May 1992 ATM by Art. 46, approved 10-1-1992; May 1993 ATM by
Arts. 55 and 56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43,
approved 8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. In a Resident District R-4, no
building or premises shall be erected, altered or used for any purpose
except (Uses in Subsections B through H are limited in area to either lots
of less than 40,000 square feet or structures with a gross floor area of
less than 20,000 square feet. For uses of greater lot area or floor area, see
§ 120-18C.):
§ 120-21. Accessory uses. [Amended May 1993 ATM by Art. 55,
approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved 8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. Uses on the same lot with and
customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, including but not
limited to the provisions of § 120-16 of this bylaw.
A building or group of buildings for occupancy by two or more families
in separate dwelling units.
A.
B. Nursing home and convalescent home.
C. Hotel, motel or restaurant, not including drive-in restaurant.
D. Private club or lodge, operated for members only.
Clinic or office of an architect, attorney, physician, dentist or other
similar professional persons or firm, real estate, insurance or other
agency office, bank, office building, post office or other similar
establishment.
E.
F. Retail business or service establishment relative to this zoning district.
G. Marina or yacht club and sales of boats, boat parts and accessories.
§ 120-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-21.1
1:367
§ 120-21.1. Special permit uses by Planning Board. [Amended June
1978 STM by Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978; May 1987 ATM by Art. 52,
approved 8-27-1987; May 1989 ATM by Art. 49, approved
7-28-1989]
The following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, may be granted
as special permit uses by the Planning Board, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
§ 120-22. Special permit uses by Board of Selectmen. [Added May
1989 ATM by Art. 49, approved 7-28-1989]
Special permit uses as provided in § 120-18.1.
A. Special permit uses as provided in § 120-18.
Any permitted use or group of permitted uses in § 120-20B through
G, which have either a lot area of 40,000 square feet or more or a
structure with a gross floor area of 20,000 square feet or more.
B.
§ 120-21.1 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-22
1:368
ARTICLE VIA
Neighborhood Center District NCD
[Added May 1983 ATM by Art. 48, approved 8-26-1983]
§ 120-22.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Neighborhood Center District is to outline and preserve
the neighborhood core which has historically developed into a composite
of residential, commercial, governmental and religious uses primarily
designed to serve the surrounding neighborhood. It is intended to allow
uses of a small scale and of a convenience nature. It is further intended
to provide for special regulations relative to density, dimensional
requirements, signage and parking to maintain the neighborhood scale and
to ensure compatibility between uses within the districts as well as abutting
residential districts.
§ 120-22.2. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1992 ATM, Art. 46,
approved 10-1-1992; May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55 and 56, approved
7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved 8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. In a Neighborhood Center District
NCD, any of the following uses or uses customarily accessory thereto are
permitted, provided that all permitted uses, except residential uses, shall
be limited to a maximum of 5,000 gross square feet of floor area for each
business and/or office:
A. Detached single-family dwelling.
B. A building for occupancy by two families in separate dwelling units.
Retail sales, such as food, apparel and accessories, home products and
furnishings, drugstores, specialty items other than motor vehicles and
trailers, hardware, stationery, newsstand, variety store or similar sales
primarily intended to serve the surrounding neighborhood, provided
that sales do not involve manufacturing on the premises except of
products the major portion of which are to be sold at retail by the
manufacturer to the consumer and provided that no more than four
operatives shall be employed in such manufacture.
C.
Retail services such as barbershop, beauty shop, laundry, dry cleaning,
tailoring, shoe repair, caterer, print shop, photography or similar
service primarily intended to serve the surrounding neighborhood,
excluding motor vehicles and trailer-oriented services.
D.
E. Clinic or office of business, professional or financial organizations.
F. Funeral home.
G. Trade, professional or other school conducted as a gainful business.
§ 120-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.2
1:369
§ 120-22.3. Special permit uses by Board of Zoning Appeals.
[Amended May 1993 ATM by Arts. 56 and 57, approved 7-9-1993]
In a Neighborhood Center District, any of the following uses or uses
customarily accessory thereto are permitted on approval of the Board of
Zoning Appeals, subject to the conditions and requirements of Article XXV:
§ 120-22.4. Special permit uses by Board of Selectmen.
In a Neighborhood Center District, any of the following uses or uses
customarily accessory thereto are permitted on approval of the Board of
Selectmen, subject to the conditions and requirements of Article XXV:
Place of amusement or assembly, provided that the structure is
sufficiently sound-insulated to confine noise to the premises.
H.
Lunchroom, restaurant or cafeteria, excluding drive-in restaurant and/
or drive-through window service.
I.
A. Private club or lodge operated for members only.
A building for occupancy by three or more families in separate dwelling
units, provided that the building area does not exceed a floor area ratio
(FAR), as defined in § 120-6, of 0.25.
B.
C. (Reserved)
Any permitted use in § 120-22.2A through H having drive-through
service or windows.
D.
A. Licensed lodging house up to a maximum of 10 lodgers.
§ 120-22.2 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-22.4
1:370
ARTICLE VIB
Highway Transition District HT
[Added May 1990 STM by Art. 2, approved 8-29-1990]
§ 120-22.5. Purpose.
The purpose of the Highway Transition District is to:
§ 120-22.6. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55
and 56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved
8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. Any of the following uses, or uses
customarily accessory thereto, are permitted:
§ 120-22.7. Special permit uses by Board of Zoning Appeals.
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
Provide for a mixed residential, business and commercial development
along major arterials in the Town.
A.
Allow for redevelopment of former residential areas to limited business
and commercial uses.
B.
Control off-site impacts of new development or redevelopment through
the site plan review and special permit process.
C.
Preserve the scale and character of the existing streetscape by
encouraging the reuse of existing residential structures and
appropriate site design criteria.
D.
A. Any use permitted in Resident District R-1.
B. Two-family dwelling.
Conversion of an existing residential structure for use as a clinic or
office of a business, professional, medical/veterinarian or financial
organization; barbershop; beauty salon; gift shop; antique shop;
printer; caterer; or photography studio.
C.
Conversion of an existing residential structure for use as retail sales or
services with less than 2,000 square feet of gross floor area.
D.
A. Private club or lodge.
B. Conversion of an existing dwelling for up to four dwelling units.
§ 120-22.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.8
1:371
§ 120-22.8. Special permit uses by Planning Board.
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Planning Board, subject to the conditions and requirements
of Article XXV:
§ 120-22.8.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
Retail sales or service, except auto-related sales or services that:
Are in a new structure and contain up to a maximum of 5,000
square feet of gross floor area.
(1)
Are in an existing converted dwelling with a gross floor area
between 2,000 square feet and 5,000 square feet.
(2)
A.
B. Any permitted use having drive-through service or windows.
New structure containing a clinic or office of business, professional,
medical/veterinarian or financial organization; barbershop; beauty
salon; antique or gift shop; or photography studio.
C.
D. Trade, professional or other for-profit school.
Restaurant, except that no drive-through window is allowed unless
the restaurant has less than 20 seats and the minimum lot size land
area shall be 43,560 square feet. [Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No.
14-107]
E.
A. Self-storage facilities.
Outdoor sale of automobiles where the inventory of used cars exceeds
10% of the total inventory.
B.
§ 120-22.8 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-22.8.1
1:372
ARTICLE VIC
Medical Services District MS
[Added May 1990 STM by Art. 3, approved 8-29-1990]
§ 120-22.9. Purpose.
The purpose of the Medical Services District is to:
§ 120-22.10. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55
and 56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved
8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any
of the permitted uses listed in this section. The following uses, or uses
customarily accessory thereto, are permitted, provided that, in connection
with such use, any new construction or addition to a structure lawfully
existing at the time this section is adopted shall not exceed 20,000 square
feet of gross floor area:
§ 120-22.11. (Reserved)37
§ 120-22.12. Special permit uses by Board of Zoning Appeals.
In a Medical Services District, any of the following uses, or uses customarily
accessory thereto, are permitted on approval of the Board of Zoning
Appeals, subject to the conditions and requirements of Article XXV:
Provide for the health and care needs of the community within a district
designed for a hospital and the customary supporting facilities and uses
that develop around such a regional facility.
A.
Allow hospitals, clinics, treatment facilities, offices, laboratories, sale of
materials and supplies of a medical nature and similar related uses.
B.
Maintain the neighborhood scale and ensure compatibility between
uses within the Medical Services District and abutting districts through
density and dimensional requirements.
C.
A. Detached single-family dwelling.
B. Hospital.
C. Nursing home.
D. Medical office.
E. Outpatient clinic.
F. Medical laboratory.
37.Editor's Note: Former § 120-22.11, Site plan review, was repealed May 1993 ATM by Art.
56, approved 7-9-1993.
§ 120-22.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-22.12
1:373
§ 120-22.13. Special permit uses by Planning Board.
In a Medical Services District, any of the following uses, or uses customarily
accessory thereto, are permitted on approval of the Planning Board, subject
to the conditions and requirements of Article XXV:
A. Funeral home.
Alteration of a dwelling existing at the time this bylaw is adopted for a
two-family dwelling.
B.
C. Sale or lease of medical supplies and/or equipment.
Any special permit use which, in addition, requires a variance from the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
D.
E. Ambulance station.
Any uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, permitted in
§ 120-22.10, where any building, group of buildings, premises or
addition to a structure lawfully existing at the time this section is
adopted exceeds 20,000 square feet or more of gross floor area.
A.
Parking plans that provide for required off-street parking to be located
on more than one lot for any permitted or specially permitted use.
B.
§ 120-22.12 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-22.13
1:374
ARTICLE VII
Business District B-1
[Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978]
§ 120-23. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1987 ATM by Art. 52,
approved 8-27-1987; May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55 and 56, approved
7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved 8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. In a Business District B-1, no
building or premises shall be erected, altered or used for any purposes
injurious, noxious or offensive to a neighborhood by reason of the emission
of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration or noise or other cause or for any
purpose, and, further, no building, group of buildings or premises shall be
placed on either a lot of 40,000 square feet or more or contain 20,000
square feet or more of gross floor area except:
§ 120-23.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
§ 120-24. Special permit uses by Board of Zoning Appeals.
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, unless otherwise provided, subject
to the conditions and requirements of Article XXV:
A. Hotel, motel or restaurant, not including a drive-in restaurant.
Trade, professional or other school for ages 16 and above conducted as
a gainful business.
B.
C. Private club or lodge operated for members only.
Place of amusement or assembly, provided that the structure is
sufficiently sound-insulated to confine noise to the premises.
D.
Clinic or office of an architect, attorney, physician, dentist or other
similar professional persons or firm, real estate, insurance or other
agency office, bank, office building, post office or similar establishment.
E.
F. Printing shop, photographer's studio, taxidermist or caterer.
Retail business, service or public utility not involving manufacturing on
the premises except of products, the major portion of which are to be
sold at retail by the manufacturer to the consumer, and provided that
no more than four operatives shall be employed in such manufacture.
G.
A. Self-storage facilities.
Outdoor sale of automobiles where the inventory of used cars exceeds
10% of the total inventory.
B.
Service station, repair garage and car wash on approval of the Board
of Selectmen, subject to the conditions and requirements of § 120-101
A.
§ 120-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-24
1:375
§ 120-25. Special permit uses by Planning Board.
The following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, may be granted
as special permit uses by the Planning Board, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
of this bylaw, as applicable, provided that all washing, lubricating and
the making of repairs is carried on inside the building and that the
structure housing major repairs, including auto body and paint shop,
is sufficiently sound-insulated to confine noise to the premises and
any flashing, fumes, gases, smoke and vapor is effectively confined
to the premises. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 47, approved
7-28-1989]
Commercial parking lot or parking garage. [Amended May 1989 ATM
by Art. 47, approved 7-28-1989]
B.
C. Detached one-family dwelling.
Wholesale business, jobbing or dispatching establishment and storage
in roofed structure, but not including wholesale storage of inflammable
liquids, gases or explosives. [Added May 1980 ATM by Art. 49,
approved 8-27-1980]
D.
Enclosed or open-lot storage of new building material, contractor's
equipment, machinery and metals, other than scrap or junk, and similar
materials, provided that any material stored in unenclosed premises
to a height greater than four feet above grade level is surrounded by
a substantial seven-foot-high wall, tight fence or a proper landscape
screening. [Added May 1980 ATM by Art. 49, approved 8-27-1980;
amended May 1990 ATM by Art. 50, approved 9-13-1990]
E.
Lodging house, not to exceed 10 lodgers; and only in the conversion of a
building, existing at the time of adoption of this amendment, containing
up to three dwelling units, and further provided that the Board of
Selectmen shall be the special permit granting authority, subject to the
conditions and requirements of Article XXV. [Added October 1982
STM by Art. 3, approved 1-11-1983]
F.
Any permitted uses in § 120-23A through G which may be grouped
together so as to form a shopping center and for which one or more
of the following conditions exist or will exist as part of a proposed
development and which will comprise 1.5 acres or more:
(1) More than one building per lot.
More than one building in an overall development of contiguous
lots even if one building will be built on one lot.
(2)
A single building whose intended purpose is to house more than
one commercial business and/or retail enterprise.
(3)
A.
§ 120-24 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25
1:376
Any permitted use or group of permitted uses in § 120-23A through
G which have either a lot area of 40,000 square feet or more or a
structure with a gross floor area of 20,000 square feet or more. [Added
May 1987 ATM by Art. 52, approved 8-27-1987]
B.
Any permitted use having drive-through service or windows. [Added
May 1993 ATM by Art. 57, approved 7-9-1993]
C.
§ 120-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25
1:377

ARTICLE VIIA
Village Center Zoning Overlay District
[Added 12-6-2010 by Ord. No. 10-111]
§ 120-25.1. Purpose.
The Village Center District is an overlay zoning district. Parcels within the
overlay district are first subject to the additional regulations of the overlay.
In cases where there is a conflict, the regulations of the overlay zoning
supersede the underlying zoning district.
Village Center zoning is the creation of a specific overlay zoning district
for the unique needs of small mixed-use commercial areas; to provide
goods, services and housing in a more compact environment; to encourage
redevelopment; and to create a vibrant, walkable, pedestrian- and bicyclefriendly
environment. A Village Center District seeks to preserve the
existing mixed uses of a village and encourage new construction to be
compatible with the setbacks and scale of existing structures and is
consistent with the recommendations put forth in the Weymouth Master
Plan.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Village Center Overlay District
to establish reasonable standards that permit and control mixed residential,
commercial, governmental, institutional, and office uses in the Town of
Weymouth. Furthermore, it is the intent of this district to:
Encourage commercial, governmental, institutional, and office uses
that do not attract large volumes of traffic, a diverse mix of residential,
business, commercial, office, governmental, institutional and
entertainment uses for workers, visitors, and residents.
A.
Limit and discourage development of highway-oriented strip
commercial uses that create traffic hazards and congestion because
they require numerous individual curb cuts and generally higher traffic
volumes.
B.
Encourage a pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly environment so that
commercial enterprises and consumer services do not rely on
automobile traffic to bring consumers into the area.
C.
Permit uses that promote conversion of existing buildings in a manner
that maintains the visual character and architectural scale of existing
development within the district.
D.
Minimize visual and functional conflicts between residential and
nonresidential uses within an abutting the district.
E.
Allow for more compact development than may be permitted in other
zoning districts to reduce the impacts of sprawl.
F.
G. Encourage mixed uses within the same structure.
§ 120-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.1
1:379
§ 120-25.1.1. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
§ 120-25.2. Location.
The Village Center District shall consist of the traditional neighborhood
retail cores which have historically been village centers and have developed
into a composite of residential, commercial, governmental and religious
uses. The district is delineated in the Town's Zoning Map.
§ 120-25.3. Permitted, site plan and special permit uses.
Any uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, permitted within the
Village Center Overlay District are noted in the Use Table for the Village
Center Overlay District.
Use Table for the Village Center Overlay District
As of Right Site Plan Review Special Permit
Single-family
detached
Three-family dwelling Multifamily dwelling
units (20 units or more)
Single-family attached Multifamily dwelling
units (4 units to 19
units)
Maximum density of 1
unit per 5,000 square
feet or 4 units per lot
Conversion of existing
residential structure to
retail or services
Conversion between
2,000 square feet and
5,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Encourage consolidation of curb cuts for vehicular access and promote
more efficient and economical parking facilities.
H.
I. Encourage uses that minimize noise and congestion.
J. Encourage artist live/work space.
K. Encourage first-floor retail space.
Allow for an appropriate density of land uses and people to support a
vibrant village center and public transportation.
This article is intended to be used in conjunction with other regulations
as adopted by the Town, including historic district regulations, design
guidelines, site plan review, and other local ordinances designed to
encourage appropriate and consistent patterns of village development.
L.
A. Self-storage facilities.
Outdoor sale of automobiles where the inventory of used cars exceeds
10% of the total inventory.
B.
§ 120-25.1 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.3
1:380
Use Table for the Village Center Overlay District
As of Right Site Plan Review Special Permit
Two-family dwelling Conversion of a singlefamily
dwelling to a twofamily
dwelling
All nonresidential uses in
a new structure or
addition with a gross
floor area greater than
5,000 square feet
Accessory in-law
accommodation
Conversion of existing
dwelling to multifamily
up to 4 units
Adult day care
Home occupation Bed-and-breakfast Private club or lodge for
members only
Artist live/work space Conversion of existing
residential structure to
clinic, office, retail sales
or retail services of a
nature customarily
found in a village center,
excluding vehicular
sales and service; must
be less than 2,000
square feet of gross
floor area
Lodging house,
maximum of 10 lodgers
Retail sales and retail
services of a nature
customarily found in a
village center,
excluding vehicular
sales and service
Common driveway; may
not be used in
conjunction with any lot
used for single-family
purposes
Drive-through services,
excluding food sales
Mixed-use commercial
with residential above
All nonresidential uses
in a new structure or
addition up to a
maximum of 5,000
square feet
Funeral home Professional office for
architect, attorney or
similar profession
Trade, professional or
other school
conducted as gainful
business
Medical office/clinic or
laboratory
Place of assembly,
amusement or
recreation
Office building
Restaurant
§ 120-25.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.4
1:381
§ 120-25.4. Site and design criteria.
The site and design criteria within this section shall be applicable to all
residential greater than three units, mixed use and nonresidential property.
Site access. New curb cuts on existing public ways shall be minimized.
To the extent feasible, access to businesses shall be provided through
one of the following methods: (a) through a common driveway serving
adjacent lots or premises or (b) through an existing side or rear street,
thus avoiding the principal thoroughfare. Garage doors or loading
docks are prohibited on the front facade of any building facing the
street.
Curb cuts within 200 feet of intersections are subject to site plan
review.
(1)
Curb cuts greater than 30 feet and driveway openings greater than
20 feet are subject to a site plan review. Full-width curb cuts are
prohibited.
(2)
A.
Pedestrian and bicycle circulation. Provision for safe and convenient
pedestrian access shall be incorporated into plans for new construction
of buildings and parking areas and should be designed in concert
with landscaping plans noted below. New construction should improve
pedestrian access to buildings, sidewalks and parking areas and should
be completed with consideration of pedestrian safety, handicapped
access and visual quality. Where appropriate, applicants are
encouraged to provide pedestrian and/or bicycle paths connecting their
site with abutting areas in order to promote pedestrian and bicycle
circulation and safety in the village. When parking is located in the rear,
pedestrian access via a pedestrian-oriented alley or walkway through
to the primary street is encouraged.
B.
Landscape plans shall show the type, size and location of all proposed
plantings.
Side yards shall be screened or landscaped as follows:
Where the distance between structures on adjacent lots is 10
feet or less, the side yard shall be screened from public view
by a solid fence or tight landscaping having a height of no less
than five feet. A chain-link fence shall not be permitted.
(a)
Where the distance between structures is greater than 10 feet,
the space shall be appropriately landscaped.
(b)
(1)
Large parking areas (e.g., greater than 20 parking spaces) shall
be separated by landscaped islands of eight feet to 10 feet in
width or in the alternative shall devote at least 5% of the interior
of the parking lot to landscaping. In addition, a minimum of one
shade tree shall be planted for every six parking spaces required
or built, within appropriate locations on the lot(s). The plan shall
(2)
C.
§ 120-25.4 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.4
1:382
§ 120-25.5. Intensity of use.
No structure shall be erected, altered or moved, except in conformity with
the following overlay district requirements:
Minimum Lot
Size
(square feet)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum Rear
Yard Depth
(feet)
Maximum
Height
5,000 50 See § 120-25.5C 2 1/2 stories, not
to exceed 35 feet;
or 4 stories, not to
exceed 50 feet by
special permit
Minimum
Front Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum Side
Yard Depth
(feet)
Minimum Rear
Yard Depth
(feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent of lot
area)
See § 120-25.5C See § 120-25.5C See § 120-25.5C 50% residential;
80% mixed-use
show the location of plantings, including use of plantings to buffer
neighboring properties, and along the street frontage and
pedestrian ways. Trees planted within parking areas shall be
planted in protected pervious plots of at least 60 square feet of
area.
Location and distribution of uses. The ground floor of the front facade of
a commercial building or a mixed-use residential/commercial building
shall be occupied by business uses only. When the rear facade faces a
parking area, the ground floor shall also be occupied by business uses
only.
A.
Height. To accomplish the purposes of this article, the Board of Zoning
Appeals is authorized to grant a special permit to allow an increase
in the height of structures either in existence, as reconstructed, or as
new construction, so that the total height does not exceed four stories
with a maximum height of 50 feet within this zoning district. If any
construction of a structure increases the intensity of use over what
was previously in existence on the lot, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall allow this increase only upon a finding that the additional height
is consistent with the scale of adjacent structures and is necessary
to maintain the area's character. The Board of Zoning Appeals must
further find that the relaxation of height limitations will not interfere
with or negatively impact abutting properties, particularly property
used or zoned for single-family residential purposes.
B.
Setback. In keeping with the purpose of the Village Center District, it
is recognized that the areas have developed with distinct development
C.
§ 120-25.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.5
1:383
patterns to match the traditional needs of the small lots and buildings
that have made village centers unique to their individual
neighborhoods. Building setbacks within the district are given with
provision to average setbacks so that redevelopment and new
development will be in keeping with the established village layout.
To accomplish the purposes of this section, the Inspector of Buildings
is authorized to allow a calculation of front, side and rear setback
standards for new or preexisting structures, as prescribed as follows:
Front, side and rear building setbacks shall be calculated as
follows: The maximum front and street side building setback may
not exceed the average front yard depth of the nearest two lots on
both sides of the subject lot or 10 feet, whichever is less.
If one or more of the lots required to be included in the
averaging calculation is vacant, such vacant lot(s) will be
deemed to have a yard depth of zero feet.
(a)
Lots fronting a street other than the subject lot or separated
from the subject lot by a street or alley may not be used in the
computing average.
(b)
When the subject lot is a corner lot, the average setback will
be computed on the basis of the two adjacent lots that front on
the same street as the subject lot.
(c)
When the subject lot abuts a corner lot fronting on the same
street, the average setback will be computed on the basis of
the abutting corner lot and the nearest two lots that front on
the same street as the subject lot.
(d)
(1)
§ 120-25.5 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.5
1:384
Figure 1. Village Center Setbacks
The following exceptions to the maximum front and street side
building setbacks apply:
A portion of the building may be set back from the maximum
setback line in order to provide an articulated facade or
accommodate a building entrance feature, provided that the
total area of the space created must not exceed one square foot
for every linear foot of building frontage.
(a)
A building may be set back farther than the maximum setback
in order to accommodate an outdoor eating area. In order to
preserve the continuity of the street wall, the building may be
set back no more than 12 feet from the front or street side
property line or at least 40% of the building facade must be
located at the maximum setback line.
(b)
(2)
§ 120-25.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.5
1:385
Figure 2 Exceptions to Front/Street Setback
Orientation. Building shall be oriented parallel with the front setback
line to establish and preserve a consistent building line, with primary
entrances oriented toward the street.
D.
Articulation. Large expanses of blank walls are prohibited. A single
building with a width of more than 60 feet facing a street line or
a public or municipal parking area shall be divided visually into
subelements which, where appropriate, express the functional diversity
within the building. Major articulations shall be spaced no farther apart
than 25% of the building length at street level.
E.
Transparency. The intent of these transparency standards is to maintain
a sense of visual continuity and provide interest for pedestrians by
ensuring that the solid-to-void ratio (the percentage of glass to solid
wall surface that is used on a building face) appears similar to that seen
in traditional storefronts.
A minimum of 60% of the street-facing building facade between
two feet and eight feet in height must be comprised of clear
windows that allow views of indoor nonresidential space or product
display areas.
(1)
The bottom edge of any window or product display window used to
satisfy the transparency standard of Subsection F(1) above may not
be more than three feet above the adjacent sidewalk.
(2)
Product display windows used to satisfy these requirements must
have a minimum height of four feet and be internally lit.
(3)
F.
G. Doors and entrances.
§ 120-25.5 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.5
1:386
§ 120-25.7. Required parking spaces.
Off-street parking spaces within the Village Center Overlay District shall
be provided in accordance with the following minimum and maximum
requirements:
Use
Minimum Parking
Spaces
Maximum
Parking Spaces Comments
Dwelling units 1.5 per unit 2 per unit Single- and
multifamily
dwellings
Eating and
drinking
establishments
1 space for each 4
seats or 2 spaces
for each 150 square
feet of gross floor
area, excluding
basement storage
area
1 space for each 2
seats or 1 space for
each 50 square
feet of gross floor
area, excluding
basement storage
area
Use seats for
primarily sitdown
facilities,
floor area for
primarily takeout
facilities; at
discretion of the
Inspector of
Buildings
Motels, hotels
and lodging
houses
0.75 space for each
guest room or
dwelling unit, plus
1 space for each
500 square feet of
meeting, banquet or
restaurant area
1 space for each
guest room or
dwelling unit, plus
1 space for each
400 square feet of
meeting, banquet
or restaurant area
Buildings must have a primary entrance door facing a public
sidewalk. Entrances at building corners may be used to satisfy this
requirement.
(1)
Building entrances may include doors to individual shops or
businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian-oriented
plazas, or courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
(2)
The main business entrance to each ground-floor business shall be
accentuated by larger doors, signs, a canopy or similar means.
(3)
Where a building has a street frontage greater than 100 feet, doors
must be placed an average of one door every 50 feet of frontage.
(4)
Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage shall not be permitted in the Village
Center District.
H.
Utilities. Underground utilities for new and redeveloped buildings are
required unless physically restricted or blocked by existing
underground obstructions.
I.
§ 120-25.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.7
1:387
Use
Minimum Parking
Spaces
Maximum
Parking Spaces Comments
Medical,
dental or
professional
building
1.3 spaces for each
200 square feet of
gross floor area,
excluding basement
storage area
1.5 spaces for each
200 square feet of
gross floor area,
excluding
basement storage
area
Offices 1 space for each
300 square feet of
gross floor area,
excluding basement
storage area
1 space for each
200 square feet of
gross floor area,
excluding
basement storage
area
Retail
business and
service
establishments
1 space for each
250 square feet of
gross floor area on
the first floor of a
building, and 1
space for each 500
square feet of gross
floor area
thereafter for all
floors used for
office, retail or
service businesses,
excluding basement
storage area
1 space for each
200 square feet of
gross floor area on
the first floor of a
building, and 1
space for each 400
square feet of
gross floor area
thereafter for all
floors used for
office, retail or
service businesses,
excluding
basement storage
area
Theaters,
auditoriums,
assembly halls
and other
places of
assembly
1 space for each 5
seats or for each
100 square feet of
auditorium area, if
there are not fixed
seats
1 space for each 4
seats or for each
50 square feet of
auditorium area, if
there are not fixed
seats
Mixed uses in
a single
building
Spaces required will be the sum of the
requirements of the various individual
uses
§ 120-25.8. Parking criteria.
The following criteria are included to ensure that new and renovated offstreet
parking areas are constructed in accordance with the village's
character and the provisions of this article.
Parking areas shall be located to the side and rear of the structure.
Parking areas shall be designed such that parking is prohibited within
the required front yard setback.
A.
§ 120-25.7 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.8
1:388
§ 120-25.9. Shared parking.
Recognizing that parking requirements in the Village Center Overlay
District of this article may hamper development of village-style land use and
development, a reduction in the number of parking spaces is permissible
through the criteria addressed in § 120-25.7.
Parking areas shall include provisions for the "parking" of bicycles in
bicycle racks in locations that are safely segregated from automobile
traffic and parking. For parking areas of 10 or more spaces, bicycle
racks facilitating locking shall be provided to accommodate one bicycle
per 20 parking spaces or fraction thereof.
B.
Where possible, parking areas shall be interconnected in a manner that
allows the unobstructed flow of pedestrians between businesses and
the parking areas.
C.
Where such parking abuts a residential district, it shall not be located
within less than five feet of the lot line, and a wall or fence of solid
appearance or a tight evergreen hedge having a height of no less than
five feet shall be erected and maintained between such area and the
property in the residential district.
D.
The applicant may reduce the number and/or the location of the
required parking spaces through a site plan review or special permit.
Consideration may be given to the hours of usage of the proposed use/
structure, hours of usage of other uses/structures within the Village
Center District, amount of shared parking with other uses, proximity
to transit stations, as well as other relevant information to assist the
granting authority in determining the need for additional parking for
motor vehicles. Relief may be granted, provided that it is demonstrated
that the additional demand for such spaces can be reasonably met
without placing an undue burden on existing facilities already relying
on such spaces under the following conditions:
Under site plan review:
(1) A ten-percent reduction in the minimum parking standard for any
business located within 1,000 feet of a municipal parking facility or
commuter rail station.
(2) Allow parking areas to be shared with adjoining businesses, based
upon having peak user demands at different times, provided that
all businesses sharing parking are located on the same lot.
Under special permit:
(3) On-street parking spaces within a radius of 200 feet and municipal
lot parking spaces may be counted as part of the required parking
need.
(4) Allow provisions for the required spaces to be on a separate lot or
lots within a radius of 1,000 feet, measured from the lot line of the
principal use.
A.
§ 120-25.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.9
1:389
§ 120-25.10. Landscaping.
Appropriate landscaping and design shall be incorporated into new and
expanded development. Landscape design plans shall be prepared by a
At the applicant's request, the Town may permit, through site plan
review, shared parking, subject to the following conditions:
A reciprocal agreement shall be executed by all parties concerned
that ensures the long-term joint use of such common parking, and
that a copy has been submitted, and is acceptable.
(1)
The applicant shall provide a parking study with all information
deemed necessary to render a decision. Said information shall
include, but not be limited to:
(a) The hours of operation and parking demand for each use;
(b) The hours of peak demand for parking;
A description of the character of the land use and the parking
patterns of adjacent uses;
(c)
An estimate of the anticipated turnover in parking space use
over a twenty-four-hour period of time; and
(d)
A site plan showing the shared-use spaces in the lot and the
walking distance to the uses sharing the lot.
(e)
(2)
B.
In rendering a decision regarding shared parking, the following criteria
shall be considered:
Uses sharing the parking facility do not need to be contained within
the same lot, but shall be a maximum of 600 feet from the closest
parking space.
(1)
(2) The hours of operation and peak demand of the uses involved.
The number of spaces required for each individual use is pursuant
to § 120-25.7. of this article.
(3)
The applicant shall demonstrate that vehicles occupying a
particular number of spaces are unlikely to require the use of those
spaces at the same time of day or same day of the week.
(4)
The degree to which the applicants are committed to
implementation of transit demand management measures, such as
those to promote car and van pooling, bicycling, and public transit.
(5)
C.
In the event that the conditions for shared parking change, or if the
shared parking arrangement is discontinued, the applicant shall notify
the Inspector of Buildings within 10 days. The Inspector of Buildings
shall then require the applicant to meet the applicable parking
requirements found in § 120-25.7 of this article.
D.
§ 120-25.9 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.10
1:390
registered landscape architect, although the permit granting authority may
accept a plan prepared by one other than a landscape architect if it believes
the plan meets the design guidelines noted below and is in concert with the
intent of this regulation. Wherever possible, naturally occurring vegetation
shall be incorporated into the landscape plan.
§ 120-25.11. Signs.
Signs in a Village Center District advertising conforming uses shall be
subject to the following conditions:
Side yard setbacks (in accordance with § 120-25.5.) shall be
landscaped. This side yard shall be planted with a combination of grass,
appropriate-height shrubs and shade trees. If there is not an adequate
amount of side yard area to landscape, a fence may be allowed as an
alternative. No parking area or driveway shall be allowed within this
side yard.
A.
Exposed storage areas, machinery, garbage dumpsters, service areas,
truck loading areas, utility buildings and structures shall be screened
from the view of abutting properties and streets using plantings, fences
and other methods compatible with the goals of this regulation.
Plantings used for this section shall be a minimum of four feet in height
at the time of planting.
B.
Trees are to be planted where necessary, as determined by the
Inspector of Buildings. Trees shall be the equivalent of well-rooted
nursery-grown stock free of injury, harmful insects, and diseases. They
shall be well-branched, and the branching structure shall be sound.
Trees shall only be planted after April 15 and before September 30. Any
planting outside of those dates shall be approved by the Town Arborist.
C.
No more than 50% of the trees, approved to be planted, shall be of any
one species, and no less than 25% of the total trees planted shall be of
any one species. Trees shall be chosen from a list provided by the Town
Arborist, unless an alternative is specifically approved by the Inspector
of Buildings.
D.
Minimum acceptable size of tree to be planted shall be trunk caliper
of 1.5 inches at four feet above the grade. Evergreen trees shall be at
least eight feet to 10 feet tall at the time of planting.
E.
All required landscape areas of a property, whether permitted as of
right, by site plan review or special permit, shall be maintained and
properly cared for. Any plant that dies shall be replaced within one
growing season. Replacement trees or shrubs shall be of similar type
and a size as required. If fencing is used, the fence shall be maintained
in good working order or replaced as necessary.
F.
Each place of business shall be allowed one permanent wall sign
parallel to the exterior building facade, projecting not more than 12
inches from said wall and having an aggregate area of two square feet
A.
§ 120-25.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.11
1:391
for each horizontal foot of building frontage of said business, provided
that the area of said sign shall not exceed 20 square feet.
Each lot shall be allowed one freestanding sign, provided that the
foremost building on the lot is set back from the front lot line a
minimum of 10 feet, subject to the following criteria:
The sign area shall not exceed 15 square feet per side, with a total
surface area of all sides not exceeding 30 square feet.
(1)
Signs within 10 feet of a street or way line shall have either the
uppermost edge of the sign no more than three feet above grade or
the lowermost edge of the sign no less than eight feet above grade
and the uppermost edge not to exceed 20 feet above grade.
or
(2)
B.
Each lot shall be allowed one projecting sign, mounted to the front
building line, provided that the foremost building on the lot is set back
from the front lot no greater than 10 feet, subject to the following
criteria:
The sign shall have the lowermost edge no lower than 10 feet above
grade nor more than 12 feet above grade; the uppermost edge of
the sign shall be no greater than 20 feet above grade or above
the roofline, whichever is lower in height; the sign shall project no
more than 4.5 feet from the front building line.
(1)
The sign area shall not exceed 15 square feet per side, with a total
surface area of all sides not exceeding 30 square feet.
(2)
C.
Projecting signs over public property or a right-of-way shall be subject
to a site plan review, if no special permit is required, in accordance with
the following conditions.
A projecting sign shall only be placed over a sidewalk or walkway,
and in no case shall a projecting sign extend over any portion of a
vehicular travel lane.
(1)
D.
Window signs either painted on or attached to the inside window or
etched on the window, provided such signs do not cover more than 25%
of the window glass.
E.
Signs shall be set back from any adjoining residential district lot line
by at least the front yard distance required in the adjoining residential
district.
F.
Any lights used for illumination shall be so arranged as to reflect light
away from an adjoining residential district.
G.
§ 120-25.11 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.12
1:392
§ 120-25.12. Site plan review.
The Village Center Districts are recognized as a special place to be
protected as a community resource because they represent an important
part of the Town's heritage and because their unusual character creates
an identity for Weymouth today. Compatible design helps to enhance the
quality of life for all residents while strengthening the economic viability
of the village centers. The site plan review program for the Village Center
Districts seeks to encourage visual harmony and historic integrity and
encourage creative design solutions. The village center site plan review
does not dictate style, but rather suggests a variety of choices for achieving
design compatibility within the Village Center Districts. The site plan review
can also help to protect the property values by encouraging improvements
that maintain buildings as viable assets. In Weymouth Landing, the site
plan review shall incorporate the provisions of the Memorandum of
Understanding regarding coordinated design/development review signed
by Braintree and Weymouth Mayors on March 25, 2010.
The village center site plan review is triggered by change to the urban
design features, architectural features and on- and off-site improvements.
The village center site plan review is required under the following
circumstances (with exceptions noted):
§ 120-25.13. Special permit standards and criteria.
Any new construction or exterior alteration requiring a building permit
(replacement roofing excluded).
A.
New and altered signs (any signage including new, altered existing
signs and awnings).
B.
C. Freestanding ground lighting.
D. Fencing of any height.
E. Interior and exterior alterations in conjunction with a change in use.
F. Curb cuts within 200 feet of street intersections.
Curb cuts greater than 30 feet in width and driveway openings greater
than 20 feet in width.
G.
H. New paving for two or more vehicles.
In addition to the specific criteria regarding the granting of a special
permit, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall issue a special permit only
after consideration of all of the following:
Impact on the neighborhood visual character, including
architectural design, views and vistas;
(1)
Degree to which the proposed use will share an access driveway
and/or parking with an adjacent use and avoids new curb cuts; and
(2)
A.
§ 120-25.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.13
1:393
Degree to which the proposed project complies with the goals of
the Weymouth Master Plan and the provisions of this article.
(3)
§ 120-25.13 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.13
1:394
ARTICLE VIIB
Commercial Corridor Overlay District
[Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
§ 120-25.14. Purpose and intent.
The Commercial Corridor Overlay District is an overlay district. Parcels
within the overlay district are subject to either the additional requirements
of the overlay district or the underlying district at the applicant's option. In
cases where a conflict exists, the regulations of the overlay zoning or the
underlying zoning shall apply based upon the scheme the applicant intends
to comply.
The overlay district applies to the underlying districts in specific areas
that are zoned as Business District (B-1) and Highway Transition (HT) with
the intent of creating development and redevelopment opportunities along
portions of the Town's major commercial corridors in the specific locations
identified on the Town of Weymouth Zoning Map.38 Further, this overlay
district is created to permit the incorporation of a residential component as
part of mixed-use developments. This is not possible within the underlying
Business District (B-1) and limited within the Highway Transition District
(HT).
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Commercial Corridor Overlay
District to establish reasonable standards reflective of the changing retail
and office markets and additionally support within this district the Town's
intent and goals to:
Promote the economic development, general welfare and safety of the
community through the use of basic urban design standards in special
development areas.
A.
Provide the broadest range of compatible commercial and residential
uses and encourage the development and redevelopment of
underutilized or obsolete commercial property and ensure development
and redevelopment that includes current retail and service trends and
allows for a wide variety of mixed uses.
B.
Encourage reuse and redevelopment of existing buildings and building
lots along portions of the gateway corridors of Route 18, Route 53, and
Route 3A and Columbian Street.
C.
D. Encourage the consolidation of smaller lots and curb cuts.
Promote urban design that is consistent with the Town of Weymouth's
economic development, planning and programmatic efforts.
E.
Provide flexibility with regard to dimensional requirements in a manner
that is consistent with the purposes and intent of this article.
F.
38.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 120-25.14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.14
1:395
§ 120-25.15. Applicability.
The Town intends with the overlay district to provide additional
development options for qualifying properties. The overlay district shall
not take away the rights permitted by the underlying zoning district.
Definitions.
The following areas are established and defined.
The Route 53 Corridor is generally defined as the area along Route
53 from Broad Street to the Hingham town line with the exception
of the Washington Street Corridor.
(1)
The Washington Street Corridor is generally defined as the portion
of Route 53 beginning at the intersection with Route 18 and
extending to approximately 650 feet east of the intersection with
Middle Street.
(2)
The Route 18 Corridor is generally defined as the area along Route
18 from the intersection with Route 53 to the Abington Town Line.
(3)
The Columbian Street Corridor is generally defined as the area
along Columbian Street from the Braintree town line to the
intersection with Forrest Street.
(4)
The Route 3A Corridor is generally defined as the area along Route
3A between Neck/Green Street and the Hingham Town Line.
Refer to the Town of Weymouth Zoning Map39 for the precise
extents of the overlay.
(5)
A.
Generally.
Application for special permit can be made to the Board of Zoning
Appeals under this article provided that the lot consists of at least
30,000 square feet and either of the below is true:
The proposal consists of both a residential and nonresidential use
with the ground floor of the building reserved for use as retail,
office, or both and provides an active, transparent facade. See
§ 120-25.23C. Proposals may also be comprised of more than one
principal building on a lot representing the mixed use; or
(1)
The proposal is for a professional office building of between three
and five stories dependent on the additional requirements in
§ 120-25.17A.
(2)
B.
39.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 120-25.14 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.16
1:396
§ 120-25.16. Additional criteria.
In addition to the applicability requirements, an applicant must have a
pre-application conference with the Director of Planning and Community
Development or other appropriate staff as determined by him, to discuss
additional criteria including:
§ 120-25.17. Dimensional requirements.
Adequacy of the site for the size of the proposed project and the
extent that building design elements as well as setbacks, height and
density (FAR) prevent large monolithic structures that overwhelm the
streetscape and adjoining neighborhoods. Design elements shall be
tailored to the building's specific location.
A.
Suitability of the site for the proposed use or uses ensuring that the
retail use is compatible with the residential component of the proposal
as well as with existing residential uses abutting the proposal. Specific
consideration should be given to noise, lighting, and hours of operation.
B.
Degree to which the proposed project complies with the goals of the
Town's Master Plans.
C.
Impact on traffic, pedestrian flow, safety, and access for emergency
vehicles.
D.
Impact on established residential properties and areas including noise,
lighting, and traffic.
E.
The extent to which the project promotes sustainable building, site
design, and internal walkability.
F.
Extent to which buildings, driveways, parking areas, loading areas,
outdoor activity areas, light sources, trash areas, and other potential
nuisances shall be located and designed to minimize adverse impacts
on abutting residential properties. To limit the adverse impact of any
proposed use the special permit may require alternative site layouts,
including increased setbacks from residential property lines, different
locations of buildings, parking areas, and driveways, the incorporation
of loading and trash collection areas as part of the principal building
design, and increased screening for light sources and outdoor activity
areas.
G.
Driveway intersections with streets and traffic circulation patterns
within lots shall be located and designed to minimize congestion and
safety problems on adjacent streets and nearby intersections. The
special permit may require alternative driveway locations and site
design in order to alleviate potential congestion or safety problems and
to maximize internal circulation.
Further, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall review all special permit
requests with these criteria in mind.
H.
§ 120-25.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.17
1:397
Height.
Proposals shall have a minimum of three stories and 45 feet with a
maximum of five stories and 70 feet in the following areas:
(1) The Route 18 corridor [§ 120-25.15A(3)].
(2) The Route Washington Street corridor [§ 120-25.15A(2)].
The Route 3A corridor [§ 120-25.15A(5)].
Within the Route 53 corridor [§ 120-25.15A(1)] and within the
Columbian Street corridor [§ 120-25.15A(4)], height shall be
limited to a minimum of three stories and 45 feet and a maximum
of four stories and 60 feet.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider in its review of the
appropriate height within the defined ranges the following:
(3)
(4) The purpose and intent of the overlay district.
(5) Visual scale of proposal in context to the surrounding area.
(6) Proximity to established residential areas.
Extent to which a proposal utilizes topography, facade articulation,
roof line variation, step-up techniques, and building materials to
achieve appropriate visual scale.
(7)
A.
Setbacks.
Recognizing that the primary mode of transportation along major
commercial corridors will be the automobile, the goal of this article is
to safely accommodate traffic while preventing these gateway corridors
from being visually dominated by large expanses of paved parking
areas. With this in mind the following setback requirements shall be, at
least, as follows:
The maximum front yard setback shall be 70 feet, taken as an
average across the building frontage to allow for a minimum fivefoot
landscape area along the frontage, a row of parking, and a
travel aisle.
(1)
The minimum front yard setback shall be 25 feet and will include a
minimum five-foot landscape area along the frontage.
(2)
When a setback averaging less than 70 feet is proposed, the height
of the building will be limited to two stories and 35 feet from the
front of the building to the seventy-foot setback line.
(3)
(4) Side setbacks shall be 10 feet.
(5) Rear setback shall be 15 feet.
B.
C. Additional requirements when abutting a residential use.
§ 120-25.17 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.17
1:398
§ 120-25.18. Density.
The building area for any building for occupancy should not exceed a floor
area ratio (FAR), as defined in § 120-6, of the following:
The Route 53 and Columbian Street corridors shall have a maximum FAR of
0.75.
A twenty-foot "no build" and "no parking" buffer will be provided along
any property line abutting an existing residential use. A landscape and
irrigation plan shall be submitted showing the size, species and location
of planting material as well as the design and building materials of a
fence. The buffer must adequately screen the proposed development
from abutting residential uses as determined by review by the Director
of Planning and Development. At a minimum, buffer trees should be of
three-inch to four-inch caliper.
The buffer will consist of a privacy fence and landscape screen as
illustrated below.
When abutting an existing residential use, in addition to the twentyfoot
"no build" and "no parking" buffer, a step-up approach shall be
applied to building heights as illustrated below. Building height will
be limited to 35 feet for the first 25 feet after the twenty-foot buffer.
The required buffers are to be located so as not to interfere with safe
emergency vehicle access and will be subject to review and approval
by the Weymouth Fire Department.
§ 120-25.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.18
1:399
The Route 18, Route 3A and Washington Street corridors shall have a
maximum FAR of 1.00.
Any building within 1,000 feet of an MBTA Commuter Rail station may
increase its maximum FAR by 0.25.
FAR as defined in § 120-6 excludes commercial space and structured
parking from FAR calculations.
§ 120-25.19. Coverage.
All proposals under this article shall dedicate a minimum of 15% of the total
land area as open space. Further, a maximum building coverage of 60%
shall apply and only 75% of any site shall be of an impervious material.
§ 120-25.20. Required parking.
Generally.
Parking shall be provided per below:
Studios and one
bedrooms
1.25 spaces per unit minimum with 1.5 spaces
maximum
All other residential 1.5 spaces per unit minimum with 2 spaces
maximum
If the proposed development site is within 1,000 feet of an MBTA
Commuter Rail station, the Board of Zoning Appeals may accept a
reduction in the above requirements to 1.0 space per studio or onebedroom
unit and 1.25 for other units.
The number of spaces required for other uses are pursuant to § 120-74
of this ordinance.
A.
Shared parking arrangements.
The Town encourages the use of shared parking arrangements. The
Board of Zoning Appeals may consider proposals of this kind as
justification for at most a twenty-percent reduction in the required onsite
parking.
In considering proposals for shared parking, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall use the following criteria:
Uses sharing the parking facility may be on a separate lot, but
shall be a maximum of 600 feet from the closest parking space.
The applicant must submit a copy of the formal, written agreement
outlining the details of the shared use agreement;
(1)
(2) The hours of operation and peak demand of the uses involved;
The applicant shall demonstrate that vehicles occupying a
particular number of spaces are unlikely to require the use of those
(3)
B.
§ 120-25.18 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.20
1:400
§ 120-25.21. Complete Streets and Green Community requirements.
The Town of Weymouth has adopted the Commonwealth's Complete Streets
Policy and has been designated as a Green Community. The Town is
committed to ensuring that all proposals provide the amenities required to
encourage multi-modal and clean energy transportation options. As such,
the Town requires the following to be included as part of each development
proposal:
§ 120-25.22. Split lots.
In cases of lots with split zoning, the overlay district shall extend over the
entire lot.
§ 120-25.23. Building orientation, open facades, and screening.
spaces at the same time of day or same day of the week as the other
shared use; and
The degree to which the applicant is committed to implementation
of transit demand management measures such as those to promote
car and van pooling, bicycling, and public transit.
(4)
Charging stations for electric, hybrid, or similar types of vehicles shall
be installed with the below frequency based on parking spaces:
(1) One to 25 spaces: zero.
(2) Twenty-six to 50 spaces: one.
(3) Fifty to 100 spaces: two.
One additional charging station for each additional 50 spaces
thereafter.
(4)
A.
Bicycle racks shall be installed as part of each development. The
required number of rack spaces shall be at least 15% of the total
number of residential units.
B.
Buildings shall generally be sited to face streets and sidewalks of the
main corridor with entrances located to provide convenient access from
the sidewalk network.
A.
An accessible, primary pedestrian entrance to the building shall face an
abutting street. For interior buildings sites, entrances should connect to
a pedestrian way that provides convenient access to the abutting street
and sidewalk network.
B.
Building walls facing the street should present an active facade
incorporating windows, doors, columns, changes in materials,
modulation of the facade, and similar details to add visual interest.
C.
§ 120-25.20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-25.23
1:401
Parking for ground level, non-residential uses may be provided along
the front, the sides, or both the front and sides of the building while
parking for residential uses is encouraged to be sited in the rear of the
building or within an interior parking structure. A detailed landscape,
irrigation, and lighting plan for all parking areas shall be submitted as
part of the application.
D.
Any portion of an above-ground parking structure fronting a public way
shall include facade details and landscaping to maintain an attractive
streetscape.
E.
Dumpsters, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, mechanical, electrical
and plumbing equipment and loading docks shall be fully screened from
view.
F.
§ 120-25.23 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-25.23
1:402
ARTICLE VIII
Business District B-2
§ 120-26. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1987 ATM by Art. 52,
approved 8-27-1987; May 1989 ATM by Art. 47, approved 7-28-1989;
May 1993 ATM by Art. 55, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by
Art. 43, approved 8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. In a Business District B-2, no
building or premises shall be erected, altered or used for any purposes
injurious, noxious or offensive to a neighborhood by reason of the emission
of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration or noise or other cause or for any
purpose; and, further, no building, group of buildings or premises shall be
placed on either a lot of 40,000 square feet or more or contain 20,000
square feet or more of gross floor area except:
§ 120-27. Special permit uses by Board of Zoning Appeals.
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
§ 120-27.1. Special permit uses by Planning Board. [Added May
1987 ATM by Art. 52, approved 8-27-1987]
The following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, may be granted
as special permit uses by the Planning Board, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
A. Any use permitted in Business District B-1. See § 120-23.
B. Commercial parking lot or parking garage.
Rental agency for autos, trailers, motorcycles or bicycles, conducted
entirely within a building.
C.
Any use requiring a special permit in the Business District B-1,
§ 120-24A, B, C, D and F. [Amended May 1990 ATM by Art. 50,
approved 9-13-1990]
A.
B. Drive-in restaurant.
Multiple dwelling, see Table 1, Schedule of District Regulations, for
density requirements.40 [Amended May 1987 ATM by Art. 52,
approved 8-27-1987]
C.
Any permitted use or group of permitted uses in § 120-26A through
C, which have either a lot area of 40,000 square feet or more or a
structure with a gross floor area of 20,000 square feet or more.
A.
40.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 120-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-27.1
1:403
§ 120-27.2. Prohibited uses. [Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
Any permitted use having drive-through service or windows. [Added
May 1993 ATM by Art. 57, approved 7-9-1993]
B.
A. Self-storage facilities.
Outdoor sale of automobiles where the inventory of used cars exceeds
10% of the total inventory.
B.
§ 120-27.1 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-27.2
1:404
ARTICLE IX
Industrial District I-1
[Amended April 1971 ATM by Art. 47, approved 8-24-1971; June
1978 STM by Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978]
§ 120-28. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55 and
56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved
8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any
of the permitted uses listed in this section. In an Industrial District I-1,
no building or premises shall be erected, altered or used for any purpose
injurious, noxious or offensive to a neighborhood by reason of the emission
of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration or noise or other cause or for any
purpose except the following:
Trade school for ages 16 and above conducted as a gainful business
and machine shop or other noise-generating activity accessory to such
a school.
A.
Sales of automobiles and trucks, where operation is carried on within
the structure.
B.
C. Office building.
D. Printing shop and caterer.
E. Research laboratory.
Wholesale business, jobbing or dispatching establishment and storage
in roofed structure, but not including wholesale storage of flammable
liquids, gases or explosives.
F.
G. Helicopter landing facility.
Assembly, machine shop, manufacturing, auto repair, packaging,
processing or other similar operation, whether making, repairing,
finishing, packing or storing, provided that all resulting cinders, dust,
flashing, fumes, gases, odors, refuse matter, smoke and vapor are
effectively confined to the premises or disposed of in a manner so as not
to create a nuisance or hazard to fire, safety or health.
H.
Registered marijuana dispensary, provided not within 500 feet of a
public or private primary or secondary school, licensed day-care center,
public library, public park, public playground, or any facility in which
children commonly congregate in a structured, scheduled manner. The
five-hundred-foot distance is measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the facility in question to the nearest point of the
proposed RMD. [Added 7-14-2014 by Ord. No. 14-078]
I.
§ 120-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-29
1:405
§ 120-29. Special permit uses.
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
A. Storage of flammable liquids, gases or explosives.
Motor freight or bus terminal and yards for the storage and servicing of
trucks or buses.
B.
Open-lot storage of new building material, contractors' equipment,
machinery and metals, other than scrap or junk, and similar materials,
provided that any material stored in unenclosed premises to a height
greater than four feet above grade level is surrounded by a substantial
seven-foot-high wall, tight fence or a proper landscape screening.
C.
Accessory uses, whether or not on the same parcel as the permitted
use of a research laboratory in § 120-28E, which are accessory to the
necessary primary activities of a research laboratory or of scientific
research or scientific development or related production; provided,
however, that the Board of Zoning Appeals must first find that the
proposed accessory uses do not substantially derogate from the public
good.
D.
Place of recreation or assembly. [Added May 1994 ATM by Art. 56,
approved 8-19-1994]
E.
§ 120-29 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-29
1:406
ARTICLE X
Planned Industrial Park District PIP
[Added February 1979 STM by Art. 1, approved 4-19-1979]
§ 120-30. Intent.
The purpose of the Planned Industrial Park District is to establish and
preserve areas for industrial park development which allow industrial and
related uses of such a nature as to promote orderly and harmonious
industrial growth within the PIP District and to further promote industrial
performance standards to reduce adverse environmental effects resulting
from development within the district.
§ 120-31. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55 and
56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved
8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any
of the permitted uses listed in this section. In a Planned Industrial Park
District, the following uses are permitted:
§ 120-32. Special permit uses by Planning Board.
The following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, may be granted
as special permit uses by the Planning Board subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
Assembly, manufacturing, packaging, processing or other similar
operation, whether making, finishing and packing, but not including
flammable liquids, gases, detonable material or the refining of
petroleum products.
A.
B. Wholesale business, jobbing or dispatching establishment.
C. Office building.
D. Research laboratory.
E. Printing shop and caterer.
Storage, utilization or manufacture of hazardous materials, subject to
the conditions of § 120-34G and H.
A.
Motor freight or bus terminal and yards for the storage and servicing of
trucks or buses.
B.
Wholesale storage in a roofed structure not involved in the permitted
use under § 120-31B.
C.
Open-lot storage of new building material, contractors' equipment,
machinery and metals, other than scrap or junk, and similar materials,
provided that any material stored in unenclosed premises to a height
D.
§ 120-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-32
1:407
§ 120-33. Special permit uses by Board of Selectmen.41 [Added June
1994 STM by Art. 5, approved 8-25-1994; amended May 1996 ATM
by Art. 54, approved 9-9-1996]
The following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, may be granted
as special permit uses by the Board of Selectmen subject to the conditions
and requirements of § 120-33.1 and Article XXV.
§ 120-33.1. Adult bookstore, adult motion-picture theater and adult
club regulations and standards. [Added June 1994 STM by Art. 5,
approved 8-25-1994; amended May 1995 ATM by Art. 57, approved
7-1-1995; May 1996 ATM by Art. 54, approved 9-9-1996]
greater than four feet above grade is surrounded by a substantial
seven-foot-high wall, tight fence or a proper landscape screening.
Accessory uses, whether or not on the same parcel as the permitted
use of a research laboratory in § 120-31D, which are accessory to the
necessary primary activities of a research laboratory or of scientific
development or related production; provided, however, that the
Planning Board must first find that the proposed accessory uses do not
substantially derogate from the public good.
E.
Ancillary service establishments whose primary purpose is to serve
existing industrial occupants and their employees, including but not
necessarily limited to restaurant, limited retail sale of food, beverages
and other convenience items or branch banking or credit union
facilities.
F.
G. Hotel or motel.
Place of recreation or assembly. [Added May 1994 ATM by Art. 56,
approved 8-19-1994]
H.
A. Adult bookstore.
B. Adult motion-picture theater.
C. Adult club.
Adult bookstores, adult motion-picture theaters and adult clubs may not
be located within 1,000 feet of each other and 500 feet of the nearest
lot lines of:
(1) A residential district.
Any establishment licensed under the provisions of MGL c. 138,
§ 12.
(2)
A.
41.Editor's Note: Former § 120-33, Site plan design standards, was repealed May 1993 ATM
by Art. 56, approved 7-9-1993.
§ 120-32 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-33.1
1:408
§ 120-34. Industrial performance standards.
The intent of performance standards is to reduce adverse environmental
impacts within the PIP District, to assess potential industrial nuisances
factually and objectively, to ensure that all industries will provide methods
to protect the community from hazards and nuisances which can be
prevented by process of control along with required site plans to the
Planning Board for all permitted and special permit uses within the PIP
District. The report shall, as a minimum, show how the proposed use of
occupancy shall be issued unless the Planning Board has made a finding
that all permitted and special permit uses have complied with these
industrial performance standards within the Planned Industrial Park
District. The Planning Board may require such information, data and
testing, to be performed at the owner's or developer's expense, in order to
achieve the finding of compliance.
Adult bookstores, motion-picture theaters, adult clubs and all
advertising signs shall not be located within 50 feet of a public or
private way and must be set back a minimum of 50 feet from all
property lines.
B.
The application for a special permit under § 120-33 must include the
following information:
The name and address of the legal owner of the adult bookstore,
adult theater or adult club.
(1)
The name and address of all persons having lawful, equity or
security interests in the adult bookstore, adult theater or adult
club.
(2)
(3) The name and address of the manager.
(4) The number of employees.
(5) Proposed security precautions.
(6) The physical layout of the premises.
C.
Special permits shall not be issued to any person convicted of violating
the provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63, or MGL c. 272, § 28.
D.
Noise.
Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter having an Aweighted
filter constructed in accordance with specifications of the
American National Standards Institute (ANSI). Measurements shall
be made at any point in adjacent lots or districts as indicated in
Table I.
(1)
A.
§ 120-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34
1:409
Table I
Maximum Permitted Sound Levels
Sound Measured
Within PIP District
Continuous Slow-
Meter Response
[db(A)]
Impact Fast-
Meter Response
[db(A)]
At a point on the lot line
of the subject lot
nearest to the noise
source
70 80
At a lot line abutting a
commercial district
60 70
At a lot line abutting a
residential district or
school
50 60
Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., the permissible
sound levels in any abutting residential district shall be reduced by
five decibels for impact noises.
(2)
The following sources of noise are exempt from noise level
regulations:
Transient noises of moving sources such as automobiles and
trucks.
(a)
Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency
pressure-relief valves.
(b)
Noises emanating from temporary construction and
maintenance activities between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(c)
(3)
Vibration.
Vibration shall be measured at the lot line or district border as
indicated in Table II below, and such measurement shall not exceed
the particle velocities so designated. The instrument used for these
measurements shall be a three-component measuring system
capable of simultaneous measurement of vibration in three
mutually perpendicular directions. Maximum vibration is given as
particle velocity, which may be measured directly with suitable
instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and
frequency. When computed, the following formula shall be used:
Where:
PV = 6.28 F x D
PV = Particle velocity, inches per second.
F = Vibration frequency, cycles per second.
(1)
B.
§ 120-34 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-34
1:410
D = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration,
inches.
Maximum particle velocity shall be the vector sum of the three
individual components recorded. Such particle velocity shall not
exceed values given in Table II.
Table II
Maximum Ground-Transmitted Vibration
Vibration Measured Within PIP
District
Particle Velocity
(inches per second)
At a point on the lot line of the subject
lot nearest to the vibration source
0.10
At a lot line abutting a commercial
district
0.05
At a lot line abutting a residential
district or school
0.02
(2)
Air quality of emissions from all vents, stacks, chimneys, flues or other
opening or any process, operation or activity shall be in accordance
with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of
Environmental Quality Engineering Regulations for the Control of Air
Pollution. Ambient air quality standards for the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts shall be the guide to the release of airborne toxic
materials across lot lines. For those toxic materials that are not listed
in the ambient air quality standards of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, the release of such materials shall be in accordance
with fractional quantities permitted as currently listed in the threshold
limit values adopted by the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists. Measurement of toxic matter shall be at ground
level or habitable elevation and shall not exceed 1/30 of the threshold
limit across lot lines.
C.
Odors from any permitted or special permit use in the PIP District shall
not be perceptible beyond lot lines of a subject parcel of land.
D.
Any process, operation or activity producing glare shall be conducted
so that any direct or indirect illumination from the source of light
shall not cause illumination in excess of 0.5 footcandle at the district
borders of the planned industrial park. Flickering or flashing sources
of illumination shall be controlled so as not to be visible beyond the
district borders of the planned industrial park.
E.
Heat or cold from any process, operation or activity shall not alter the
temperature of the air, land or water by more than 5° F. when measured
at the district borders of the planned industrial park.
F.
G. Water supply; sewers.
§ 120-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-34
1:411
Organic and inorganic chemicals which have a maximum
contamination level of 0.1 milligram per liter or less, as established
under the Drinking Water Regulations of Massachusetts through
the Department of Environmental Quality Engineering, may be
manufactured or stored in the PIP District only with a special
permit from the Planning Board, provided that it is determined that
such material will not endanger the water supply.
(1)
All buildings used in the PIP District must be connected to the
sanitary sewer system. Discharge shall conform with the industrial
discharge requirements of the Metropolitan District Commission.
(2)
Construction and use of pretreatment facilities for wastes which
cannot be discharged into the public sanitary sewer is prohibited.
(3)
Salt (NaCl) application to roads, parking and other paved surfaces
is prohibited.
(4)
Oil-separation devices shall be installed in all catch basins draining
paved surfaces.
(5)
All roof drains shall be dispersed to preserve the groundwater
recharge abilities of the land within the PIP District.
(6)
Ancillary storage of naphthas (gasolines, kerosenes and mixtures of
gasolines and oils which have a density of less than 0.86 gram per
cubic centimeter) is permitted in the PIP District only with a special
permit from the Planning Board, provided that it is determined that
such material will not endanger the water supply.
(7)
Detonable materials.
Detonable materials include but are not limited to all primary
explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and
tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, ROX, HMX, PETN and
picric acid; propellants and components thereof such as dry
nitrocellulose, black powder, boron hydrides, hydrazine and its
derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as magnesium
powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting
explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine; unstable organic
compounds such as acetylides, tetroxoles and ozonides; unstable
oxidizing agents such as perchloric acid, perchlorates and
hydrogen peroxide in concentration greater than 35%.
(1)
Manufacture of or manufacturing processes which result in byproducts
of detonable material is strictly prohibited.
(2)
Storage or utilization of detonable materials, as well as storage,
utilization or manufacture of high-hazard fire materials, shall be
limited to quantities approved by the Fire Department and shall be
contained in a suitable structure with setbacks as approved by the
Weymouth Fire Department and Building Department.
(3)
H.
§ 120-34 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-35
1:412
§ 120-35. Signs and off-street parking.
The provisions for signs set forth in Article XVI of this bylaw for
Industrial District I-1 shall be applicable to the Planned Industrial Park
District.
A.
The provisions for off-street parking set forth in Article XVII of this
bylaw for Industrial District I-1 shall be applicable to the Planned
Industrial Park District.
B.
§ 120-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-35
1:413

ARTICLE XA
Planned Office Park District POP
[Added October 1985 STM by Art. 23, approved 1-27-1986]
§ 120-35.1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Planned Office Park (POP) District is to provide a zone
for a parklike development of general office and light industrial uses of such
a nature as to promote orderly and harmonious growth; so as to control,
avoid, mitigate or reduce the adverse environmental impacts attendant
with such development; to protect adjacent land uses from incompatible
industries; and to promote the operation and expansion of commerce within
the district.
§ 120-35.2. Construal of district uses.
No building, structure or land shall be used and no building or structure
shall hereafter be erected, altered, enlarged or maintained, except for one
or more of the following uses. Any use not so specified hereunder shall be
deemed prohibited.
§ 120-35.2.1. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55
and 56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved
8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. The following uses are permitted:
§ 120-35.2.2. Special permit uses.
The following uses may be allowed by the Planning Board subject to the
issuance of a special permit pursuant to §§ 120-123 and 120-126 of this
bylaw.
A. Office park. [Amended 9-7-2004 by Ord. No. 04-133]
Light industry associated with component assembly or packaging, but
not including the processing or manufacturing of the same.
B.
Ancillary warehouse or storage facility associated with a principal use
not to exceed 80% of the total floor area.
C.
Research and development buildings involving activities which do not
utilize or store hazardous materials or wastes.
D.
Ancillary warehouse or storage facility associated with a principal use
exceeding 80% of the total floor area.
A.
Research and development buildings involving activities which utilize
or store hazardous material or wastes, notwithstanding the provisions
of § 120-35.2.3A below.
B.
§ 120-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-35.2.2
1:415
§ 120-35.2.3. Prohibited uses.
The following activities are expressly prohibited from the POP District:
§ 120-35.3. Off-street parking.
Any permitted or special permit use shall be subject to the provisions of
Article XVII of this bylaw for required off-street parking.
§ 120-35.4. Other requirements.
C. Hotel or motel.
Retail sales and consumer service establishments on the ground level
of a multi-story building. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
D.
Light industrial uses associated with the processing or manufacture of
durable or nondurable goods.
E.
Function hall, conference center or assembly hall. [Added August
1989 STM by Art. 5, approved 11-17-1989]
F.
Nursing home or assisted living facility. [Added June 1992 STM by
Art. 5, approved 11-12-1992; amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No.
17-127]
G.
Place of recreation or assembly. [Added May 1994 ATM by Art. 56,
approved 8-19-1994]
H.
Restaurant, theater, or other entertainment establishment particularly
when shared parking agreements can be established with existing
businesses. All regulations contained in § 120-33.1 apply. [Added
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
I.
Parking structure as accessory to primary use. [Added 4-2-2018 by
Ord. No. 17-127]
J.
Storage, utilization, manufacture, processing or packaging of any
hazardous materials, including but not limited to flammable liquids
or gases, organic and inorganic chemicals and naphthas; any United
States Environmental Protection Agency listed or characteristic
hazardous waste; and detonable material.
A.
Application or utilization of deicing materials, including but not limited
to salts (NaCl and CaCl2), and other chemicals to paved surfaces.
B.
Open-lot storage of new building material, contractors' equipment,
machinery, metals, scrap paper or junk.
C.
D. Terminals and yards for the storage and servicing of trucks or buses.
All buildings in the POP District shall be connected to the sanitary
sewer system.
A.
§ 120-35.2.2 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-35.4
1:416
§ 120-35.5. Off-street loading and unloading.
Any permitted or special permit use shall be subject to the provisions of
Article XVIII of this bylaw for required off-street loading and unloading
space needs.
§ 120-35.6. (Reserved)42
§ 120-35.7. Dimensional requirements.
Dimensional requirements for all uses in the POP District shall follow the
district regulations applicable to the Planned Industrial Park District as
shown on Table 1, Schedule of District Regulations, of this bylaw.43
Oil separation devices shall be installed in all catch basins draining
paved surfaces.
B.
All roof drains shall be dispersed to preserve the groundwater recharge
abilities of the land within the POP District.
C.
42.Editor's Note: Former § 120-35.6, Site plan review, was repealed May 1993 ATM by Art. 56,
approved 7-9-1993.
43.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 120-35.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-35.7
1:417

ARTICLE XI
Industrial District I-2
[Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978]
§ 120-36. Permitted uses. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 48,
approved 7-28-1989; May 1993 ATM by Arts. 55 and 56, approved
7-9-1993; May 1997 ATM by Art. 43, approved 8-11-1997]
See Article XXVA, § 120-123E, for site plan review applicability for any of
the permitted uses listed in this section. In an Industrial District I-2, no
building or premises shall be erected, altered or used for any purposes
injurious, noxious or offensive to a neighborhood by reason of the emission
of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, vibration or noise or other cause or for any
purpose except the following:
§ 120-37. Special permit uses.
Any of the following uses, or uses customarily accessory thereto, on
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV:
A. Uses permitted in Industrial District I-1, § 120-28A, B, C, D, E and F.
B. Lunchroom, restaurant and cafeteria.
C. Steam laundry and dry-cleaning and rug-cleaning establishment.
Assembly, machine shop, manufacturing, auto repair, packaging,
processing or other operation, whether making, repairing, finishing,
packing or storing, provided that all resulting cinders, dust, flashing,
fumes, gases, odors, refuse matter, smoke and vapor are effectively
confined to the premises or disposed of in a manner so as not to create
a nuisance or hazard to fire, safety or health.
D.
Marina or yacht club and sales of boats, boat parts and accessories,
fishing equipment, boat fuel and ice and similar supplies for boats, boat
rental or charter, boat building, repair, service and storage.
E.
A. Any use requiring a special permit in an Industrial District I-1, § 120-29.
Open-lot storage of new building material, contractors' equipment,
machinery and metals, other than scrap or junk, and similar materials,
provided that any material stored in unenclosed premises to a height
greater than four feet above grade level is surrounded by a substantial
seven-foot-high wall, tight fence or a proper landscape screening.
B.
Open-lot storage of coal, coke, sand or other solid fuel or similar
material of such storage in silos or hoppers, provided that all dust
and dirt incident to storage or handling is effectively confined to the
premises, and further provided that any material stored in unenclosed
premises to a height greater than four feet above grade level is
surrounded by a substantial seven-foot-high wall or tight fence.
C.
§ 120-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-37
1:419
Commercial parking lot or parking garage. [Amended May 1989 ATM
by Art. 47, approved 7-28-1989]
D.
Water freight terminal facility, including docks, piers, wharves, storage
sheds for waterborne commodities and rail and truck facilities
accessory to water port facilities.
E.
F. Helicopter landing facilities.
Place of recreation or assembly. [Added May 1994 ATM by Art. 56,
approved 8-19-1994]
G.
§ 120-37 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-37
1:420
ARTICLE XII
Open Space District OSD
§ 120-37.1. Reuse of surplus public and quasi-public property.
[Added November 1981 STM by Art. 12, approved 3-3-1982]
Intent. The special permit use process allows for the reuse of surplus
public and quasi-public properties. It is intended to allow for innovative
designs that will permit a practical reuse of these properties as well
as result in a balanced development of high standards. It is further
intended to provide safeguards that will prevent detrimental effects
and impacts on the neighboring properties, especially on abutting
residential districts. The following uses, uses customarily accessory
thereto, dimensional requirements, signs and parking may be granted
as a special permit by the Planning Board subject to the conditions
and requirements of Article XXV insofar as they comply with the intent
expressed herein.
A.
Uses.
A building or group of buildings for occupancy by two or more
families in separate dwelling units and any accessory uses and
structures customarily associated therewith, including swimming
pools, recreation facilities, garages and the like.44
(1)
(2) Clinic or office of business, professional or financial organizations.
Trade, professional or other school conducted as a gainful
business.
(3)
Retail sales and services such as convenience grocery stores,
newsstands, barbers, hairdressers, drugstores and like facilities
primarily for the use of on-site residents, tenants or patrons,
provided that retail uses and services do not constitute more than
25% of the floor area of the building.
(4)
Light assembly or packaging of components or merchandise
associated with office uses. [Added October 1985 STM by Art.
21, approved 1-27-1986]
(5)
B.
Dimensional requirements.
(1) Minimum lot size: 20,000 square feet for newly constructed lots.
Minimum lot area (square feet per dwelling unit): all buildings for
multiple-family residential use based on a floor area ratio of 0.25.
See § 120-6.
(2)
C.
44.Editor's Note: Former Subsection B(2), regarding licensed day-care nursery centers, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed May 1992 ATM by Art. 46, approved
10-1-1992.
§ 120-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-37.1
1:421
§ 120-38. Permitted uses.
In an Open Space District, no building or premises shall be erected, altered
or used for any purpose except:
Front yard depth: minimum of 20 feet for buildings and five feet of
landscaped space for paved areas, excluding entrance drives.
(3)
Side and rear yards depth: minimum of 25 feet for buildings and
five feet of landscaped space for paved areas.
(4)
Lot coverage: maximum of 80% of lot area for buildings and paved
areas (parking, drives and loading areas).
(5)
(6) Height: maximum of 35 feet for new construction.
Signs. Requirements for signs shall be determined by the special permit
granting authority based on proposed uses, i.e., residential uses shall
follow § 120-64.1 and all other uses shall follow §§ 120-64.2 through
120-64.4. When the property fronts in a predominately residential
neighborhood, the sign requirements shall be reviewed to mitigate
any adverse impacts. All other sections of Article XVI shall apply as
necessary. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 48, approved
7-28-1989]
D.
Parking. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with
the following minimum requirements:
(1) Dwellings, multiple: 1.5 spaces for each dwelling unit.
(2) Medical offices: 0.6 space for each 100 square feet of floor area.
Offices, all other types: 1/3 space for each 100 square feet of floor
area.
(3)
Retail business and service establishments: 1/2 space for each 100
square feet of floor area.
(4)
Unlisted requirements: Reasonable off-street parking requirements
for buildings and uses not listed in this section shall be determined
by the special permit granting authority.
(5)
(6) All other sections of Article XVII shall apply as necessary.
E.
A. Municipal use.
B. Cemetery.
§ 120-37.1 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-38
1:422
ARTICLE XIIA
Floodplain District
[Added May 1980 by Art. 50, approved 8-27-1980; amended January
1990 STM by Art. 16, approved 3-26-1990]
§ 120-38.1. Intent.
The Floodplain District is established for the following purposes:
§ 120-38.2. Establishment; determination of boundaries.
To promote the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of land
against the hazards of flooding.
A.
To preserve and protect the streams and other watercourses in
Weymouth and its adjoining lands.
B.
To protect the community against detrimental use and development
which cause increases in erosion, flood heights or flood velocities.
C.
To minimize losses by provisions designed to restrict or prohibit uses
which are dangerous to health, safety or property due to water or
erosion hazards.
D.
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district.
The district includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of
Weymouth designated as Zone A, AE, AO, or VE on the Norfolk County
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National
Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Norfolk County FIRM
that are wholly or partially within the Town of Weymouth are panel
numbers 25021C0089E, 25021C0093E, 25021C0226E, 25021C0227E,
25021C0228E, 25021C0229E, 25021C10231E, 25021C0233E,
25021C0236E, 25021C0237E, 25021C0238E, 25021C0239E,
25021C0241E, and 25021C0243E, dated July 17, 2012. The exact
boundaries of the district may be defined by the one-hundred-year base
flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Norfolk
County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 17, 2012. The
FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are
on file with the Town Clerk. [Amended May 1999 ATM by Art. 18,
approved 8-19-1999; 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-091]
A.
The boundaries of the Floodplain District shall be determined by
scaling distance on the National Flood Insurance Program maps. Where
interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of
the district as shown on the National Flood Insurance Program maps,
the Inspector of Buildings shall make the necessary interpretation.
B.
Any discrepancy with the boundaries and/or elevations as given on the
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall be submitted to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Flood Insurance Administration, for
C.
§ 120-38.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-38.2
1:423
§ 120-38.3. Permitted uses.
its approval; otherwise, the conditions and requirements of this bylaw
shall apply to the land in accordance with the Floodplain Zone as
shown.
Notification of watercourse alteration. In a riverine situation, the
Conservation Commission shall notify the following of any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse: [Added 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-091]
(1) Adjacent communities.
National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) State Coordinator, MA
DCR.
(2)
(3) NFIP Program Specialist, FEMA.
D.
Within the Floodplain Overlay District, all uses shall follow the specific
permitted uses and special permit uses of the underlying zoning
district.
A.
All provisions of this bylaw affecting a permitted use shall be applicable
in the Floodplain District.
B.
The special permit granting authority shall be the Board of Zoning
Appeals. [Amended 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-091]
C.
In addition to all provisions of this bylaw that affect the underlying
district, the following additional procedures shall apply for all filling,
permitted uses, special permitted uses and substantial improvements
of any structure (the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market
value of the structure) where any portion of such lies within the various
floodplain zones as stipulated below: [Amended May 1993 ATM by
Art. 56, approved 7-9-1993; May 1999 ATM by Art. 18, approved
8-19-1999; 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 12-091]
Zones A, AO, AE: A special permit from the special permit granting
authority is required, subject to the special criteria set forth in
§§ 120-38.4 and 120-38.5 and subject to the procedures of
§ 120-123.
(1)
Zone VE.
A special permit from the special permit-granting authority is
required, subject to the criteria set forth in §§ 120-38.4 and
120-38.5 and subject to the procedures of § 120-123 when any
portion thereof is located landward of mean high tide.
(a)
Seaward of mean high tide new structures are prohibited and
existing structures shall not be enlarged.
(b)
Man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE which
would increase potential flood damage is prohibited.
(c)
(2)
D.
§ 120-38.2 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-38.3
1:424
§ 120-38.4. Special permit uses.
§ 120-38.5. Construction criteria for special permits.
The following criteria shall apply to any special permit use granted within
the one-hundred-year floodplain:
Floodway, as shown on the maps, is essentially the natural drainage
for the one-hundred-year floodwaters, comprising streams, brooks,
etc. No building, filling or other encroachment is permitted in
floodway.
(3)
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a
regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state,
local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase
in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(4)
The special permit granting authority may require such information,
data and testing to be performed at the applicant's expense in order to
achieve a finding of compliance. Such information may include but not
be limited to spot elevations and drainage calculations.
A.
The special permit granting authority may approve any application for
a special permit where specified in § 120-38.3D(3) only if it finds that,
in its judgment, all of the following criteria are met:
The subject land is not subject to flooding or, if Subsection B(1) is
not proven, then:
(1)
The subject land is not unsuitable because of drainage conditions
on-site as well as on abutting properties upstream and
downstream.
(2)
The proposed activity will not increase the water surface elevation
of the one-hundred-year flood at any point within the Town.
(3)
B.
All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures shall have the lowest portion of all structural members
supporting the lowest floor, including basement or cellar, elevated at
least one foot above the one-hundred-year-flood elevation. [Amended
May 1999 ATM by Art. 18, approved 8-19-1999]
A.
All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential
structures shall be floodproofed at least to a point one foot above
the one-hundred-year flood elevation. "Floodproofed" shall mean
watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water and structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic loads and the effect of buoyancy.
B.
§ 120-38.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-38.5
1:425
§ 120-38.6. Reference to existing regulations. [Amended May 1999
ATM by Art. 18, approved 8-19-1999]
The Floodplain District is established as an overlay district to all other
districts. All development in the floodplain, including structural and
nonstructural activities, whether permitted by right or by special permit,
may be subject to compliance with other regulations such as, but not limited
to:
Within the Floodplain District, one-hundred-year flood elevations shown
on the approved Flood Insurance Rate Map shall govern. Where the
one-hundred-year flood elevation is not provided, the Planning Board
shall produce and maintain any already existing one-hundred-year flood
elevation data, and it shall be used to meet the above requirements.
C.
All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that: [Amended
May 1999 ATM by Art. 18, approved 8-19-1999; 6-18-2012 by
Ord. No. 12-091]
(1) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(2)
(3) Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
D.
Within Zone AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths must be
provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around
and away from proposed structures. [Added 6-18-2012 by Ord. No.
12-091]
E.
A. MGL c. 131, § 40.
Massachusetts State Building Code, 780 CMR 3107.0, Flood Resistant
Construction.
B.
C. Inland Wetland Restriction, DEP, 302 CMR 6.00.
D. Coastal Wetlands Restriction, DEP, 302 CMR 4.00.
Minimum Requirements for Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary Sewerage,
DEP 310 CMR 15, Title 5.
E.
§ 120-38.5 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-38.6
1:426
ARTICLE XIII
Nonconforming Uses
[Amended June 1978 STM by Arts. 2 and 3, approved 11-2-1978]
§ 120-39. Continuation.
Any building or structure or any use of a building or structure or premises
or part thereof lawfully existing at the time this bylaw or any amendment
thereto is adopted may be continued although such building or structure or
use does not conform to the provisions thereof. This article shall not apply
to nor grant any exemption to any billboards, signs or other advertising
devices subject to MGL c. 93, §§ 29 to 33 and MGL c. 93D.
§ 120-40. Extension or change by special permit. [Amended May
1989 ATM by Art. 49, approved 7-28-1989]
Any lawful building or structure or use of a building or structure or
premises or part thereof at the time this bylaw or any amendment thereto
is adopted may be extended or altered, provided that no such extension or
alteration shall be permitted unless there is a finding by the Board of Zoning
Appeals that such change, extension or alteration shall not be substantially
more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use to the neighborhood,
subject to the conditions and requirements of Article XXV of this bylaw.
§ 120-41. Exception to limitation on restoration by special permit.
[Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 49, approved 7-28-1989]
No building or structure which has been damaged by fire or other causes to
the extent of more than 3/4 of its value shall be repaired or rebuilt except
in conformity with this bylaw, unless the Board of Zoning Appeals finds that
the restoration is for the same use and that the building or structure is not
substantially greater in area, height or size and not nearer to adjoining lots,
subject to the conditions and requirements of Article XXV of this bylaw.
§ 120-42. Abandonment or discontinuance. [Amended May 1989 by
Art. 49, approved 7-28-1989]
If the nonconforming use of any building or structure shall be abandoned
or shall be discontinued for a period of 24 consecutive months, it shall
not be reestablished, and all future use thereof shall be in conformity with
the applicable provisions of this bylaw, unless prior to the expiration of
the 24 months permission to reestablish said use has been applied for and
thereafter granted by special permit from the Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 120-43. Structures in progress with permits issued.
It is hereby provided that construction or operations under a building
permit or special permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this
bylaw unless the use or construction is commenced within a period of not
less than six months after the issuance of the permit and, in cases involving
§ 120-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-43
1:427
construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion
as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable.
§ 120-43 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-43
1:428
ARTICLE XIV
Applicability of District Regulations
§ 120-44. Compliance with bylaw required.
No structure or land shall be hereafter used and no structure or part
thereof shall be erected or moved nor shall the exterior be altered unless in
conformity with the regulations of this bylaw for the district in which it is
located, except as provided for in Article XIII.
§ 120-45. Open space.
No yard or open space required for a building by this bylaw shall, during the
life of such building, be occupied by or counted as open space for another
building.
§ 120-46. Visibility at intersections.
In any district where a front yard is required, no structure, fence or planting
shall be maintained within 30 feet of any corner street line intersection and
within the required front yard above a height of three feet above curb level
or so as to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner.
§ 120-47. Projections into required yards. [Amended April 1971
ATM by Art. 47, approved 8-24-1971]
Nothing herein shall prevent the projection of steps, cornices, windowsills,
balconies, chimneys, flues and fire escapes and other ornamental features
into any required yard area.
§ 120-48. Reduction of lot area.
No lot on which is located any building in any district shall be reduced or
changed in area or shape so that the building or lot fails to comply with the
provisions of this bylaw. This section, however, shall not apply in the case of
a lot a portion of which is indicated for a public purpose.
§ 120-49. Calculation of side yard area for certain yards.
Where a side wall of a building is not parallel with the side lot line,
the required width of any side yard may be taken as the average width,
provided that said side yard shall not be narrower at any point than 80% of
the required width.
§ 120-50. Exceptions to height regulations. [Added May 1989 ATM
by Art. 50, approved 7-28-198945; amended May 1992 ATM by Art.
34, approved 10-1-1992]
45.Editor's Note: This article also repealed former § 120-50, Unusual buildings prohibited.
§ 120-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-50
1:429
The limitation of height in feet as set by § 120-51, Schedule of District
Regulations (Table 1), and as further regulated by § 120-57, shall not
apply to church spires or flagpoles.
A.
The limitation of height in feet as set by § 120-51, Schedule of District
Regulations (Table 1), and as further regulated by § 120-57, may be
extended an additional 10 feet for chimneys, antennas, ventilators,
skylights, tanks, elevator/mechanical penthouses or other accessory
features usually carried above roofs, provided that they are in no way
used for living purposes.
B.
§ 120-50 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-50
1:430
ARTICLE XV
Dimensional Requirements
§ 120-51. Schedule of District Regulations.46 [Added May 1989 ATM
by Art. 51, approved 7-28-1989]
No structure shall be erected, altered or moved, except in conformity with
Table 1, Schedule of District Regulations, included as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 120-52. Exception for erection of single-family dwelling on
previously recorded lots. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 51,
approved 7-28-1989]
A single-family dwelling may be erected on a lot containing less than is
hereby prescribed if such lot was recorded at the time of the adoption of
this bylaw, if separately owned and containing not less than 5,000 square
feet and if it did not at the time of such adoption adjoin other land of the
same owner available for use in connection with said lot; provided, however,
that any building erected thereon shall conform to all other provisions of
this bylaw. See Table 1 for applicability.47
§ 120-53. (Reserved)48
§ 120-53.1. Minimum upland area. [Added May 1986 ATM by Art.
46, approved 7-24-1986; amended May 1998 ATM by Art. 43,
approved 10-23-1998; 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 16-150]
Any lot created after January 17, 2017, shall have a minimum upland area,
as defined in § 120-6, of 85% of the minimum lot area.
§ 120-53.2. Lot shape factor. [Added 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 16-150]
No lot shall be created so as to be so irregularly shaped or extended that it
has a "shape factor" in excess of 30. "Shape factor" equals the square of the
lot perimeter divided by the lot area.
§ 120-54. Confinement of accessory uses to rear yard. [Amended
May 1989 ATM by Art. 48, approved 7-28-1989]
Building of an accessory use, other than a private garage or carport, shall
be confined to the rear yard area, and no building of any accessory use shall
be permitted in the required front yard.
46.Editor's Note: Former § 120-51, Exception to minimum lot area requirement, amended
February 1985 STM by Art. 7, approved 6-3-1985, was repealed 5-2-1988 ATM by Art. 51,
approved 9-2-1988.
47.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
48.Editor’s Note: Former § 120-53, Exceptions by Board of Zoning Appeals, as amended, was
repealed 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 16-150.
§ 120-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-55
1:431
§ 120-55. One-story accessory use buildings. [Amended May 1989
ATM by Art. 48, approved 7-28-1989]
A one-story building of accessory use may be built no closer than five feet
to a side lot line and/or the rear lot line.
§ 120-56. Front lot line, frontage and frontage width. [Amended
April 1971 ATM by Art. 47, approved 8-24-1971; May 1983 ATM by
Art. 48, approved 8-26-1983; May 1985 ATM by Art. 44, approved
7-25-1985; May 1990 STM by Art. 1, approved 8-29-1990; May 1997
ATM by Art. 42, approved 8-11-1997]
§ 120-57. Height limits on structures abutting R-1 Districts or
schools. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 51, approved 7-28-1989;
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
If abutting a Resident District R-1 or school, no building or structure shall
be erected to a height in excess of 2 1/2 stories, not to exceed 35 feet. See
Table 1 for applicability.49
Applications for special permits under Article VIIB may substitute the
requirements of § 120-25.17C with approval from the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
§ 120-58. Exception for erection on previously recorded lots.
[Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 51, approved 7-28-1989]
A building may be erected on a lot containing less than is hereby prescribed
if such lot was recorded at the time of the adoption of this article of the
bylaw, if separately owned and containing not less than 5,000 square feet
and if it did not at the time of such adoption adjoin other land of the same
owner available for use in connection with said lot; provided, however, that
Each lot shall have a front lot line, as said term is defined in § 120-6,
of not less than 40 feet, unless stated otherwise in Table 1, Schedule of
District Regulations, included as an attachment to this chapter.
A.
Lots within a Neighborhood Center District NCD shall have a minimum
front yard depth of 18 feet unless the alignment of two or more existing
buildings on lots on either or both sides of said lot and within a distance
of 150 feet and fronting on the same side of the same street in the same
block is nearer the street than the required front yard depth, in which
case the average of the existing alignment of all buildings within that
distance may be required front yard depth.
B.
Each lot shall have frontage and frontage width, as said terms are
defined in § 120-6, of no less than 40 feet, unless stated otherwise in
Table 1, Schedule of District Regulations, included as an attachment to
this chapter.
C.
49.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 120-55 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-58
1:432
any buildings erected thereon shall conform to all other provisions of this
bylaw. See Table 1 for applicability.50
§ 120-59. Setback restrictions for buildings abutting residential
districts or schools. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 51, approved
7-28-1989]
If abutting a residential district or school, no building or structure shall be
built or placed within 20 feet of a side lot line and/or a rear lot line. See
Table 1 for applicability.51
§ 120-59.1. Measurements across lots. [Added February 1985 STM
by Art. 7, approved 6-3-1985; amended May 1997 ATM by Art. 42,
approved 8-11-1997]
If any lot in existence as of February 25, 1985, is to be subdivided into three
or more lots or if any lot subsequently created is to be subdivided, then
each subdivided lot shall have a minimum lot measurement across the front
yard from side lot line to side lot line at any point from the lot line to the
minimum lot width line at the front line of the building of not less than 60%
of the minimum required lot width, and no portion of a principal building
shall be erected on any portion of a lot which is less than the required
lot width as set forth in these bylaws. Said minimum required lot width
shall extend an additional 20 feet beyond the rear portion of the principal
building.
§ 120-60. Lot width for areas where rear land available for
development. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 51, approved
7-28-1989]
In areas where there is rear land for development that may require access
through the lots involved, then the lot width shall be 200 feet. See Table 1
for applicability.52
§ 120-61. Side setback requirement for certain lots. [Amended May
1989 ATM by Art. 51, approved 7-28-1989]
If a lot has a lot width of less than 199 feet, then the buildings shall not be
less than 15 feet from a side lot line. See Table 1 for applicability.53
50.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
51.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
52.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
53.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 120-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-62
1:433
§ 120-62. Location on lot restrictions for structures abutting R-1
Districts or schools. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 51, approved
7-28-1989]
If abutting a Resident District R-1 or school, no building or structure shall
be built or placed within 50 feet of a side lot line and/or a rear lot line. See
Table 1 for applicability.54
§ 120-62.1. Front yard landscaping. [Added May 1992 ATM by Art.
36, approved 10-1-1992]
The front yard area comprising the minimum required front yard setback
depth and measured across the lot width shall be landscaped, except for
required access driveways and walkways. The minimum landscaped depth
may be reduced to 15 feet in the HT, MS and B-1 Zoning Districts if a
landscaping plan is approved by the Inspector of Buildings. See Table 1 for
applicability.55
§ 120-63. Planned unit developments. [Added June 1978 STM by
Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978; amended May 1995 ATM by Art. 74,
approved 7-1-1995]
If a special permit is sought pursuant to §§ 120-13, 120-18 and 120-22, the
following minimum regulations shall be required:
In addition to the requirements of Article XXV, the Planning Board
will have to make a finding that the planned unit development plan is
superior to a conventional plan for that zoning district in minimizing the
environmental impacts, providing for protection of natural resources
and allowing for more efficient provision of services and use of the land.
A.
Minimum land area shall be 25 acres in the R-1 Zone and five acres in
the R-3 and R-4 Zones.
B.
The use of the land shall be a mixture of residential with open space and
recreational uses and may include uses customarily accessory thereto.
C.
In an R-1 District, within a PUD, no structure shall be erected, altered
or moved except in conformity with Table 1, Schedule of District
Regulations,56 as applicable to the R-1 District, with the following
exceptions:
The special permit granting authority shall approve all lot area, lot
width and lot setback dimensions.
(1)
All lots within a PUD shall conform to §§ 120-53.1, 120-54 and
120-56.
(2)
D.
54.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
55.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
56.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 120-62 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-63
1:434
A twenty-foot setback for all buildings, parking and loading shall be
provided around the outside perimeter of a PUD.
(3)
In R-3 and R-4 Districts, within a PUD, no structure shall be erected,
altered or moved, except in conformity with Table 1, Schedule of
District Regulations,57 as applicable to the R-1 District, with the
following exceptions:
The special permit granting authority shall approve all lot area, lot
width and lot setback dimensions.
(1)
All lots within a PUD shall conform to §§ 120-53.1, 120-54, 120-56
and 120-57.
(2)
A twenty-foot setback for all buildings, parking and loading shall be
provided around the outside perimeter of a PUD.
(3)
E.
The number of dwelling units shall not exceed the number of dwelling
units permitted under the zoning classification of the tract if the tract
were developed pursuant to the Zoning Bylaw, the Subdivision Control
Law, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 131, Weymouth Code
Chapter 7, Section 7-300, Wetlands Protection, and other applicable
laws and regulations.
F.
More than one building for residential purposes may be permitted on a
lot in a PUD.
G.
H. More than one dwelling unit may be permitted in a building in a PUD.
57.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 120-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-63
1:435

ARTICLE XVI
Signs
[Amended February 1972 STM by Art. 6, approved 5-8-1972;
October 1975 STM by Art. 19, approved 1-26-1976; May 1980 ATM
by Art. 53, approved 8-27-1980; October 1982 STM by Art. 3,
approved 1-11-1983; May 1983 ATM by Art. 48, approved 8-26-1983;
October 1985 STM by Art. 22, approved 1-27-1986]
§ 120-64. (Reserved)
§ 120-64.1. Signs in residential districts.
No billboard, sign or other advertising matter of any kind shall be erected
on any premises or maintained within public view or facing an adjoining
residential lot in any residential district, except as hereinafter provided:
One sign not exceeding two square feet in area and pertaining to the
use of the premises or bearing the name and/or occupation of the
occupant. The sign may be attached to the building or may be on a rod
or post not more than six feet high and at least three feet from the
street line.
A.
A lot containing 10 or more residential dwelling units may have either
one wall sign or one freestanding sign for identification purposes which
may contain any of the following: property name, address, property
owner/manager and telephone number; and, further, subject to all size,
height and lighting criteria applicable to these districts.
Wall signs shall not exceed 12 square feet, nor shall any such sign
project beyond the face of any other wall nor project more than 18
inches from said wall, and further provided that in no case shall the
uppermost edge of such sign exceed 20 feet above grade.
(1)
Freestanding signs shall not exceed 12 square feet per side with
a total surface area of all sides not exceeding 24 feet, and further
provided that such sign shall comply with height and setback
criteria as specified for business districts.
(2)
B.
One "for sale" or "for rent" sign not exceeding six square feet in area
and advertising only the premises on which the sign is located and, in
any case, to remain no longer than a four-month period in any calendar
year, after which period a permit may be given by the Inspector of
Buildings for an additional four-month period upon written application,
if need is shown.
C.
One building contractor's sign not to exceed 12 square feet in area may
be temporarily maintained on the premises while the same are actually
under construction.
D.
A permitted nonresidential or nonconforming use may have either one
wall sign up to a maximum area of six square feet; or one freestanding
E.
§ 120-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-64.1
1:437
§ 120-64.2. Signs in Resident R-2 and Neighborhood Center
Districts. [Amended May 1990 STM by Art. 1, approved 8-29-1990]
Signs in a Resident R-2 District and Neighborhood Center District
advertising conforming uses shall be subject to the following conditions:
§ 120-64.3. Signs in business districts. [Amended May 1990 STM by
Art. 2, approved 8-29-1990; May 1990 STM by Art. 3, approved
8-29-1990]
Signs advertising conforming uses located on the premises are allowed with
the following conditions:
sign up to a maximum area of six square feet per side, with a total
surface area of all sides not exceeding 12 square feet.
F. All signs may be illuminated by continuous reflected illumination only.
G. No sign shall exceed 20 feet in height above grade.
Political signs. Political signs shall be those signs pertaining to a
candidate for election or ballot questions. Each sign shall not exceed six
square feet in size. Signs shall be erected no earlier than 35 days prior
to an election and shall be removed within three days after the election.
[Added May 1992 ATM by Art. 47, approved 10-1-1992]
H.
Each place of business shall be allowed one permanent wall sign
parallel to the exterior building facade, projecting not more than 12
inches from said wall and having an aggregate area of two square feet
for each horizontal foot of building frontage of said business, provided
that the area of said sign shall not exceed 20 square feet, and further
provided that the uppermost edge of said sign shall not exceed 20 feet
above grade or above the roofline, whichever is lower in height.
A.
Each lot shall be allowed one freestanding sign, provided that the
foremost building on the lot is set back from the front lot line a
minimum of 10 feet, subject to the following criteria:
The sign area shall not exceed 15 square feet per side, with a total
surface area of all sides not exceeding 30 square feet.
(1)
Signs within 25 feet of a street or way line shall have either the
uppermost edge of the sign no more than three feet above grade or
the lowermost edge of the sign no less than eight feet above grade
and the uppermost edge not to exceed 20 feet above grade.
(2)
B.
Signs shall be set back from any adjoining residential district lot line
at least the front yard distance required in the adjoining residential
district.
C.
Any lights used for illumination shall be so arranged as to reflect light
away from an adjoining residential district.
D.
§ 120-64.1 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-64.3
1:438
§ 120-64.4. Signs in industrial districts. [Amended May 1987 ATM
by Art. 50, approved 8-27-1987; May 1990 STM by Art. 2, approved
8-29-1990]
Signs identifying and/or advertising conforming uses located on the
premises are allowed with the following conditions:
Wall signs parallel to an exterior wall of a building for each place of
business shall be permitted, provided that the same shall not project
beyond the face of any other wall, nor project above the roofline of
said wall, nor project more than 18 inches from said wall, and provided
further that the aggregate area of said signs shall not exceed one
square foot for each horizontal foot of building frontage of each said
business, and further provided that the area of said signs for each
business shall not exceed 75 square feet.
A.
One freestanding sign only for each lot, provided that the foremost
building on the lot is set back from the front lot line a minimum of 10
feet, shall be permitted, subject to the following criteria:
Sign area may be one square foot for each five feet of lot line front,
provided that the total area of each surface shall not exceed 60
square feet and a total of all surfaces shall not exceed 120 square
feet.
(1)
The frontmost edge of the sign shall be set back from the front lot
line a minimum of three feet in a B-1 District only.
(2)
Signs within 25 feet of a street or way line shall have either the
uppermost edge of the sign no more than three feet above grade or
the lowermost edge of the sign no less than eight feet above grade
and the uppermost edge not to exceed 25 feet above grade.
(3)
B.
Wall or freestanding signs may use a portion of the permitted sign
area for interchangeable characters, provided that such area shall not
exceed three square feet plus an additional 10% of the sign face area.
C.
Signs shall be set back from any adjoining residential district lot line
at least the front yard distance required in the adjoining residential
district.
D.
Any lights used for illumination shall be so arranged as to reflect light
away from an adjoining residential district.
E.
Any proposed signage not in conformance with the regulations set forth
in this section shall be subject to site plan review under Article XXVA.
[Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
F.
Wall signs parallel to an exterior wall of a building for each place of
business shall be permitted, provided that the same shall not project
beyond the face of any other wall nor project above the roofline of said
wall nor project more than 18 inches from said wall, shall not exceed
A.
§ 120-64.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-64.4
1:439
§ 120-64.5. Regulations applicable in all districts.
The following provisions shall apply in all districts:
one square foot for each horizontal foot of building frontage of each
said business, and further provided that the area of said signs for each
business shall not exceed 75 square feet.
One freestanding sign only for each lot shall be permitted, subject to
the following criteria:
Signs shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any street, way,
driveway, parking area and loading area.
(1)
Sign area shall not exceed 20 square feet per side, with a total
surface area of all sides not to exceed 40 square feet.
(2)
The uppermost edge of said sign shall not exceed six feet above
grade.
(3)
B.
One freestanding directory sign is permitted, provided that there is no
other freestanding sign on the lot, at the principal entrance to a group
of buildings or building in which various businesses are conducted,
listing only the name and location of said building, and provided further
that said listing shall be no larger than three square feet; and in
addition to said sign listings there shall be permitted, and as part of
the freestanding sign, a sign identifying the name of the industrial
park or building, not to exceed 30 square feet. The total sign area of
each surface shall not exceed 100 square feet, and the total area of all
surfaces shall not exceed 200 square feet. The height of said sign shall
not exceed 25 feet above grade, and the lower edge of the sign shall
be no less than eight feet above grade if said sign is within 25 feet of a
street or way line.
C.
Signs shall be set back from any adjoining residential district lot line
at least the front yard distance required in the adjoining residential
district.
D.
Any lights used for illumination shall be so arranged as to reflect light
away from adjoining residential districts.
E.
Churches and nonprofit institutions may be permitted either a
maximum of two wall signs, any portion of which may be used as an
announcement or bulletin board, provided that the total area of all signs
shall not exceed 20 square feet, or one freestanding sign, for which the
area of each surface shall not exceed 40 square feet and the total of all
surfaces shall not exceed 40 square feet.
A.
A permitted business use may use any portion of its permitted sign
area for a clock, thermometer and/or calendar, which changes on a
synchronized basis.
B.
§ 120-64.4 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-64.6
1:440
§ 120-64.6. Prohibited signs.
In the interest of public safety, the following are not permitted:
§ 120-64.7. Billboards. [Amended 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
Billboards of any kind are prohibited outside the limits of the Billboard
Relocation Overlay District.
§ 120-64.7.1. Billboard Relocation Overlay District. [Added
4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
Any sign or advertising device with visible moving or movable parts
(except as provided in this bylaw) or with flashing, animated or
intermittent illumination or which is noise-making. Exempted from this
section is any automated, illuminated barber pole, used in advertising
the licensed profession of barbering, which does not exceed 39 inches
in height and 10 1/2 inches in width and is attached to the building.
[Amended September 1996 STM by Art. 22, approved 1-2-1997]
A.
Any colored sign so located as to attract attention from or obscure a
traffic control light so as to reduce its visibility and effect.
B.
Any sign within 25 feet of an intersection of two streets so placed in any
way as to obstruct clear vision in any direction.
C.
Any device illuminating a sign which directs light toward a public way
in such a manner as to cast its beam in the eyes of oncoming motorists
or pedestrians.
D.
Any sign which contains a registered trademark or portrays a specific
commodity for sale, unless said trademark or commodity is the
principal activity conducted therein.
E.
The Billboard Relocation Overlay District is established to provide for
the removal and relocation of pre-existing, legally established
billboards to new locations while achieving an overall reduction in the
number of billboards throughout the Town.
A.
The regulations set forth below are generally applied to portions of
properties located along Route 3 that are currently zoned Limited
Industrial (I-1). The overlay shall be limited to an area extending 300
feet from the center line of Route 3 within the designated areas and as
specifically identified on the Town of Weymouth Zoning Map.58
B.
No more than three electronic billboards are the only permitted use
within the Billboard Relocation Overlay District and are subject to
the approval of a billboard reduction and relocation agreement or
development agreement for the reduction and relocation of billboards
in compliance with this section.
C.
58.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 120-64.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-64.7.1
1:441
§ 120-64.8. Nonconforming signs.
Signs or other advertising devices legally erected may continue to be
maintained; provided, however, that no such sign or other advertising
device shall be permitted if it is enlarged, reworded (other than in the
case of permitted signs with changing messages), redesigned or altered in
any way, including repainting in a different color, except to conform to the
requirements of this bylaw, and provided further that any such sign or other
advertising device which has deteriorated to such an extent that the cost of
restoration would exceed 35% of the replacement cost of the sign or other
advertising device at the time of the restoration shall not be repaired or
rebuilt or altered except to conform to the requirements of this bylaw. Any
exemption provided in Article XVI shall terminate with respect to any sign
or other advertising device which:
§ 120-64.9. Power of Inspector of Buildings.
§ 120-65. through § 120-68. (Reserved)
All billboards and related facilities and structures approved or
permitted pursuant to a billboard reduction and relocation agreement
or development agreement must be within the Billboard Relocation
Overlay District and must comply with the requirements of Code of
Massachusetts Regulations as defined in 700 CMR 3.17 and with the
guidelines developed by the Director of Planning and Community
Development.
D.
A. Shall have been abandoned;
Advertises or calls attention to any products, businesses or activities
which are no longer sold or carried on at the particular premises; or
B.
Shall not have been repaired or properly maintained within 30 days
after notice to that effect has been given by the Inspector of Buildings.
C.
Any signs permitted by the zoning laws shall be erected to the
satisfaction of the Inspector of Buildings.
A.
In addition to signs otherwise permitted, directional signs for the
purpose of maintaining traffic control for public safety are permitted to
be erected or placed at designated locations with the approval of the
Inspector of Buildings. The size of such signs shall not exceed 4 1/2
square feet each.
B.
§ 120-64.7.1 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-65
1:442
ARTICLE XVII
Off-Street Parking
§ 120-69. Off-street parking required; plan; exception.
No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be erected or used
unless the off-street parking spaces as hereinafter required are provided.
No application for a permit for erection of a new structure or for the
development of a land use shall be approved unless it includes a plan for
off-street parking facilities and is maintained thereafter in accordance with
the requirements of this section, except that such parking spaces are not
required for any structure or use existing at the time of enactment of this
bylaw; provided, however, that parking spaces as specified in this article
shall be provided for any enlargement or alteration to any such existing
structure or use, and provided further that the increase is greater than 15%.
§ 120-70. Location requirements. [Amended April 1971 ATM by Art.
47, approved 8-24-1971]
The off-street parking spaces required by this section shall be as follows:
On the same lot as the structure or use they are intended to serve;
except where such off-street parking spaces cannot be reasonably
provided on the same lot in the Neighborhood Center District NCD,
Business District B-2 and the Industrial District I-2, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may by special permit grant exceptions to allow provisions of
the required spaces on a separate lot or lots within a radius of 600 feet,
measured from the lot line of the principal use. [Amended May 1983
ATM by Art. 48, approved 8-26-1983; May 1989 ATM by Art. 49,
approved 7-28-1989]
A.
When a required off-street parking space is in the form of a parking lot
or other open air parking space in: [Amended May 1990 STM by Art.
1, approved 8-29-1990]
Resident Districts R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4, all required spaces for
nonresidential uses shall be located behind the minimum required
front setback. [Amended May 1998 ATM by Art. 42, approved
10-23-1998]
(1)
Industrial District I-1, it shall be confined to side and rear yard
areas.
(2)
B.
When a required off-street parking space is in the form of a parking lot
or other open-air parking space in Business Districts B-1, HT and MS, it
shall not be located within less than 15 feet of a street line. [Amended
May 1990 STM by Arts. 2 and 3, approved 8-29-1990]
C.
In the event that off-street parking spaces cannot be reasonably
provided on the same lot within the Neighborhood Center District to
accommodate nonresidential uses only, the Board of Zoning Appeals
may grant exceptions to allow provision for counting on-street parking
D.
§ 120-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-70
1:443
§ 120-71. Dimensional requirements. [Amended May 1987 ATM by
Art. 51, approved 8-27-1987]
§ 120-72. Access to street required. [Amended May 1987 ATM by
Art. 51, approved 8-27-1987]
Each parking space shall have vehicular access to a street without the need
of moving any other vehicle. Driveways and aisles in all districts, except
Low Density Residential (R-1), shall be arranged so that vehicles will leave
and enter the street with a forward motion.
§ 120-73. Construction requirements.
Every parcel of land which, after the effective date of this bylaw, is changed
to a parking area for more than three vehicles, or to a drive-in business or
motor vehicle sales or service establishment, shall be developed as follows,
subject to the approval of the plans therefor by the Inspector of Buildings:
spaces within a radius of 150 feet, provided that it is demonstrated that
the additional demand for such spaces can be reasonably met without
placing an undue burden on existing facilities already relying on such
spaces. [Added May 1983 ATM by Art. 48, approved 8-26-1983]
Parking spaces. Each individual parking space shall have minimum
dimensions of nine feet by 18 feet.
A.
Driveway entrances. Driveway entrances in all districts, except the Low
Density Residential (R-1) District, shall be a minimum of 12 feet in
width for one-way traffic and 20 feet in width for two-way traffic.
B.
Aisle widths. Aisle widths and turning spaces shall be adequate to
ensure safe and proper operation and shall be established by
recognized architectural/engineering standards as deemed appropriate
by the Inspector of Buildings.
C.
Such area, where subject to wheeled traffic, shall be smoothly graded,
properly drained and treated with bituminous or other all-weather hard
surface and shall have appropriate bumper or wheel guards where
needed.
A.
Where such area abuts a residential district, it shall not be located
within less than five feet of the lot line, and a wall or fence of solid
appearance or a tight evergreen hedge having a height of no less than
five feet shall be erected and maintained between such area and the
property in the residential district.
B.
Any light used to illuminate said parking area shall be so arranged as
to reflect light away from adjoining premises and streets.
C.
§ 120-70 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-74
1:444
§ 120-74. Minimum required spaces.
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following
minimum requirements:
A. Bowling alleys: three off-street parking spaces for each lane.
Dwellings, single- and two-family: two spaces for each dwelling unit.
[Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 52, approved 7-28-1989]
B.
Dwellings, multiple: two spaces for each dwelling unit. [Amended May
1997 ATM by Art. 41, approved 8-11-1997]
C.
Eating and drinking establishments: one space for each three seats
or two spaces for each 100 square feet of gross floor area, excluding
basement storage area, as deemed necessary by the Inspector of
Buildings. [Amended May 1997 ATM by Art. 41, approved
8-11-1997; 4-2-2018 by Ord. No. 17-127]
D.
Funeral homes: one space for each company vehicle, plus one space for
each three seats in meeting rooms.
E.
Hospitals: one space per bed plus 1/2 space for each 800 square feet
of gross floor area, excluding basement storage area. [Amended May
1990 STM by Art. 3, approved 8-29-1990]
F.
Motels, hotels and lodging houses: one space for each guest room or
dwelling unit.
G.
H. Marinas: one space for each boat mooring and/or berthing space.
Medical, dental or professional building: one space for each 100 square
feet of gross floor area, excluding basement storage area. [Amended
May 1989 ATM by Art. 52, approved 7-28-1989; May 1997 ATM
by Art. 41, approved 8-11-1997]
I.
Nursing homes and rest homes: one space for each two beds.
[Amended May 1997 ATM by Art. 41, approved 8-11-1997]
J.
Offices: one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area,
excluding basement storage area. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art.
52, approved 7-28-1989; May 1997 ATM by Art. 41, approved
8-11-1997]
K.
Retail business and service establishments: one space for each 200
square feet of gross floor area on the first floor of a building, and one
space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area thereafter for all
floors used for office, retail or service businesses, excluding basement
storage area.
L.
Schools; day-care centers. [Amended May 1997 ATM by Art. 41,
approved 8-11-1997]
M.
§ 120-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-74
1:445
§ 120-75. Issuance of certificates of occupancy.
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless required parking facilities
shall have been provided in accordance with those designated and approved
on the approved plan.
Schools: one space for each employee, including teachers and
administrators, plus sufficient off-street space for safe and
convenient loading and unloading of clients.
(1)
Day-care centers: one space for each employee, plus one space
for each six clients of the licensed capacity, not including any
shared parking spaces, plus sufficient off-street space for safe and
convenient loading and unloading of clients. Off-street space for
loading and unloading shall consist of an additional minimum of
one space for each 12 clients of the licensed capacity. [Amended
May 1998 ATM by Art. 42, approved 10-23-1998]
(2)
Theaters, auditoriums, assembly halls and other places of assembly:
one space for each five seats or for each 100 square feet of auditorium
area, if there are not fixed seats.
N.
Wholesale establishments and industrial uses: one space for each two
employees employed, plus space for every company-owned and -
operated vehicle, plus spaces for customers' vehicles as determined
appropriate by the Inspector of Buildings.
O.
Joint facilities. Accessory off-street parking for business and industrial
uses may be provided in joint facilities designed to serve two or more
buildings or uses, provided that the joint facilities shall not be less than
the total required under the provisions of this bylaw.
P.
Mixed uses in a single building. Where a building has a mixture of
uses for which accessory off-street parking space is required, spaces
required will be the sum of the requirements of the various individual
uses.
Q.
Unlisted requirements. Reasonable off-street parking requirements for
buildings and uses not listed in this section shall be determined in each
case by the Inspector of Buildings.
R.
§ 120-74 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-75
1:446
ARTICLE XVIII
Off-Street Loading
§ 120-76. Off-street loading spaces required. [Amended May 1992
ATM by Art. 38, approved 10-1-1992]
No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be erected or used
for nonresidential purposes in any use district requiring the loading and
unloading of goods unless off-street loading spaces are provided. Further,
for each nonresidential use or structure with a gross floor area of 30,000
square feet or less in which commodities are sold, displayed, serviced,
repaired, altered or fabricated as the principal use of the parcel or lot, one
off-street loading bay shall be provided, with an additional loading bay for
each additional 50,000 square feet of floor area, except that additional offstreet
loading bays shall be required by the Inspector of Buildings when
necessary to provide adequate area for off-street loading.
§ 120-77. Off-street loading bay dimensions. [Amended May 1992
ATM by Art. 38, approved 10-1-1992]
Each such loading bay shall have minimum dimensions of 45 feet by 14
feet and 14 feet in height and may be located either within a building
or outside and adjoining an opening in the building. Every part of such
off-street loading bay shall be located completely off the street. In case
trucks, trailers or other vehicles larger than the dimensions of the minimum
requirements habitually service the building in question, additional space
shall be provided so that such vehicles park or stand completely off the
street.
§ 120-78. Construction requirements. [Amended May 1992 ATM by
Art. 38, approved 10-1-1992]
Each loading bay shall be developed as follows:
Vehicles using the loading bay shall have vehicular access to a street,
driveway or vehicular aisle without the need of moving any other
vehicle, or without obstructing any driveway or vehicular aisle.
A.
Such area, where subject to wheeled traffic, shall be smoothly graded,
properly drained and treated with bituminous or other all-weather hard
surface.
B.
Where such area abuts a residential district, it shall not be located
within five feet of the lot line, and a wall or fence of solid appearance or
a tight evergreen hedge having a height of no less than five feet shall
be erected and maintained between such area and the property in the
residential district.
C.
Any light used to illuminate said loading bay shall be so arranged as to
reflect light away from adjoining premises and streets.
D.
§ 120-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-79
1:447
§ 120-79. Filing of plan required before permit issuance.
There shall be filed with every application for a construction permit a
plan showing provisions for any off-street loading bays and use before the
issuance of any building permit.
§ 120-79 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-79
1:448
ARTICLE XIX
Earth Removal
§ 120-80. Removal outside of Town prohibited.
The removal of sod and loam from any land in the Town to any location
outside the Town is hereby prohibited under all circumstances.
§ 120-81. Permit required.
The removal of soil, loam, sand, gravel, quarry stone or other earth material
from any parcel of land by any person, firm or corporation shall be allowed
only under permit from the Board of Zoning Appeals and subject to
restrictive covenants of the Board. However, the Inspector of Buildings,
without reference to the Board of Zoning Appeals, may issue permits for the
removal from the site of earth and may require a suitable bond, if deemed
necessary, for the following purposes: wherein the amount of material to be
removed is necessarily incidental to or in connection with the construction,
alteration, excavation or grading for a building or road or other facility
being built in accordance with a permit issued or in accordance with
an approved plan, provided that there is reasonable assurance that the
construction will be completed.
§ 120-82. Application requirements.
Each application for a permit for earth-material removal shall be
accompanied by a plan, submitted in triplicate to the Inspector of Buildings
and a copy to the Planning Board at least 14 days prior to the date of the
public hearing, prepared at the expense of the applicant by a registered
land surveyor or registered professional engineer, showing:
A. Specifically the boundaries and dimensions of the premises.
The location and dimensions of the area from which the proposed
removal of materials is to take place.
B.
Topography by five-foot contours at the area to be excavated and up to
at least 100 feet beyond the perimeter of the area included and along
all property lines.
C.
D. Names and boundaries of all abutters.
At least three permanent benchmarks with elevations marked thereon,
on Town of Weymouth datum.
E.
F. Five-foot contours as proposed after completion of the operation.
Topographical detail showing the physical character of the premises,
including natural drainage and direction of water flow.
G.
Other information necessary to indicate the complete physical
characteristics of the proposed operation which may be indicated by
the rules of the Board of Zoning Appeals.
H.
§ 120-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-83
1:449
§ 120-83. Conditions of permit.
In granting a permit, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall impose reasonable
conditions specifically designed to safeguard the neighborhood and the
Town, which may include but not be limited to conditions as to:
§ 120-84. Performance bond.
The Board shall require a bond or other security to insure compliance with
its conditions of authorization, unless, in a particular case, it specifically
finds that such security is not warranted and so states in its decision, giving
the reasons for its findings.
§ 120-85. Expiration of permit; renewals.
Any permit issued shall automatically expire upon the completion of the
earth-removal project for which it was issued or at such other time as
may be specified in said permit. A permit may be granted by the Board
of Zoning Appeals with the provision that it may be renewed for one year,
without a hearing, if the Inspector of Buildings finds that all conditions then
applicable have been complied with and that the work has been carried on
continuously and in good faith.
A. Method of removal.
B. Type and location of temporary structures, fences and barriers.
C. Hours of operation.
D. Routes for transporting the material through the Town.
E. Area and depth of excavation.
F. Distance of excavation to street and property lines.
G. Steepness of slopes excavated.
H. Reestablishment of ground levels and grades.
I. Provision of temporary and permanent drainage.
J. Disposition of boulders and tree stumps.
K. Provisions for dust control, which may include paving.
L. Replacement of loam over the area of removal.
M. Planting of the area to suitable cover, including shrubs and trees.
Cleaning, repair and/or resurfacing of streets used in removal activities
which have been adversely affected by the removal activity.
N.
§ 120-83 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-86
1:450
§ 120-86. Existing operations.
Earth-removal activities in lawful operation on any parcel of land at the time
this article is adopted may continue, unless and until abandoned for more
than 12 consecutive months, with the following conditions:
§ 120-87. Review of progress of work; notice of violations; penalties.
Removal operations shall not be extended beyond the property lines of
the particular parcel upon which such operations are in progress at the
time of the adoption of this article.
A.
At no time of year shall the premises be maintained at levels such that
ground- or surface water will accumulate. Such areas shall be either
filled or drained.
B.
The depth of excavation shall not be extended below the grade of the
lowest point excavated on the effective date of this article.
C.
The total area of excavation shall not be increased by more than 50%
over its area on said date.
D.
Removal operations shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
E.
The Inspector of Buildings shall review the progress of the work from
time to time to assure proper conduct.
A.
The Inspector of Buildings, if he concludes that there has been a
violation of this article, shall send to the offender and to the owner
of record of the premises, or deliver, such notice of violation and, if
applicable, a notice ordering the cessation of the improper activities. If
the offender holds a permit issued under this article, such permit may
be revoked.
B.
If the permit holder or other offender persists in such violation, the
Inspector of Buildings shall seek the imposition of the penalties
authorized by MGL c. 40, § 21, Paragraph 18, through appropriate legal
action, and the penalty for removing earth in violation of this article
shall be a fine of not more than $50 for the first offense after such
warning and not more than $50 for any subsequent offense. Each day
that willful violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
C.
§ 120-86 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-87
1:451

ARTICLE XX
Earth Filling
[Added April 1974 ATM by Art. 32, approved 5-24-1974]
§ 120-88. Intent.
The intent of this article is to prevent cumulative damage to landscape
and topography and to preserve statistical data which may be useful to the
various Town agencies in the performance of their official duties and also to
establish procedural steps and guidelines for the filling of land.
§ 120-89. Permit required.
No lot or parcel of land shall be filled with any fill material unless a permit
is issued by the office of the Inspector of Buildings, except that no permit
shall be required:
§ 120-90. Application requirements.
Each application for a permit required under this article shall be made to
the office of the Inspector of Buildings on forms supplied by said office
and shall be accompanied by a plan and five copies thereof prepared at
the expense of the applicant by a registered land surveyor or a registered
professional. One copy of said plan shall be sent to the Board of Public
Works, the Conservation Commission, the Board of Health and the Planning
Board, for their permanent records, and each of said boards may, within
20 days of said filing, forward to the office of the Inspector of Buildings,
for his consideration, their observations, comments and recommendations.
Said plan shall show:
For filling lots or parcels of land, provided that the total volume of fill
does not exceed 50 cubic yards, or for minor filling done in connection
with or incidental to the construction of walks, driveways, walls and
landscaping.
A.
Where the filling is necessary or incidental to or in connection with
the construction of roads, structures or other improvements or facilities
being built in accordance with a lawful permit or in accordance with an
approved definitive subdivision plan, provided that there is reasonable
assurance that the fill portion will be satisfactorily completed.
B.
Specifically the boundaries and dimensions of the lot or parcel to be
filled.
A.
B. The location and dimensions of the area to be filled.
Topography by two-foot contours of the area to be filled to a distance
not less than 100 feet beyond the perimeter of the area to be filled and
along all property lines.
C.
D. Name and boundaries of all abutters.
§ 120-88 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-90
1:453
§ 120-91. Conditions of permit.
Permits will be granted subject to the following conditions, which will
be imposed to safeguard the neighborhood and the Town during the fill
operation:
§ 120-92. Manner of filling; slope stabilization.
Filling shall be done in such a way that the resulting contours follow
smooth, natural curves that conform as nearly as possible to the curves
of the surrounding landscape. Upon completion, all slopes shall be
appropriately stabilized to prevent erosion and excessive water runoff on
abutting lots or abrupt changes in topography near lot lines and to prevent
excessive water accumulation.
§ 120-93. Expiration of permit.
Completion of all work under a permit shall be completed within six months
of the issuance thereof; provided, however, that for good cause the time may
be extended, but not for more than three successive six-month periods.
At least three permanent bench marks with elevations marked thereon,
on Town of Weymouth datum.
E.
F. Two-foot contours as proposed at completion of fill.
Topographical detail showing the physical character of the area to be
filled and at least 100 feet beyond the perimeter thereof, including
natural drainage and direction of water flow and all significant and
outstanding features such as rock formations, ledge, peat, marsh, etc.
G.
A. Method of fill.
B. Filling shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Provisions for dust control, which may include paving when conditions
reasonably indicate.
C.
Planting of the area with ground cover suitable or indigenous to the
area, including shrubs and trees.
D.
Fill material shall be some form of earth or earth products. All other
material shall be placed in accordance with proper sanitary landfill
procedures; provided, however, that no garbage, refuse, industrial
waste, toxic materials, flammable liquids or gases, highly explosive
materials and junk shall be used.
E.
If the topographical features and/or geological conditions reasonably
indicate, borings and test pits may be required.
F.
Cleaning, repair and/or resurfacing of streets which have been
adversely affected by filling activity.
G.
§ 120-90 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-94
1:454
§ 120-94. Applicability of other laws and regulations.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as permitting the nonconformance
with or in violation of any rule or regulation or code of any other Town board
or department. All permits issued under this article are issued conditionally
for those portions of the premises to be filled which by law come within
the provisions of the Wetlands Act, so-called. For those lots or parcels for
which filling may come within the provisions of said Wetlands Act, permits
under this article shall be issued conditioned on compliance therewith. It
is recommended that the Board of Zoning Appeals, Planning Board and
Conservation Commission, in granting of relief or permits, provide as a
condition thereto compliance with the applicable provisions of this article.
§ 120-95. Violations and penalties.
Failure to complete the work within the time and in the manner required
by the terms and conditions of a permit and within the time permitted shall
be deemed a violation of this bylaw and be subject to all the provisions of
§§ 120-111 and 120-112 of this bylaw.
§ 120-96. Notice of issuance of permit.
No work shall commence on a permit under this article until a notice of
the issuance of the same has been recorded at the Norfolk Registry of
Deeds or Registry District of the Land Court and evidence of said recording
is filed with the Inspector of Buildings. Said notice shall be on a form
supplied by the Inspector of Buildings and executed and acknowledged
by the owners of record of the land included in said permit. The notice
shall contain the names of the record owners, description of said land,
appropriate references to title and such other information which may be
necessary for recording.
§ 120-97. Fee.
The fee for a permit under this article shall be $25.
§ 120-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-97
1:455

ARTICLE XXI
Supplementary Regulations
§ 120-98. Exterior lighting.
Exterior lighting shall be shielded or reflected so that the light source is not
visible from any residential district. Exterior lighting, the source of which
would be visible from any public street, shall have its source reflected or
retracted so as to direct and distribute the light to minimize glare.
§ 120-99. Vehicles, improper storage. [Added May 1999 ATM by Art.
20, approved 8-19-1999]
No person in charge or control of any property in the Town, whether an
owner, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any partially dismantled,
wrecked, junked, nonoperative or discarded vehicle to remain on such
property longer than 30 days after written notice to the owner has been
given by the Town of Weymouth, except:
§ 120-100. Obstructions to air navigation prohibited.
No structure shall be erected or altered nor any tree permitted to grow
which would create a hazard to air navigation. In determining whether such
a hazard exists, the Inspector of Buildings or the Board of Zoning Appeals,
as the case may be, shall have reference to, but not exclusively, criteria
used by the South Weymouth Naval Air Station and/or Massachusetts
Aeronautics Commission; nor shall any use be permitted which creates
electrical interference with radio aids or communications between the air
station and aircraft, making it difficult for pilots to distinguish between
air station light and others. Permits for high structures may require the
applicant, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain such markers
and lights as may be necessary to indicate to pilots the presence of any
airport hazard.
A vehicle which is in an enclosed building or in an area unexposed to
the view of the public or any abutter.
A.
Any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a
lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such
business enterprise.
B.
A vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained by
the Town or with the consent of the Town.
C.
A vehicle upon property covered by a Class III license, duly in effect
under the Code of the Town of Weymouth, Chapter 9, Section 9-500,
Used Car Dealers.
D.
§ 120-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-101
1:457
§ 120-101. Service stations, repair garages and car washes.
[Amended May 1989 ATM by Art. 47, approved 7-28-1989]
Any service station, repair garage or car wash in any district to be approved
by the Board of Selectmen shall conform at least to the following
regulations. When the intensity regulations for any district in which a
service station is located are more restrictive than the regulations
contained hereinafter, all service stations or repair garages shall conform to
the more restrictive dimensional requirements.
§ 120-102. Concealing of storage areas.
All parking and outdoor storage areas of facilities for fuel, materials and
products shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight
evergreen hedge not less than five feet high to conceal such areas or
facilities.
Frontage and area. Every service station or car wash shall have a
minimum frontage of 150 feet and a minimum area of 20,000 square
feet.
A.
Setbacks. Every structure erected for use as a service station or car
wash shall have a minimum setback from the street line of 40 feet and a
minimum setback from all property lines of 10 feet. Pump islands shall
be permitted in front yards and set back a minimum of 15 feet from all
property lines.
B.
All vehicle service areas shall be constructed to conform to the
following standards:
Suitable separation shall be made between the pedestrian sidewalk
and the vehicular parking or moving area with the use of
appropriate bumper or wheel guards or traffic islands.
(1)
The entire area used for vehicle service shall be paved, except for
such unpaved area as is landscaped and protected from vehicle use
by a low barrier.
(2)
Hydraulic hoist, lubrication, greasing, washing, and repair
equipment shall be entirely enclosed within a building. Tire and
battery service and minor automobile repair, excluding automobile
body repair and painting, may be carried on within the premises.
No open pits will be permitted.
(3)
The minimum widths of all driveways at the sidewalk shall be 30
feet.
(4)
The distance of any driveway from any residential property line
shall be at least 20 feet and in no case less than 10 feet.
(5)
A wall or evergreen screening or tight fence five feet high shall be
erected along all property lines abutting a residential use.
(6)
C.
§ 120-101 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-102.1
1:458
§ 120-102.1. Screening of dumpsters. [Added 4-2-2018 by Ord. No.
17-127]
All dumpsters must be screened with opaque fencing on all sides and
accessed by a closable, secured gate.
§ 120-103. Swimming pools.
A private swimming pool is hereby declared to be an accessory use in a
residential district and shall conform to the appropriate side, front and rear
yard requirements of the particular residential district in which it is located;
provided, however, that any filter and pump shall be located not less than
15 feet from the side yard line. Pools shall be surrounded by a permanent
enclosure not less than four feet in height.
§ 120-104. Temporary uses.
A temporary building or yard for construction materials and/or equipment
and a temporary office, if in connection with and incidental and necessary to
a real estate development, shall be permitted in any district, provided that
any building permit issued for any such use shall be valid for not more than
six months and may not be extended more than three consecutive times.
§ 120-105. Trailers.
No person shall occupy a trailer for living or business purposes except as a
permitted temporary use under § 120-104 incidental to construction on or
development of the premises on which the trailer is located.
§ 120-106. Self-service gasoline stations prohibited. [Added January
1977 STM by Art. 1, approved 4-26-1977]
No self-service gas stations shall be permitted in the Town of Weymouth.
§ 120-106.1. Wind energy conversion systems. [Added June 1982
STM by Art. 5, approved 11-9-1982]
Intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the health and safety
of occupants, individuals on abutting property and the general public;
and to reduce adverse environmental effects by regulating the siting of
wind energy conversion systems.
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM — A machine which removes
energy from the wind and converts it to mechanical or electrical energy.
B.
Special permit required. Wind energy conversion systems may be
allowed as an accessory use in all zoning districts as a special permit
granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, subject to the conditions and
C.
§ 120-102.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-106.1
1:459
requirements of this section (§ 120-106.1) and to the conditions and
requirements of Article XXV.
Plan criteria. The special permit granting authority may require such
information, data and testing to be performed at the applicant's
expense in order to achieve a finding of compliance with the intent and
standards. At a minimum, the following information shall be submitted
with each special permit and site plan review application for a wind
conversion system:
A plan of land showing:
(a) Property lines.
(b) Proposed location of tower on site.
Location of all existing structures and aboveground utility lines
within a radius equal to the height of the tower.
(c)
Location of major features of the land, including: trees,
outcroppings, walls and all topographical changes over 20 feet
in height within a radius of 300 feet of the proposed tower site.
(d)
(1)
An environmental assessment relative to the machine design,
function and maintenance in relation to the terrain characteristics,
wind turbulence, wind shear, lightning, salt spray and other
hazards which the special permit granting authority deems
necessary for a proper and safe operating wind energy conversion
system.
(2)
D.
Standards for wind energy conversion systems. The following criteria
shall apply to all wind energy conversion systems.
Access to the tower shall be limited by a permanent enclosure not
less than six feet in height with a locking portal or by removing
climbing apparatus on the tower to a height of 12 feet.
(1)
Specifications shall be submitted with all applications documenting
that the system will not produce interference with television
reception within 300 feet.
(2)
Specifications shall be submitted with all applications documenting
that the noise levels produced by wind energy conversion systems
will not exceed ambient noise levels by more than five dB(A) when
measured at a point along the property line closest to the tower.
(3)
Energy produced shall be primarily for use of the occupants of the
property.
(4)
Tower height, where applicable, shall conform to federal aviation
regulations.
(5)
Specifications shall be submitted which document that wind energy
conversion systems do not produce any low-frequency sounds or
(6)
E.
§ 120-106.1 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-106.1
1:460
§ 120-106.2. Wireless communication equipment. [Added November
1997 STM by Art. 36, approved 2-26-1998]
vibrations affecting people. Maintenance requirements necessary
to prevent such sounds shall also be detailed.
(7) Redundant overspeed controls shall be required.
Special permit conditions. In granting a special permit for a wind
energy conversion system, the special permit granting authority shall
have the power to impose additional standards, such as height and
setback requirements, as it deems necessary to ensure compliance with
the intent of this bylaw.
F.
Purpose. The purpose of this bylaw includes minimizing adverse
impacts of wireless communication facilities, satellite dishes and
antennas on adjacent properties and residential neighborhoods;
minimizing the overall number and height of such facilities; and
promoting shared use of existing facilities to reduce the need for new
facilities.
A.
Wireless communication equipment, as defined in § 120-6, shall be
permitted in the following districts as noted below, unless specifically
prohibited:
Wireless communication, freestanding structure, as a special
permit from the Board of Zoning Appeals in Districts I-1, I-2, PIP,
POP and POS.
(1)
Wireless communication, building-mounted equipment, as an
accessory use by site plan review in Districts R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, HT,
MS, I-1, I-2, PIP, POP and POS.
(2)
Wireless communication, indoor equipment, as an accessory use
permitted in Districts R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, HT, MS, I-1, I-2, PIP, POP
and POS.
(3)
Wireless communication, accessory equipment, as an accessory
use by site plan review in Districts R-3, R-4, B-1, B-2, HT, MS, I-1,
I-2, PIP, POP and POS.
(4)
B.
The following information shall be supplemental to normal application
criteria and submitted with each special permit and site plan review
application for wireless communication equipment:
A locus plan at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet which shall show
all property lines, the exact location of the proposed structures,
streets, landscape features, residential dwellings and all buildings
within 300 feet of the facility.
(1)
A color photograph or rendition of the proposed monopole with its
antenna and/or panels. For satellite dishes or residential antennas,
a color photograph or rendition illustrating the dish at the
(2)
C.
§ 120-106.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-106.2
1:461
proposed location is required. A rendition shall also be prepared
illustrating a view of the monopole dish or antenna from the
nearest street or streets.
The following information prepared by one or more professional
engineers:
A description of the monopole and the technical, economic and
other reasons for the proposed location, height and design.
(a)
Confirmation that the monopole complies with all applicable
federal and state standards.
(b)
A description of the capacity of the monopole, including the
number and type of panels, antennas and/or transmitter
receivers that it can accommodate and the basis for these
calculations.
(c)
(3)
A signed affidavit by the applicant that the proposed facility
complies with, or is exempt from, applicable regulations
administered by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), Massachusetts Aeronautics
Commission and the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
(4)
A signed affidavit by the applicant listing all wireless
communication equipment within a one-half-mile radius and the
availability of space at each location.
(5)
The following general requirements shall apply to all wireless
communication equipment:
No wireless communication facility, which shall include monopoles,
satellite dishes over three feet in diameter or antennas, shall be
erected or installed except in compliance with the provisions of
§ 120-106.2B.
(1)
Any proposed extension in the height or the replacement of a
facility shall be subject to a new application for a site plan review
or special permit, as applicable in § 120-106.2B.
(2)
The Inspector of Buildings shall review petitions for the addition of
cells, antennas or panels to any lawfully permitted existing wireless
communication monopole or tower and shall allow such without a
new hearing, provided that such additions comply with the intent
and criteria of § 120-106.2 and the conditions of approval of the
special permit.
(3)
Only freestanding monopoles, with associated antennas and/or
panels, are allowed. Lattice-style towers and similar facilities
requiring three or more legs and/or guy wires for support are not
allowed.
(4)
D.
§ 120-106.2 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-106.2
1:462
Wireless communication monopoles and associated facilities shall
be suitably screened from abutters and residential neighborhoods.
(5)
Structures shall be removed within one year of cessation of use.
If applicable, annual certification demonstrating continuing
compliance with the standards of the Federal Communications
Commission, Federal Aviation Administration and the American
National Standards Institute and required maintenance shall be
filed with the Inspector of Buildings by the special permit holder.
(6)
The following design criteria shall be used when preparing plans for the
siting and construction of all wireless communication facilities:
All monopoles shall be designed to be constructed at the minimum
height necessary to accommodate the anticipated and future use.
All monopoles shall be set back from R-1, R-2 and NCD Zoning
District boundaries by a distance at least equal to two times the
height of the monopole. No monopole shall be placed closer than
500 feet to another freestanding wireless communication
structure.
(1)
No monopole or attached accessory antenna on a monopole shall
exceed 120 feet in height as measured from natural ground level
at the base of the pole. No monopole shall be constructed which
requires guy wires. Monopoles shall not be located on buildings.
Any monopole in excess of that permitted in Table 1, Schedule of
District Regulations, included as an attachment to this chapter, will
require a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(2)
Antennas, dishes and all other equipment located on any structure
shall not exceed 10 feet above the height of the building, as defined
in § 120-6.
(3)
All wireless communication facilities shall be sited in such a
manner that the view of the facility from adjacent abutters,
residential neighbors and other areas of the Town shall be as
limited as possible. All monopoles and dishes shall be painted or
otherwise colored so they will blend in with the landscape or the
structure on which they are located. A different coloring scheme
shall be used to blend the structure with the landscape below and
above the tree or building line.
(4)
Satellite dishes and/or antennas shall be situated on or attached
to a structure in such a manner that they are screened, preferably
not being visible from abutting streets. Freestanding dishes or
antennas shall be located on the landscape in such a manner so as
to minimize visibility from abutting streets and residences and to
limit the need to remove existing vegetation. All equipment shall be
colored, molded and/or installed to blend into the structure and/or
the landscape.
(5)
E.
§ 120-106.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-106.2
1:463
§ 120-106.3. Solar energy facilities. [Added 10-19-2015 by Ord. No.
15-106]
Wireless communication facilities shall be designed to
accommodate the maximum number of users technologically
practical. The intent of this requirement is to reduce the number of
facilities that will be required to be located within the Town.
(6)
Fencing shall be provided to control access to freestanding wireless
communication facilities and shall be compatible with the scenic
character of the Town and shall not be of razor wire.
(7)
All freestanding wireless communication structures shall have no
signs except for directional signs, "no trespassing" signs and a
required sign giving a phone number where the owner can be
reached on a twenty-four-hour basis. All signs shall conform with
Article XVI, Signs, of the Zoning Bylaw.
(8)
(9) Night lighting of towers shall be prohibited.
(10)There shall be a minimum of one parking space for each facility.
The following types of wireless communication towers and equipment
are exempt from the provisions of this section:
Amateur radio tower. An "amateur radio tower" is defined as a
tower used solely in accordance with the terms of an amateur
radio service license(s) issued by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) to members of the family residing on the
premises and not used or licensed for any commercial purpose.
(1)
Installation of any antenna, panels or similar equipment on a
lawfully permitted freestanding wireless communication tower,
provided that all such additional equipment conforms to the
conditions of the existing permit.
(2)
A tower erected to serve communication between farm vehicles
and/or farm units incidental to use of land for farming. Except for
amateur radio use as permitted in § 120-106.2F(1), the use of such
a tower under this exception may not be combined with any other
use.
(3)
A tower or antenna erected by the Town of Weymouth for municipal
public safety communication purposes.
(4)
F.
Purpose. The purpose is to protect the health and safety of occupants,
individuals on abutting property and the general public; and to reduce
adverse environmental effects by regulating the siting of solar
installations.
A.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
B.
§ 120-106.2 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-106.3
1:464
LARGE-SCALE GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC
INSTALLATIONS — A solar photovoltaic system that is structurally
mounted on the ground and is not roof-mounted, and has a minimum
nameplate capacity of 250 kW DC and whose primary function is as a
commercial venture.
SMALL GROUND-MOUNTED OR ROOF-MOUNTED SOLAR ARRAYS —
A solar installation with the primary function of providing solar to an
existing structure on the same property.
Solar installations, as defined in § 120-106.3, shall be permitted in the
following districts as noted below, unless specifically prohibited:
Small ground-mounted or roof-mounted solar arrays shall be
considered an accessory use and permitted by right as follows:
Roof-mounted solar arrays will be permitted by right in all
districts.
(a)
Small ground-mounted solar arrays will be permitted by right
in all districts with the exception of the Highway Transitional
(HT) district. Installation may not exceed 10 feet in height
and must not substantially increase the amount of impervious
surfaces on site. Screening by berms, shrubs, trees or fencing
shall be implemented to visually shield abutters from the small
ground-mounted installations and will be subject to review by
the Inspector of Buildings.
(b)
(1)
Large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installations will be
permitted by right in the PIP District but will require site plan
review under Article XXVA.
(2)
C.
Plan requirements. When seeking site plan approval, the following
documents will be required in addition to the appropriate application.
A site plan showing:
Property lines and physical features, including roads, for the
project site;
(a)
Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, grading,
vegetation clearing and planting, exterior lighting, screening
vegetation or structures;
(b)
Blueprints or drawings of the solar photovoltaic installation
signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts showing the proposed layout
of the system and any potential shading from nearby
structures;
(c)
One or three line electrical diagram detailing the solar
photovoltaic installation, associated components, and
(d)
(1)
D.
§ 120-106.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-106.3
1:465
electrical interconnection methods, with all National Electrical
Code compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices;
Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the PV panels, mounting system, and inverter;
(e)
Name, address, and contact information for proposed system
installer as well as the responsible licensed electrician.
Installation personnel will be subject to all requirements,
including master/apprentice ratios, as set forth in MGL c. 141.
Adherence to these regulations will be monitored and enforced
by the Inspector of Buildings;
(f)
Name, address, phone number and signature of the project
proponent, as well as all co-proponents or property owners, if
any.
(g)
Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the
project site.
(2)
At the discretion of the Office of Planning and Community
Development and/or the Building Department, a traffic impact
assessment may be required for any large-scale ground-mounted
installation to ensure that the project does not adversely impact
sight lines or pose any danger to drivers from resulting reflections
or glare.
(3)
(4) An operation and maintenance plan.
Zoning district designation for the parcel(s) of land comprising the
project site [submission of a copy of a zoning map with the parcel(s)
identified is suitable for this purpose];
(5)
Emergency services. The large-scale photovoltaic installation owner
or operator shall provide a copy of the project summary, electrical
schematic, and site plan to the local Fire Chief. Upon request the owner
or operator shall cooperate with local emergency services in developing
an emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the solar
photovoltaic installation shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator
shall identify a responsible person for public inquiries throughout the
life of the installation. As per the Massachusetts Comprehensive Fire
Safety Code (527 CMR), signage will be required for all solar
installations detailing specific electrical details of the installation as
well as shutoff instructions.
E.
Abandonment or decommissioning.
Any large-scale ground-mounted solar photovoltaic installation
which has reached the end of its useful life or has been abandoned
as defined below shall be removed. The owner or operator shall
physically remove the installation no more than 150 days after the
date of discontinued operations. The owner or operator shall notify
(1)
F.
§ 120-106.3 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-106.3
1:466
the Building Inspector by certified mail of the proposed date of
discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning
shall consist of:
Physical removal of all structures, equipment, security barriers
and transmission lines from the site.
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
the local, state and federal waste disposal regulations.
(b)
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion.
(c)
Absent notice of a proposed date of decommissioning or written
notice of extenuating circumstances, the installation shall be
considered abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one
year without the written consent of the Building Inspector. If the
owner or operator fails to remove the installation in accordance
with the guidelines set forth in this ordinance within 150 days of
abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the Town
may enter the property and physically remove the installation.
(2)
Financial surety. Prior to commencing operation of the solar energy
facility, the applicant shall provide a form of surety, either through
escrow account, bond or otherwise, in an amount determined by the
Planning Board to cover 125% of the cost of removal and site
restoration. The applicant shall submit a fully inclusive estimate of the
costs associated with removal, which shall be subject to review and
approval by a qualified engineer retained by the Planning Board at the
applicant's expense. The amount shall be increased annually to cover
inflation, based on increases in the Consumer Price Index. The amount
of the surety shall be reviewed every two years to determine whether
it is still adequate or whether it shall be increased to satisfy increased
cost estimates. Such surety shall not be required for municipal facilities
owned and operated by the Town.
G.
§ 120-106.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-106.3
1:467

ARTICLE XXII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 120-107. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this bylaw, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of health,
safety, morals, comfort, convenience and the general welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town of Weymouth.
§ 120-108. Enforcing official.
The provisions of this bylaw shall be enforced by the Inspector of Buildings.
No application, permit, plan, specifications or intended use which is not
in accordance with the provisions of this bylaw shall be approved by the
Inspector of Buildings.
§ 120-109. Permit required; plan; records.
No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged
or moved and no use of any land or premises shall be begun or changed
without a permit having been issued by the Inspector of Buildings.
Whenever a permit or license is issued by any other department of the
Town, such permit or license shall be in conformance with the provisions
of this bylaw. Any application for a permit shall be accompanied by a plan,
accurately drawn, showing the actual shape and dimensions of the lot or
premises to be built upon; the exact location and size of all buildings or
structures to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or enlarged,
together with the lines within which all buildings or structures are to be
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or enlarged; the existing or
intended use of each building or structure; the location of all zoning district
boundary lines as they may affect the lot or premises; the location and size
of off-street parking and loading facilities and driveways, where required;
and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the execution
and enforcement of this bylaw. A record of all applications, plans and
permits shall be kept on file in the office of the Inspector of Buildings of the
Town of Weymouth, and said record shall be available for public inspection
during regular office hours.
§ 120-110. Occupancy permit.
No occupancy, use or change of use shall take place without the issuance
of an occupancy permit signed by the Inspector of Buildings. Said permit
shall not be issued until the building, structure, premises or land or its
uses, and the uses incidental thereto, have been inspected and approved as
sufficiently completed to comply with the provisions and regulations of this
bylaw by said Inspector of Buildings, and the same shall be available for
public inspection during regular office hours.
§ 120-107 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-111
1:469
§ 120-111. Investigation of violations; service of notice. [Amended
June 1978 STM by Art. 3, approved 11-2-1978; May 1990 ATM by
Art. 46, approved 9-13-1990]
§ 120-112. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended June
1978 STM by Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978; May 1990 ATM by Art. 46,
approved 9-13-1990]
If the Inspector of Buildings shall be informed or have reason to believe
that any provision of this bylaw has been, is being or may be violated,
he may make or cause to be made an investigation of the facts and
inspect the property where the violation may exist.
A.
If he shall find any such violation, he shall give notice thereof in writing
to the owner or to his duly authorized agent by means of a written
compliance order or a warning citation.
B.
If, after such notice, the premises are continued to be used in a manner
contrary to the provisions of this bylaw, or if any such owner shall fail
to obey any lawful order of the Inspector of Buildings in respect to any
violation or use contrary to the provisions of this bylaw, the Inspector of
Buildings shall proceed with enforcement by either of the two methods
provided in § 120-112 below.
C.
If said Inspector of Buildings is requested in writing to enforce such
bylaws against any person allegedly in violation of the same and such
Inspector of Buildings declines to act, he shall notify, in writing, the
party requesting such enforcement of any action or refusal to act and
the reasons therefor within 14 days of receipt of such request.
D.
Criminal complaint. Whoever violates any provision of these bylaws
may be penalized by indictment or on complaint brought in the District
Court. Except as may otherwise be provided by law and as the District
Court may see fit to impose, the maximum penalty for each violation or
offense brought in such manner shall be $300 for each offense. Each
day that willful violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
A.
Noncriminal disposition.
In addition to the procedures for enforcement as described above,
the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw may also be enforced by the
Inspector of Buildings by noncriminal complaint pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D. Each day on which a violation exists
shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
(1)
The penalty for violation of any provision of this bylaw shall be a
warning citation for the first offense; $50 for the second offense;
$100 for the third offense; and $200 for the fourth and each
subsequent offense.
(2)
B.
§ 120-111 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-113
1:470
§ 120-113. Effect on other regulations.
This bylaw shall not interfere with or annul any bylaw, rule, regulation or
permit; provided that, unless specifically excepted, where this bylaw is more
stringent, it shall control.
§ 120-114. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate
any other section or provision thereof.
§ 120-113 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-114
1:471

ARTICLE XXIII
Permit Granting Authority
[Added June 1978 STM by Art. 3, approved 11-2-1978]
§ 120-115. Designation of permit granting authority.
The "permit granting authority" shall mean the Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 120-116. Designation of special permit granting authority.
Unless otherwise specifically designated under this bylaw, the special
permit granting authority shall be the Board of Zoning Appeals.
§ 120-117. Expiration of special permits.
Unless a lesser time is provided in this bylaw or specified in the decision
of the special permit granting authority, a special permit shall lapse not
later than 24 months, inclusive of such time required to pursue or await
determination of an appeal under MGL c. 40A, § 10, from the grant of such
permit if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for
good cause or, in the case of a permit for construction, if construction has
not begun by such date except for good cause.
§ 120-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-117
1:473

ARTICLE XXIV
Board of Zoning Appeals
[Amended November 1976 STM by Art. 8, approved 3-16-1977; June
1978 STM by Art. 4, approved 10-26-1978]
§ 120-118. Establishment; membership.
§ 120-119. Powers.
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws,
a Board of Zoning Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to
review by the Town Council as per Section 2-10 of the Weymouth Town
Charter. All members shall be citizens of the Town of Weymouth. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five regular voting members
and four associate members. Elected officials of the Town may not be
appointed to the Board. The Mayor shall appoint a Board of individuals
with a balanced mix of professional experience or educational
background in the following fields: architecture, civil/structural
engineering, law, building/construction, real estate development,
business or environment. Two members shall be citizens at large. Any
vacancy in the Board shall be filled by an appointment made by the
Mayor for the remainder of the term. In the case of an unfilled vacancy
or inability to participate on the part of a member of the Board, the
Chairman shall designate one of the associate members to take the
place of such member.
A.
Appointments will initially be made on March 20, 2000, and expire
on March 19 of every year. Appointments and/or reappointments will
continue in two-year terms.
(1) Seat 1, 2 and 3: initial terms of one year.
(2) Seats 4 and 5: initial terms of two years.
(3) Associates A and B: initial terms of one year.
(4) Associates C and D: initial terms of two years.
B.
The Board of Zoning Appeals, in accordance with the provisions of MGL
c. 40A, § 12, will elect a Chairman and a Clerk at the first meeting to
take place after March 20 of every year.
C.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers:
To hear and decide appeals taken by any person aggrieved by
reason of his inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action
from the Inspector of Buildings, by the Metropolitan Area Planning
Council or by any person, including an officer or board of the
Town of Weymouth, or of an abutting city or town aggrieved by an
order or decision of the Inspector of Buildings in violation of any
provision of Chapter 40A of the General Laws or of this bylaw.
(1)
A.
§ 120-118 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-119
1:475
§ 120-120. Procedure.
To hear and decide applications for special permits under which
the Board is empowered to act under this bylaw, as subject to the
provisions of Article XXV of this bylaw.
(2)
To hear and decide, upon appeal or petition, requests for variances
after public hearing for which notice has been given by publication
and posting as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 11, and by mailing
to all parties in interest. Variances from the term of this bylaw
with respect to particular land or structures shall be granted only
when the Board of Zoning Appeals specifically finds that, owing to
circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape or topography
of such land or structures and especially affecting such land or
structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which
it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this bylaw
would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the
petitioner or applicant, or that desirable relief may be granted
without substantial detriment to the public good and without
nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose
of this bylaw. No variance may authorize a use or activity not
otherwise permitted in the district in which the land or structure
is located; provided, however, that such variances properly granted
prior to January 1, 1976, but limited in time, may be extended
on the same terms and conditions there were in effect for such
variance upon said effective date.
(3)
The Board of Zoning Appeals may impose conditions, safeguards and
limitations, both of time and of use, including the continued existence
of any particular structures, but excluding any condition, safeguards or
limitation based upon the continued ownership of the land or structures
to which the variance pertains by the applicant, petitioner or any owner.
B.
If the rights authorized by a variance are not exercised within one
year of the date of grant of such variance, they shall lapse and may
be reestablished only after notice and a new hearing pursuant to this
article.
C.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall act on all matters within its
jurisdiction under this bylaw in the manner described in Chapter 40A
of the General Laws and subject always to the rule that it shall give
due consideration to promoting the public health, safety, convenience
and welfare and to conserving property values, that it shall permit
no building or use injurious, noxious, offensive or detrimental to a
neighborhood and that it shall prescribe appropriate conditions and
safeguards in each case.
A.
Any application for a hearing before the Board of Zoning Appeals under
this bylaw shall be accompanied by a filing fee in accordance with the
fee schedule established under the rules and regulations of the Board of
B.
§ 120-119 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-120
1:476
§ 120-121. Repetitive petitions. [Amended May 1989 ATM by Art.
52, approved 7-28-1989]
If an appeal for a special permit for exception or variance is unfavorably
decided by the Board, no appeal shall be considered for the same
interpretation within two years after the date of such unfavorable decision,
except with the consent of six members of the Planning Board.
Zoning Appeals and as approved by the Board of Selectmen. [Amended
May 1979 ATM by Art. 55, approved 8-21-1979]
In the case of every appeal made to said Board and every application
for a special permit or variance made to it under the provisions of this
bylaw, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for and
shall hold a public hearing thereon in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 40A of the General Laws. A decision of the Board must be made
within 75 days after filing the appeal, application or petition, except
with respect to special permits, in which case the time period is 90 days
from the date of the public hearing. Failure of the Board to act within
the time periods results in the constructive granting of the petition.
C.
§ 120-120 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-121
1:477

ARTICLE XXIVA
Site Plan Review Authority
[Added May 1993 ATM by Art. 53, approved 7-9-1993]
§ 120-121.1. Authority established.
In accordance with the provisions of Chapter 40A of the General Laws,
the Director of Planning and Community Development or the Director's
nominee in the Department of Planning and Community Development shall
be the site plan review authority for the purpose of conducting site plan
reviews.
§ 120-121.2. Powers.
§ 120-121.3. Procedure.
The site plan review authority shall act on all matters within its jurisdiction
under this bylaw in the manner described in Chapter 40A of the General
Laws and subject to Article XXVA of these bylaws that it shall prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in each case.
The site plan review authority shall have the power to review and
decide applications for site plan review under which the board is
empowered to act under this bylaw, as subject to the provisions of
Article XXVA of this bylaw.
A.
Decisions on site plans can only be made by a majority vote of the
Planning Board, sitting as the site plan review authority.
B.
If a building permit is not applied for within two years of the date of a
site plan review decision, the site plan review decision shall lapse and
may be reestablished only by application pursuant to this article.
C.
§ 120-121.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-121.3
1:479

ARTICLE XXV
Special Permits
[Amended June 1978 STM by Art. 2, approved 11-2-1978; May 1979
ATM by Art. 55, approved 8-21-1979; May 1990 ATM by Art. 51,
approved 9-13-1990; May 1993 ATM by Art. 56, approved 7-9-1993]
§ 120-122. Rules; application procedure; conditions.
Rules of special permit granting authority; certificate of compliance.
The special permit granting authority shall be the Board of Zoning
Appeals, the Planning Board or the Board of Selectmen, as specifically
provided for in this bylaw. The Board of Zoning Appeals, the Planning
Board and the Board of Selectmen shall adopt and from time to time
amend rules relative to the issuance of such permits and shall file a
copy of said rules with the Town Clerk. The Inspector of Buildings shall
not issue a certificate of occupancy until and unless the appropriate
special permit granting authority issues a certificate of compliance with
the provisions herein provided. All construction, including landscaping,
site preparation and other authorized uses of the land, shall be in
compliance with an approved special permit and conditions attached
thereto unless duly amended by permission from the special permit
granting authority.
A.
Application procedure.
Anyone wishing to apply for a special permit shall file an
application with the Town Clerk, and a copy of said application,
including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk,
shall be filed forthwith by the petitioner with the special permit
granting authority. Specific application forms shall be provided for
in the rules of each special permit granting authority.
(1)
Within 65 days of the receipt of the properly executed application,
the appropriate special permit granting authority shall hold a
public hearing, for which notice has been given by publication or
posting as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 11, and by mailing said notice
to all parties of interest.
(2)
Within 90 days following a public hearing or hearings, the special
permit granting authority shall take final action on the application.
The required time limits for a public hearing and said action may
be extended by written agreement between the petitioner and the
special permit granting authority. Failure to take final action shall
be deemed to be a grant of the special permit applied for.
(3)
Special permits can only be granted by a two-thirds vote of the
Planning Board, a vote of at least four members of the Board of
Selectmen or a vote of at least four members of the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
(4)
B.
§ 120-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-122
1:481
Any application for a special permit before the special permit
granting authority, other than the Board of Zoning Appeals, shall
be accompanied by a filing fee in accordance with the fee schedule
established under the rules and regulations of the special permit
granting authority and as approved by the Board of Selectmen, if
such action is required.
(5)
Special permit conditions. In approving a special permit, the special
permit granting authority shall be authorized to attach such conditions
and safeguards as are deemed necessary and appropriate to protect the
neighborhood and the Town of Weymouth. These may include but not
necessarily be limited to the following:
Requirement of front, side or rear yards greater than the minimum
required by this bylaw.
(1)
Requirements of screening of parking areas or other parts of the
premises or from the streets by walls, fences, planting or other
devices, as specified by the special permit granting authority.
(2)
Limitation of size, number of occupants, method or time of
operation or extent of facilities.
(3)
Regulation of number, design and location of access drives or other
traffic features.
(4)
Requirements of off-street parking or other special features beyond
the minimum required by this or other applicable bylaws, codes or
regulations.
(5)
C.
Criteria for approval by special permit granting authorities. The special
permit granting authority may approve any such application for a
special permit only if it finds that, in its judgment, all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The specific site is an appropriate location for such a use.
The use involved will not be detrimental to the established or future
character of the neighborhood or Town.
(2)
There will be no nuisance or serious hazard to vehicles or
pedestrians.
(3)
Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper
operation of the proposed use.
(4)
(5) The public convenience and welfare will be substantially served.
D.
§ 120-122 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-122
1:482
ARTICLE XXVA
Site Plan Review
[Added May 1993 ATM by Art. 54, approved 7-9-1993]
§ 120-123. Rules; application procedure; criteria and conditions.
Rules of site plan review authority. The site plan review authority shall
adopt and from time to time amend rules relative to the review of
such plans and shall file a copy of said rules with the Town Clerk.
The Inspector of Buildings shall not issue a building permit until and
unless the site plan review authority issues a decision of review with
the provisions herein provided. The decision of review shall consist of
all findings and conditions of the site plan review authority pertaining
to a site plan.
A.
Application procedure.
Anyone wishing to apply for a site plan review shall file an
application directly with the site plan review authority as provided
in this bylaw. Specific application forms shall be provided for in the
rules of the site plan review authority.
(1)
Within 30 days of the receipt of the properly executed application,
the site plan review authority shall conduct a site plan review, for
which notice shall be given to the property owner and by posting
with the Town Clerk not less than seven days prior to the meeting.
(2)
Within 35 days following a site plan review, the site plan review
authority shall take final action on the application and file said
action with the Town Clerk. Failure to take final action within the
time prescribed shall be deemed to be a grant of the site plan as
per the application.
(3)
Any application for a site plan review before the site plan review
authority shall be accompanied by a filing fee in accordance with
the fee schedule established under the rules and regulations of the
site plan review authority.
(4)
B.
Site plan review criteria. The site plan review authority shall limit the
site plan review to the plan's ability to provide for the following criteria:
Protection of adjoining premises and the general neighborhood
from any substantially adverse impacts created by development of
the lot or tract.
(1)
Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement
within the site and in relation to adjacent streets, properties or
improvements.
(2)
Adequacy of the methods of providing for municipal facilities and
essential services for the use of the lot or tract.
(3)
C.
§ 120-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-123
1:483
Provisions for off-street loading and unloading of vehicles
incidental to the servicing of the buildings and related uses on the
lot or tract.
(4)
Site plan review conditions. In conducting a site plan review, the site
plan review authority may only attach such conditions and safeguards
as are necessary within the criteria as set forth in this article, as
follows:
Regulation of the number, design and location of vehicular and
pedestrian drives and walkways or other traffic features on the site.
(1)
Location, number and layout of parking spaces, loading bays and
the associated drives and aisles.
(2)
(3) Location, design, number and intensity of all exterior lighting.
Location of signage, provided that any conditions fall within the
permitted areas of Article XVI.
(4)
Amount and location of landscaping to screen parking areas,
loading bays or other parts of the premises from the streets or
abutting properties by walls, fences, plantings or other devices.
(5)
Location and design of municipal facilities and other essential
services provided for the use on the lot or tract.
(6)
D.
Site plan review applicability. A site plan review shall be conducted for
certain permitted uses within the various zoning districts as follows:
Resident District R-2. The following uses and uses customarily
accessory thereto:
(a) Three-family dwelling unit.
Alteration of a dwelling existing prior to May 1990 for up to
four dwelling units.
(b)
(1)
Resident District R-3. The following uses and uses customarily
accessory thereto:
Any building or group of buildings for occupancy with five
dwelling units, up to a maximum of 19 dwelling units.
(a)
(b) Nursing home and convalescent home.
(2)
Resident District R-4. The following uses and uses customarily
accessory thereto:
Any building or group of buildings for occupancy with five
dwelling units, up to a maximum of 19 dwelling units.
(a)
(b) Nursing home and convalescent home.
(c) Private club or lodge.
(3)
E.
§ 120-123 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-123
1:484
§ 120-124. through § 120-126. (Reserved)
Neighborhood Center District NCD. The following uses and uses
customarily accessory thereto:
All permitted nonresidential uses with a floor area in excess of
3,000 square feet.
(a)
(4)
Highway Transition District HT. The following uses and uses
customarily accessory thereto:
(a) Two-dwelling-unit structures.
(5)
Medical Service District MS. The following uses and uses
customarily accessory thereto:
(a) All permitted nonresidential uses.
Alterations to all nonresidential uses where any one or more of
the following occurs:
New construction or addition to a structure lawfully
existing prior to May 1990 exceeding 5,000 square feet or
more in gross floor area.
[1]
Parking is increased by the extension of impervious cover
by 10,000 square feet or more.
[2]
Access for a public way to a site is widened or a new
access is created.
[3]
[4] New primary pedestrian access to an existing structure.
(b)
(6)
Business District B-1 and Business District B-2. The following uses
and uses customarily accessory thereto:
Any nonresidential use containing 10,000 square feet or more
but less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or
containing 10,000 square feet or more but less than 40,000
square feet of land area.
(a)
(7)
Planned Industrial Park District PIP, Planned Office Park District
POP and Industrial Districts I-1 and I-2. The following uses and
uses customarily accessory thereto:
Any nonresidential use containing 10,000 square feet or more
but less than 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or
containing 10,000 square feet or more but less than 40,000
square feet of land area.
(a)
(8)
§ 120-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-124
1:485

ARTICLE XXVI
(Reserved)
§ 120-127. (Reserved)
§ 120-127 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-127
1:487

ARTICLE XXVII
(Reserved)
§ 120-128. (Reserved)
§ 120-129. (Reserved)
§ 120-128 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-129
1:489

ARTICLE XXVIII
Moratorium on Medical Marijuana Treatment Centers59
[Added 3-4-2013 by Ord. No. 13-011]
§ 120-130. Purpose.
The Massachusetts Medical Marijuana Initiative, also known as "Ballot
Question Three," was approved by voters at the Massachusetts State
election on November 6, 2012. The law regulates the cultivation,
distribution, possession, and use of marijuana for medical purposes. The law
is effective on January 1, 2013, and the State Department of Public Health
is directed to promulgate regulations regarding implementation of the law
within 120 days after the law's effective date.
Under the current Zoning Ordinance, a medical marijuana treatment center
is not defined and is not a permitted use in the Town. The Department
of Public Health regulations should provide guidance to communities
regulating medical marijuana treatment centers at the local level. As this
is a new type of land use in the state, there will be unique and new
aspects to the use that could require oversight and regulations. These local
impacts, which could be legal, land use, public safety, and public health,
should be evaluated and addressed in a comprehensive manner in the
Zoning Ordinance prior to the permitting of a medical marijuana treatment
center. The moratorium, of a finite duration, will allow the Town to carefully
study the potential impacts, both primary and secondary, of such centers
and, through a directed planning process, recommend zoning ordinance
amendments to address the Town's concerns in the context of the Master
Plan and other Town planning goals and objectives.
§ 120-131. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER — A not-for-profit entity,
as defined by Massachusetts law only, registered by the Department of
Public Health, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including
development of related products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oil or
ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or
administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or
educational materials to qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
§ 120-132. Establishment and duration.
No building permit, special permit, variance, site plan or other permit
may be issued under this zoning ordinance, and no use of land or
A.
59.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 14-078, adopted 7-14-2014, amended this chapter to regulate
registered marijuana dispensaries. See the definition in § 120-6 and the I-1 District
permitted uses in § 120-28. See also Ch. 9, Sec. 9-700, Medical Marijuana.
§ 120-130 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-132
1:491
§ 120-133. Applicability.
This article shall be effective in all zoning districts in the Town, including
overlay districts.
structures shall be allowed for the purpose of establishing a medical
marijuana treatment center or associated activities.
The moratorium shall be in effect through and including May 1, 2014,
or until such time as zoning amendments are adopted that address
medical marijuana treatment centers and associated activities,
whichever shall be sooner.
B.
§ 120-132 WEYMOUTH CODE § 120-133
1:492
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Order No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
15-090 11-30-2015 Preservation of Public
Peace and Order
Amendment
Ch. 6
15-106 10-19-2015 Zoning Amendment Ch. 120
15-107 10-19-2015 Regulations Affecting Use
of Private Property
Amendment
Ch. 7
16-092 6-20-2016 Offices, Officials and
Multiple-Member Bodies
Amendment;
Administrative
Organization Amendment
Ch. 3; Ch. 4
16-138 12-5-2016 Regulations Affecting
Motor Vehicles Amendment
Ch. 13, attachment
only
16-146 1-17-2017 Regulations Affecting
Motor Vehicles Amendment
Ch. 13, attachment
only
16-150 1-17-2017 Zoning Amendment Ch. 120
17-014 4-18-2017 Offices, Officials and
Multiple-Member Bodies
Amendment
Ch. 3
17-074 6-5-2017 Administrative
Organization Amendment
Ch. 4
17-096 10-16-2017 Regulations Affecting
Motor Vehicles Amendment
Ch. 13, attachment
only
17-127 4-2-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 120
18-011 4-2-2018 Administrative
Organization Amendment
Ch. 4
18-054 5-7-2018 Administrative
Organization Amendment
Ch. 4
18-055 5-7-2018 Offices, Officials and
Multiple-Member Bodies
Amendment
Ch. 3
§ 120-133 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:493

. 98125 Town of Weymouth
Massachusetts
RULES AND REGULATIONS
OF THE
PLANNING BOARD
OF
ADOPTED
MARCH 4, 1954
LATEST AMENDMENT
MAY 10, 1991
Revised June 13, 1994
Adopted July 15, 1994
WEYMOUTH PLANNING SOARD
75 MIDDLE STREET
WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS 02189
Bl{ I 0 6 2 11 PG 5 3 2
flECOROEO
NORFOU'\ COlJNTY f'iEO!STR'I' OF DEl:OS
OE.OH,o.M,MI\.
CERTIFY
~-- 9AllRY T. 1-<ANNON, REGISTER
Weymouth Planning Board
8\{ I O 6 2 4 PG 5 3 3
WEYMOUTH PLANNING BOARD
Mary s. McElroy 1 Chairwoman
Martin J. Joyce, Vice-Chairman
William J. Begley, Clerk
Paul M. Pillon
Francis L. Hawkins
Paul Hurley
Roberts. Lang
RULES AND REGULATIONS COMMITTEE
William J. Begley
Robert s. Lang
Roderick M. Fuqua
STAFF
James Clarke, Director of Planning &
community Development
Roderick M. Fuqua, Principal Planner
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 GENERAL ••••••••••••••.••• , •••••.••••.•••• , ••••••.••••• 1
1. 1.
l. 2.
l. 3.
1. 4'
1. 5.
1. 6.
PUrpose ..
Intent .•
Authority
.. .. . .
Definitions . • . • •.
Fee ..•......••.• , . . . • .
More than one building for dwelling per lot
. .. . 1
.2
• 2
. 2
.5
• 6
SECTION 2 PLANS UNDER SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW NOT REQUIRED ••••••••••• , 7
2. l. Submission of Plan .................. , . . . . . . 7
2.2. Endorsement of Plan not Requiring Approval .8
2.3. Determination that Plan Requires Approval .8
2.4. Failure of Board to Act .9
2.5. Determination.......... .9
SECTION 3 PRELIMINARY PLAN ................•......•............... 11
3 .1.
3 • 2.
3. 3.
3. 4.
3. 5.
3. 6.
3 • 7.
General ......................... .
Preliminary subdivision Submittal
Required contents ................ .
Preferred Additional contents •....
Preliminary Subdivision Plan Review
Decision ................. .
Preliminary Plan Checklist . .
... .11
.11
.12
.13
.14
.15
.15
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN ••••• , •••••••• , •• , •••••••••••••• , .••••• , • 17
4.1. Plan Submittal ............... .
4.2. Required Plan Contents •.......
4.3. Required Supplemental Material
4.4. Review by Board of Health
4.5. Subdivision Plan Review
4.6. Public Hearing •...•.•
4.7. Board Procedure •.••..•.
4.8. Performance Guarantee •.
4.9. Certificate of Approval or Disapproval
• !', •
....
4.10. Endorsement of Approval on an Approved Plan ••
4.11. Reduction of Performance Guarantee
4.12. Release of Performance Guarantee
4 .13. Acceptance by the Town • . . • .
4.14. Definitive Plan Checklist ••
.17
.18
.21
.28
.29
.30
• 31
.32
.34
.35
.36
.36
• 3 7
.37
SECTION 5 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS • , •• .............................•.. 41
5.1. Streets
5.3. Width
5.4. Grade
. . . .
5.5. Dead-end streets
5.6. curb cuts
5.7. Easements
.... . . .. .. 41
.42
.42
.43
.44
.44
5.8. Open Space ....................
5. 9. Protection of Natural Features
5.10. Lot Drainage
5.11. Fire Hydrants
5.12. Sidewalks ..
5.13. Grass Plots, Trees
5.14. Utilities . . . .....
5.15. Fire Alarm system
5.16. Street Names .....
5.17. Bikeways, Walkways
5. 18. 100 Year Flood Plain Criteria
SECTION 6 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
6. 1.
6. 2.
6. 3.
6. 4.
6. 5.
6,6.
6. 7.
6. 8.
6. 9.
6.10.
6.11.
6,12.
6.13.
6,14.
6.15.
6.16.
6.17.
General
Grading
Pavement
General
Sewerage
Water ..•
Storm Drain System
Non-municipal Utilities
Sidewalks ..... .
curbs ......... .
Street Lighting
Landscaping •...
Road Bounds and Lot Markers
Street and Traffic Signs
Fire Alarm System ...... .
Bikeways, Walkways ..•...
Maintenance of Improvements
81{ I 0 6 2 L; PG 5 3 5
.45
.46
.46
.46
.47
.47
.47
.47
.48
.48
.48
.51
.51
.52
.54
.55
.55
.56
.56
.57
.57
.58
.59
.60
.60
.61
.61
.61
61
SECTION 7 ADMINISTRATION ............................... •••..••... 6 3
7.1. Waivers ....... .
7.2 Reference •.
7. 3.
7. 4.
7.5.
Building Permit
Inspections
Validity
INDEX o o o o 0 0 0 ' ' 0 o e • • 0 0 0 0 o ' o o o 0 o o t ' t 0 o 0 ' o 0 0 0 0 0 o 0 0 ' ' 0 0 I 0 ' 0 0 t ' o
.63
.63
.63
.63
.64
.. 65
APPENDIX A ROADWAY CROSS SECTIONS .......... " .................. . .69
APPENDIX B SUBDIVISION FORMS ' 0 0 0 t t t 0 0 0 0 t 0 0 t t t 0 <I 0 t 0 ' •• 0 • 0 • 0 • 0 I o 0 . 75
1.1. Purpose
RULES AND REGULATIONS
GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
(adopted under the Subdivision Control Law)
G.L. Ch. 41 1 Sec. 81-K to 81-GG inclusive
SECTION 1
GENERAL
These subdivision regulations are adopted for the purpose of
protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Town of Weymouth by regulating the laying
out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing access
to the several lots therein, but which have not become publ~c
ways, and ensuring sanitary conditions in subdivisions and in
proper cases parks and open areas. The powers of the Planning
Board and of the Board of Appeal under the subdivision control
law shall be exercised with due regard for:
• the provision
subdivision by
travel;
of adequate access to all of the lots in a
ways that will be safe and convenient for
• lessening congestion to such ways and in the adjacent public
ways;
• reducing danger of life and limb in the operation of motor
vehicles;
• securing safety in the case of fire, flood, panic and other
emergencies;
• insuring compliance with the Weymouth Zoning Bylaws;
• securing adequate provision for water, sewerage, drainage,
underground utility services, fire, police and other similar
municipal equipment, and street lighting and other
requirements where necessary in a subdivision;
• coordinating the ways in a subdivision
with the public ways in Weymouth and
neighboring subdivisions; and,
with each other
with the ways
and
in
• may also be exercised with due regard for the policy of the
Commonwealth to encourage the use of solar energy and protect
1
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND 8)( ! Q 6 2 1
:· PG 5 3 7
access to direct sunlight of solar energy systems.
1.2. Intent
"It is the intent of the subdivision control law (and under
which these regulations are adopted) that any subdivision plan
filed with the Planning Board shall receive the approval of
such Board if said plan conforms to the recommendation of the
Board of Health and to the reasonable rules and regulations of
the Planning Board pertaining to subdivisions of land;
provided, however, that such board may, when appropriate, waive,
as provided for in Section 81-R, such portions of the rules and
regulations as is deemed advisable". (G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81-M)
1.3. Authority
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of
Weymouth by G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81-Q, said Board has hereby
adopted these rules and regulations governing the subdivision of
land in the Town of Weymouth. These regulations become
effective on *****REVIEW*****, after approval by the Board,
certification by the Town Clerk and filing with the Register of
Deeds and the Recorder of the Land Court.
1.4. Definitions
APPLICANT A person (as hereinafter defined) who applies for
the approval Of a plan of a subdivision or a person who applies
under Sections 2, 3, and/or 4 of these rules and regulations.
"Applicant" shall include an owner, or his agent or
representative, or his assigns.
BENCH MARK - A mark made in a durable object of known position
and elevation as a reference point.
BOARD - The Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth.
CERTIFIED BY Certified by (or endorsed by) the Board, as
applied to a plan or other instrument required or authorized by
the subdivision control law to be recorded, shall mean, bearing
a certification or endorsement signed by a majority of the
members of the Board, or by its chairman or clerk or any other
person authorized by it to certify or endorse its approval or
other action and named in a written statement to the Register of
Deeds and Recorder of the Land Court, signed by a majority of
the Board. (G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81-L)
DESIGNER
registered
Professional Civil Engineer
to practice in Massachusetts.
2
or Land Surveyor
All work defined as
B:( I 0 5 2 t, PG 5 3 8 SECTION 1 GENERAL
professional engineering or surveying shall be done under
direct supervision of a registered professional engineer
surveyor.
DEVELOPER
subdivision
Section 4 of
A person (as hereinafter defined) who
under a plan of a subdivision approved
these Rules and Regulations.
develops
pursuant
the
or
a
to
EASEMENT - A right acquired by public authority or other person
to use or control property for a utility or other designated
public purpose.
GENERAL LAWS (abbreviated G.L.) The General Laws of
Massachusetts, Tercentennial Edition. In case of a rearrangement
of the General Laws, any citation of particular sections of the
General Laws shall be applicable to the corresponding sections
in the new codification.
LOT An area of land in one (1) ownership
boundaries, used, or available for use, as the
or more buildings. (G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81-L)
with definite
site of one (1)
MONUMENT - A permanent marker to indicate a boundary.
Mt!NICIPAL SERVICES - Sanitary sewers, stormwater drains, water
pipes, gas pipes, electrical lines, fire alarm system, similar
systems and their respective appurtenances.
OWNER As applied to real estate, the person holding the
ultimate fee simple title to a parcel, tract or lot of land, (as
shown by the record in the Norfolk Land Registration Office,
Registry of Deeds or Registry of Probate) .
PERSON - An individual, or two or more individuals or a group or
association of individuals, a partnership, trust or corporation
having common or undivided interests in a tract of land.
PLANNING BOARD
the Planning
regulations.
AGENT - Town employee or consultant authorized by
Board to review subdivisions and administer the
PRELIMINARY PLAN
resubdivision of
facilitate proper
A plan of a proposed subdivision
land prepared in accord with Section
preparation of a definitive plan.
or
3
a
to
PLAN OR
submitted
approval,
the Land
approved
plan.
DEFINITIVE PLAN - The plan of a subdivision as duly
(with appropriate application) to the Board for
to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or filed with
Court when approved by the Board, and such plan when
and recorded; all as distinguished from a preliminary
3
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
RECORDED - Recorded shall mean recorded in the Registry of
of Norfolk county, except that, as affecting registered
it shall mean filed with the Recorder of the Land Court.
Ch. 41, Sec. 81-L)
Deeds
land,
(G. L.
REGISTRY OF DEEDS - Registry of Deeds shall mean the Registry of
Deeds of Norfolk County and, when appropriate, shall include the
Land Court. (G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81-L)
ROADWAY That portion of a way which is designed and
constructed for vehicular travel.
STREET, MAJOR - A street which,
being used or will be used as a
Weymouth or which will otherwise
(generally, over fifteen hundred
in the opinion of the Board is
thoroughfare within the Town of
carry a heavy volume of traffic
(1500) vehicles per day).
STREET, MINOR - A street which, in the opinion of the Board, is
being used or will be used primarily, to provide access to
abutting lots and which will not be used for through traffic.
STREET, SECONDARY - A street intercepting one (1) or more minor
streets and which, in the opinion of the Board, is used or will
be used to carry a substantial volume of traffic (generally,
over four hundred (400) vehicles per day) from such minor
street(s) to a major street or community facility, and normally
including a principal entrance street to a shopping center,
industrial park, planned unit development, or a large
subdivision, or group of subdivisions, and any principal
circulation street within such developments.
SUBDIVISION The division of a tract of land into two (2) or
more lots and shall include re-subdivision, and, when
appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of
subdivision or the land or territory subdivided; provided,
however, that the division of a tract of land into two (2) or
more lots shall not be deemed to constitute a subdivision
within the meaning of the subdivision control law, if at the
time when it is made, every lot within the tract so divided has
a frontage on (a) a public way, or a way which the Town Clerk of
the Town of Weymouth certifies is maintained and used as a
public way, or (b) a way shown on a plan theretofore approved
and endorsed in accordance with the subdivision control law, or
(c) a way in existence when the subdivision control law became
effective in the Town, having in the opinion of the Planning
Board, sufficient width, suitable grades and adequate
construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in
relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or
served thereby, and for the installation of municipal services
to serve such land and the buildings erected or to be erected
thereon. Such frontage shall be of at least such distance as is
4
SECTION l GENERAL
then required by the Zoning Bylaw. Conveyances or other
instruments adding to, taking away from, or changing the size
and shape of, lots in such a manner as not to leave any lot so
affected without the frontage above set forth, or the division
of a tract of land on which two (2) or more buildings were
standing when the subdivision control law went into effect in
the Town into separate lots on each of which one (l) of such
buildings remains standing shall not constitute a subdivision.
(G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81-0)
SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW The power Of regulating the
subdivision of land granted by the Subdivision Control Law, G.L.
Ch. 41, Sec. Bl-A through GG inclusive, as hereinafter
amended.
TOWN - Town of Weymouth
VOLUME OF TRAFFIC - For purposes of determining street type the
Planning Board shall calculate ten (10) trips per day for a
single family or each unit in a duplex residence and six (6)
trips per day for each townhouse or unit in an apartment or
multi-family structure. Nonresidential traffic volumes shall be
calculated using a recognized authoritative source in the
field, such as Trip Generation, the most recent edition,
published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. The
Planning Board shall determine reasonable traffic generation
volumes for any uses not listed in any source.
1.5. Fee
1.5.1. Subdivision plans submitted for approval under
subdivision control law not required.
All expenses for engineering, surveying, any professional plan
review, plans, recording and filing of documents and all other
expenses in connection with a plan for "approval under
subdivision control law not required" shall be borne by the
applicant.
The fee shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each plan.
1.5.2. Subdivision plans submitted for approval under the
subdivision control law.
All expenses for advertising, engineering, any professional plan
review, plans, inspection, construction, recording and filing
of documents and all other expenses in connection with a
subdivision shall be borne by the applicant.
The fee shall be one dollar ($1.00) per center line foot of each
road shown on a preliminary plan, or a definitive plan if a
5
-
;'\..)
•. ::-
- ·-
··.'
.J
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
preliminary plan is not submitted, provided that the minimum fee
shall be three hundred dollars ($300.00), and shall be paid
upon submission of the respective plan. The fee shall cover
both the preliminary and definitive plan provided that the
definitive plan is submitted within seven months of the filing
of the preliminary. Wherever a definitive plan is not submitted
within seven months of a preliminary plan, then a new filing· fee
shall be required.
1.5.3. Modification or amendment of a plan approved under the
G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81-W, as hereinafter amended.
All expenses for advertising, engineering, any professional plan
review, plans, inspection, construction, recording and filing
of documents and all other expenses in connection with a
subdivision shall be borne by the applicant.
The fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), and shall
be paid upon submission of the respective plan.
1.5.4. Consent for more than one building for dwelling purposes
per lot.
All expenses for advertising, engineering, any professional plan
review, plans, inspection, construction, recording and filing
of documents and all other expenses in connection with a
subdivision shall be borne by the applicant.
The fee shall be one dollar ($1.00) per center line foot of each
road and/or driveway providing access shown on the plan,
provided that the minimum fee shall be three hundred dollars
($300.00), and shall be paid upon submission of the respective
plan.
1.6. More than one building for dwelling purposes per lot
Not more than one (1) building designed or available for use for
dwelling purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use
as such on any lot in a subdivision, or elsewhere in Town,
without the consent of the Board.
such consent shall be conditional upon the providing of adequate
ways furnishing access to each site for such building in the
same manner as otherwise required for lots within a subdivision.
Any request for such consent shall follow all the procedures and
requirements for a subdivision plan as contained in Sections 3
and 4 of these rules and regulations. Design and construction
of the access and all municipal utilities shall follow the
standards of sections 5 and 6 of these rules and regulations.
6
~:( i 0 6 2 L, PG 5 4 2
SECTION 2
PLANS UNDER SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW NOT REQUIRED
2.1. Submission of Plan
Any persoi; wishing to cause to be recorded. a plan of land
situated in the Town of Weymouth, who believes that his plan
does not require approval under the subdivision control law may
submit their plan according in the following manner. Plans
filed in this matter are more commonly referred to as ANR Plans
or Form A Plans.
An original plan, two contact prints thereof, a properly
executed Fann A, the prope·r filing fee and accompanied by the
necessary evidence to show that the plan does not require
approval shall be filed with the Board by delivery or by
registered mail, postage prepaid. The applicant shall also give
written notice to the Town Clerk of such plan submittal. If the
notice is given by delivery, the Town Clerk shall, if requested,
give a written receipt therefor. Such notice shall describe the
land to which the plan relates sufficiently for identification,
and shall state the date when such plan was submitted and the
name and address of the owner of such land. The facts, as
stated, in such notice shall be taken by the Town Clerk as true,
unless the contrary is made to appear.
The classification and precision of surveys shall conform to
class A or better of the most recent Land Court Manual of
Instructions, commonwealth of Massachusetts. It is recommended
that all other survey and Definitive Plan preparation, where not
herein specified, be guided by the Manual of Instructions.
The plan shall be at a scale of one inch (1 11 ) equals forty feet
(40'), or such other scale as the Board may accept to show
details clearly and adequately. Plans and profiles of each
individual street shall be at a scale of one inch (1 11 ) equals
forty feet (40 1 ) horizontal and one (111 ) equals four feet (4')
vertical. All elevations shall refer to the Town of Weymouth
Datum. Sheet sizes shall be twenty-four by thirty-six inches
(24 11 x 36") including a one inch (l") border. All plans shall
be accompanied by a locus map at a scale of one inch (l") equals
one thousand feet (1000 1 ), showing the entire subdivision and
adjacent streets. The plan shall contain the following
information:
0 Identification of the plan by name of owner of record and
location of the land in question.
0 The statement
Required", and
of a majority
"Approval Under Subdivision Control Law Not
provide sufficient space for the signatures
of the Board and the date of the Board's
7
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
action.
0 Zoning classification and location of any Zoning District
Boundaries that may lie within the locus of the plan.
0 In the case of the creation of a new lot,
area and frontage of the land in the
applicant shall be shown.
the remaining land
ownership of . the
0 Notice of any decisions by the Board of
including but not limited to variances
regarding the land.or any buildings thereon.
Zoning Appeals,
and exceptions
0 Names of abutters from the latest available Assessor's
records unless the applicant has knowledge of any changes
subsequent to the latest available Assessor's records.
0 Distance to the nearest permanent monument.
0 Location of all existing buildings, including set back and
side and rear yard designations.
0 A locus map at one thousand (l,OOO) feet to the inch.
0 Sheet, Block, Lot(s) numbers from the Weymouth Town Atlas.
0 Designer's stamp and signature.
2.2. Endorsement of Plan not Requiring Approval
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval,
it shall without a public hearing and within twenty-one (21)
days of submission endorse the plan.
The Board may add to such endorsement a statement of the reason
approval is not required. The plan shall be forwarded to the
Department of Public Works, Engineering Division and there it
will be returned to the applicant, and the Board shall also
notify the Town Clerk in writing of its action.
2.3. Determination that Plan Requires Approval
If the Board determines that the
under the Subdivision Control Law,
(21) days of the submission of
applicant in writing and return the
notify the Town Clerk in writing of
8
plan does require approval
it shall, within twenty-one
the plan, so inform the
plan. The Board shall also
its action.
SECTION 2 PLANS UNDER SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW NOT REQUIRED
2.4. Failure of Board to Act 81( l 0 S 2 1., PG 5 t, l}
If the Board fails to act upon a plan submitted under this
section or fails to notify the Town Clerk and the person
submitting the plan of its action within twenty-one (21) days
after its submission, it shall be deemed to have determined
that approval under the Subdivision Control Law is ·. not
required, and it shall forthwith make such endorsement on said
plan, and on its failure to do so forthwith, the Town Clerk
shall issue a certificate to the same effect.
2.5. Determination
The Board, at a duly called and posted meeting, without a public
hearing, shall by a majority vote determine if such plan does
not require approval. A determination shall be based on the
following criteria:
2.5.1. The proposed lots shown on a plan shall front on:
• a public way or a way which the Town Clerk certifies is
maintained and used as a public way;
or
o a way shown on a plan therefore approved and endorsed in
accordance with the subdivision control law;
or
• a way in existence when the subdivision control law became
effective (Annual Town Meeting 1958), having, in the opinion
of the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable grades and
adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular
traffic in relation to the proposed use of the land.
2.5.2. The proposed lots shown on a plan meet the minimum lot
frontage requirements as contained in the zoning bylaw.
2.5.3. Each lot shown on plan shall have access onto the way
from the frontage shown on the plan.
2.5.4. The way on which the proposed lots front shall provide
adequate access.
2.5.5. Each lot shown on plan shall have practical access from
the way to the buildable portion of the lot.
Board determination regarding
under subdivision control law
aforementioned criteria. such
9
a plan submitted for
not required is based
endorsement cannot be
approval
on the
withheld
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
for any other reason. ·P"i ( / 0 0r 2-1.· ,,D G :r-Jlf5
2.5.6. If, in the course of review, the Board notes one or more
of the proposed lots indicates some zoning deficiency, other
than minimum frontage requirements, the Board may note along
with its endorsement, the phrase "No determination of compliance
with zoning conformance has been made or intended by ··the
attached endorsement. All zoning interpretations can officially
be made only to the Inspector of Buildings."
2.5.7. A determination by the Board may be appealed as provide
in G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81BB.
10
3.1. General
SECTION 3
PRELIMINARY PLAN
In the case of a subdivision showing lots in a residential zone,
any person, before submitting their definitive plan , for
approval, may submit to the Board and to the Board of Health, a
preliminary plan and shall give written notice of such delivery
to the Town Clerk by delivery or by registered mail, postage
prepaid.
The submission of such a preliminary plan will enable the
subdivider, the Board, other Town agencie~ and owners of
property abutting the subdivision to discuss and clarify the
details of such subdivision before a Definitive Plan is
prepared. Therefore, it is strongly recommended that a
preliminary plan be filed in each case.
In the case
submitting
the Board
shall give
delivery or
of a nonresidential subdivision, any person, before
their definitive plan for approval, shall submit to
and to the Board of Health, a preliminary plan and
written notice of such delivery to the Town Clerk by
by registered mail, postage prepaid.
In either case, if the notice is given by delivery, the Town
Clerk shall, if requested, give a written receipt therefore.
Within forty-five days after submission of a preliminary plan,
the Board shall notify the applicant and the Town Clerk, by
certified mail, either that the plan has been approved, or that
the plan has been approved with modifications suggested by the
Board or agreed upon by the person submitting the plan, or that
the plan has been disapproved and in the case of disapproval,
the Board shall state in detail its reasons therefor. The Board
shall notify the Town Clerk of its approval or disapproval, as
the case may be. Except as is otherwise provided, the
provisions of the subdivision control law relating to a plan
shall · not be applicable to a preliminary plan, and no register
of deed shall record a preliminary plan.
A decision
be valid
submittal.
of the Board on a preliminary subdivision plan shall
for a period of seven (7) months from the date of
3.2. Preliminary Subdivision Submittal
A complete Preliminary Subdivision submittal shall consist of
the following material:
D An original plan, drawn on tracing paper, mylar or linen.
11
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
0 Nine (9) contact prints thereof. Bl< I 0 6 2 4 PG 5 4 7
0 A properly executed application Form B.
0 A properly executed certified list of abutters, with attached
Form E.
0 The minimum filing fee in a accord with Section 1.5.
A preliminary plan may be filed, in any of the following ways:
• with the Planning Board Office during normal working hours,
or
• at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board,
or
• by registered mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the Board.
3.3. Required Contents
The preliminary plan shall be drawn on tracing paper, mylar or
linen with ink at a suitable scale, preferably forty feet (40 1 )
to the inch, however no plan shall be smaller than sixty feet
(60 1 ) to the inch. The plan shall be designated as a
"preliminary plan" and to form a clear basis for discussion of
the details of the subdivision and for preparation of the
definitive plan, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
0 The subdivision name, boundaries, north point, date, scale,
legend and title "Preliminary Plan".
0 The names of the record owner of the land and the applicant
and the name(s) of the designer, engineer and/or surveyor who
made the plan, which shall appear in the lower right hand
corner.
0 The names of all abutters, as determined form the most recent
real estate tax list, unless the applicant shall have more
recent knowledge of such abutters. See Form E - Certified
List of Abutters.
0 The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements,
water service, sewer disposal and any public or common areas
within the subdivision, in a general manner.
0 The proposed system of drainage, including adjacent existing
natural waterways, in a general manner.
12
81( I 0 6 2 I:. PG 5 4 8 SECTION 3 PRELIMINARY PLAN
D The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots,
approximate areas and dimensions.
with
D The names, approximate location and widths of adjacent
streets.
D The topography of the land with a two foot
interval based on the Town of Weymouth Datum.
and their elevations shall be shown with
measurement.
3.4. Preferred Additional Contents
(2') contour
water bodies
the date of
An applicant may submit additional information with a
preliminary plan. The following items are not part of the
statutory requirements of a preliminary subdivision plan,
however these are items that have proven useful for a more
complete review and they are offered as a suggestion for any
applicant who desires a more detailed review.
D Zoning classification and location of any zoning District
Boundaries that may lie within the locus of the plan.
D sheet, Block, Lot(s) numbers from the Weymouth Town Atlas.
D Proposed street names.
D Notice of any decisions by the Board of
including but not limited to variances
regarding the land or any buildings thereon.
Zoning Appeals,
and exceptions
D Vegetated wetlands and bordering vegetative wetland areas, as
required by G.L. Ch. 131, Sec. 40 and Chapter 119 of the Code
of the Town of Weymouth.
D Location of any 100 year flood plains, as noted in section
4.2.21 of these rules and regulations.
0 Drainage calculations, as required in Section 4.3.l of these
rules and regulations.
D A draft environmental impact
required elements as noted in
and regulations.
statement, to include all
Section 4.3.3 of these rules
0 Major features of the land, such as vegetated wetlands and
bordering vegetative wetland areas, as required by G.L. Ch,
131, Sec. 40 and Chapter 119 of the Code of the Town of
Weymouth, natural drainage courses, walls, fences, buildings,
trees six inches (611 ) in diameter measured four feet (4')
13
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
n/( l 06/1,pr,c;1.9
above the ground (dbh), wooded areas, out-cropp1ngs' 'and
ditches which exist on or near the site at the time of
survey. Where available, aerial photographs should be
submitted.
0 List all other local, state and federal permits required and
give the status of each at the time of filing of a definitive
plan. Listing shall indicate whether a permit is required
and if it has been filed and/or decided.
0 Letter from the owner, if not the applicant, authorizing the
applicant to submit a plan.
3.5. Preliminary Subdivision Plan Review
The Board may transmit copies of a preliminary plan to other
Town Agencies for their review and conunent. A copy of the plan
may be forwarded, asking for written statements with regard to
the proposed improvements in the following respect:
BOARD OF HEALTH
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKSWATER
& SEWER DIVISION
HIGHWAY DIVISION
ENGINEERING DIVISION
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
FIRE DEPARTMENT
POLICE DEPARTMENT
STREET LIGHTING COMM.
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
As to suitability of the land.
As to potential involvement with
G.L. Ch. 131, Sec. 40.
As to the design of the street
system, location of easements,
monuments, drainage system,
water system, and sewerage system.
As to compliance with Zoning Bylaw.
As to street
and adequacy
alarm system.
name and to
of hydrants,
location
and the
As to street name and vehicular and
pedestrian safety.
As to placement and design of
street lighting equipment.
As to school busing and
districting.
The Board reserves the right to send a copy of
plan to any other Town Official or Agency which,
of the Board, may have an interest or some
authority in the parcel being subdivided or the
thereon.
a preliminary
in the opinion
jurisdictional
use proposed
14
8!( I 0 6 2 lr PG 5 5 0 SECTION 3 PRELIMINARY PLAN
Plans shall be sent to Town Officials within ten (10) days of
submittal of a preliminary plan. Town Officials shall respond
within fifteen (15) days of receipt. In each referral the
Planning Board will assume that the respective officials have no
comment if no statement is received within the specified time
frame. ·
3.6. Decision
Within forty-five (45) days after submission of a preliminary
plan the Board shall approve, with modifications suggested by
the board or agreed upon by the person submitting the plan, or
disapprove and in the case of disapproval, the Board shall state
in detail its reasons therefore, after the Board's review with
the Board of Health, the Conservation Commission, Department of
Public Works, Building Department, Police Department, Fire
Department and other Town agencies. Notice of the Board's
decision.
Such approval does not constitute a final
subdivision, but facilitates the preparation
plan and the securance of approval thereof.
decision of the
of the definitive
A preliminary plan and the evolving definitive plan shall be
governed by the Zoning Bylaws and the rules and regulations
relative to subdivision control in effect at the time of
submission of the preliminary plan, provided that the definitive
plan is duly submitted within seven (7) months from the date on
which the preliminary plan was submitted.
3.7. Preliminary Plan Checklist
Subdivision Name:
Locus of Plan: Sheet(s)~~~-' Block(s)~~~-' Lot(s)~~~street
Locus:
Applicaht's Name:
Applicant's Address:
Applicant's Telephone Number:
Engineer:
surveyor:
Date submitted (Filed - Town Clerk):
Approval deadline:
15
owner's Name:
owner's Address:
[SJ
[S+45]
~~~~~-' 19~
~~~~~' 19~
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Plans and forms complete: 0 Yes, 0 No
If no,
items:
then comment on incomplete or inadequate
------
Number of lots:
Type of subdivision: 0 Single family
0 Commercial
Type ~f Road Construction:
0 Minor street
0 Secondary Street
0 Maj or Street
Plans referrals to following
Board of Health
Conservation Commission
Department of Public Works
Building Department
Fire Department
Police Department
street Lighting Committee
School Department
Agencies
sent
dS+lO
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 Multifamily
0 Industrial
(S+lO)
days)
received
dS+25 days]
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Planning Board Decision: 0 Approved, 0 Denied
Date of action: ,19 __ _
Decision filed with Town Clerk:
Applicant notified of decision:
16
4.1. Plan Submittal
SECTION 4
DEFINITIVE PLAN
A person may submit a definitive plan to the Board in any one of
these three ways:
• Delivery at a meeting of the Board.
• Sent by registered mail to the Board, care of the Town Clerk.
• Delivery to the Town Clerk's office.
Any person who submits a definitive plan of a subdivision to the
Board for approval shall file with the Board all required items
listed below to be "duly submitted" in accord with these Rules
and Regulations and the General Laws of Massachusetts:
DAn original plan, drawn on either, mylar or linen.
DNine (9) contact prints thereof.
DA reduction of the original plan, all sheets, to eleven by
seventeen inches (11'' x 17'').
DA properly executed application Form C.
DA properly executed designer's certificate, Form D.
0 A properly executed certified list of abutters, with attached
Form E.
0 A properly executed conveyance of easements and utilities,
· Form K.
0 Drainage calculations, as required in Sec. 4.3.1.
0 soil survey and percolation tests, as required in Sec. 4.3.2.
DAn environmental impact statement, as required in sec. 4.3.3.
0 A list of all required permits and approvals, as required in
Sec. 4.3.3.
0 A list of all required documentation in support of the
declaration of Public/Private Way, as required in Sec.
4. 3. 5.
0 The minimum filing fee as required in Section 1.5, provided
17
Rev. 6/13/94
BK ! 0 6 2 L} PG 5 5 3
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
that no preliminary plan was filed or that a preliminary plan
was filed more than seven (7) months preceding the date of
the definitive plan submission.
4.2. Required Plan Contents
The Definitive Plan shall be prepared by a Professional Engineer
and Registered Land Surveyor registered in Massachusetts and
shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black India ink upon
tracing cloth, mylar or any other material suitable for
recordation at the Registry of Deeds.
The classification and precision of surveys shall conform to
Class A or better of the most recent Land Court Manual of
Instructions, Commonwealth of Massachusetts. It is recommended
that all other survey and Definitive Plan preparation, where not
herein specified, be guided by the Manual of Instructions.
The plan shall be at a scale of one inch (1") equals forty feet
(40'), or such other scale as the Board may accept to show
details clearly and adequately. Plans and profiles of each
individual street shall be at a scale of one inch (1 11 ) equals
forty feet (40') horizontal and one (l'') equals four feet (4')
vertical. All elevations shall refer to the Town of Weymouth
Datum. Sheet sizes shall be twenty-four by thirty-six inches
(24 11 x 36") including a one inch (1") border. All plans shall
be accompanied by a locus map at a scale of one inch (l") equals
one thousand feet ( 1000') , showing the entire subdivision and
adjacent streets. The definitive plan shall contain the
following information:
4.2.1. A title, appearing in the lower right-hand corner of the
plan, showing the name of the subdivision, if any; the date;
scale; the names of the designer; the names of the engineer and
surveyor who made the plan with their signature and stamp.
4. 2. 2. North point, whether true, magnetic or grid benchmark
and so indicated, and boundaries of the subdivision.
4.2.3. Location and ownership of abutting property as it
appears on Form E Certified List of Abutters unless the
applicant shall have more recent knowledge of such abutters, so
indicated, including all abutting land owned by the applicant
not presently being subdivided.
4.2.4. Major features of the land, such as vegetated wetlands
and bordering vegetative wetland areas, as required by G.L. Ch.
131, Sec. 40 and Chapter 119 of the Code of the Town of
Weymouth, natural drainage courses, walls, fences, buildings,
paved areas, trees six (6) inches in diameter measured four feet
18
Rev. 6/13/94
( 4') above the ground
ditches which exist on
Where available, aerial
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
(dbh), wooded areas, out-croppings and
or near the site at the time of survey.
photographs should be submitted.
4.2.5. Lines of ~xisting and proposed streets, ways, lots, lot
numbers or other designation of each lot, easements, and public
or common areas within the subdivision.
4.2.6. Sufficient data to determine the location, direction and
length of every street and way line, lot line and boundary line,
and to establish these lines on the ground. This shall include
the lengths and bearings of plan and boundary lines of all
subdivision lot lines including lot frontage on the streets, of
the boundary lines of all streets and easements, and the length,
radii, tangents, and central angles of all curves in lot lines
and street lines. All angle points, or intersections of
tangents along the street lines, shall be shown, areas of lots
with lot numbers and the area and frontage on public ways as set
forth in G. L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81-L of adjoining lands of the
applicant not included in the subdivision will be shown. The
surveyor shall have the mathematical computations available to
present to the Board (and/or Town Engineer), for a matter of
record. It is recommended that traverse computations be drafted
onto the Definitive Plan, if space is available. If not, they
should be placed on a separate or subsequent sheet.
4.2.7. Location of all permanent monuments properly identified
as to whether existing or proposed.
4.2.8. Location, names and present widths of streets or private
ways bounding, approaching or within reasonable proximity of the
subdivision, showing both roadway widths and right-of-way
widths.
4.2.9. The zoning district classification of land shown on the
plan and the location of any zoning district boundaries that lie
within the locus of the plan, including notice of any decisions
by the Board of zoning Appeals, pertaining to, but not limited
to, variances and exceptions regarding the land or any buildings
thereon. The applicable minimum front, side and rear yard
depths for each lot as is required by the Zoning Bylaws.
4. 2 .10. Indication of all existing and proposed easements,
covenants or restrictions applying to the land and their
purposes, whether or not within the subdivision, including any
decision on appeal or any variances or exceptions made by the
Board of Zoning Appeals applicable to the subdivision of the
land or any buildings thereon.
4.2.11. If the property that comprises the subdivision or any
part or boundary thereof has been examined, approved, and
19
Rev. 6/J.3/94
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GK l 0 6 2 L; PG 5 5 5
confirmed by the Massachusetts Land Court, such information
shall be noted on the plat with case numbers and other pertinent
references to Land· court Procedure, and the same requirement
shall apply to any adjoining parcels of land of the applicant.
4.2.12. Sheet, block and lot number(s) from the Town Atlas.
4.2.13. Suitable space to note:
• the decision of the Board with the signatures of a majority
of the members of the Board,
• as to whether any appeals of the decision have been received
by the Town Clerk, and,
• a framed block reserved for the Registry of Deeds.
4.2.14. Existing profiles of the roadway exterior lines drawn
in fine black line, dash for left and dot dash for right side,
and proposed profile on the finished center-line drawn in fine
black solid line of proposed streets at a horizontal scale of
one inch (1'') equals forty feet (40') and vertical scale of one
inch (l") equals four feet (4 1 ), or such other scales acceptable
to the Board. At least two ( 2) bench marks are to be shown on
plans and profiles, and grade elevations at every fifty foot
(50') station except in vertical curves which shall be at every
twenty-five (25') station. All existing and proposed
intersections and sidewalks, bikeways and walkways shall be
shown with all proposed grade elevations calculated. Elevations
are to be referred to as either mean sea level or zero equals
mean low water as established by the Town of Weymouth Datum.
The elevation datum used shall be stated on the plan. Wherever
possible, the designer is advised to use Town of Weymouth Datum.
Gradients shall be shown by figures expressed in percent.
4. 2 .15. Existing and proposed topography at two feet (2')
contour intervals. The date of the field survey used to
determine all surface water elevations shall be noted.
4.2.16. size and location of existing and proposed water supply
mains and their appurtenances, hydrants, sewer pipes and their
appurtenances and/or sewage disposal systems, storm drains and
their appurtenances, and easements pertinent thereto, and
dimensions of gutters, including data on borings and percolation
tests made, and method of carrying water to the nearest
watercourse or easements for drainage as needed, whether or not
within the subdivision.
Show the location of any public and/or private well within a
four hundred (400) foot radius of the property within the
subdivision.
20
Rev . 6 / 13 / 9 4
81( ! 0 6 2 L, PG 5 5 6 SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
If surface water drains will discharge onto adj a cent existing
streets or onto adjacent properties not owned by the applicant,
he shall clearly indicate what course the discharge will take
and shall present to the Board evidence from the Department of
Public Works or the owner of adjacent property that such
discharge is satisfactory and permitted by public or private
ownership of adjacent street or property.
4. 2 .17. Location and species of all proposed street trees and
location of all existing trees with trunks over six inches (6")
in diameter, measured four feet (4') above the finished ground
level (dbh), within ten (10) feet on either side of the right of
way.
4. 2. 18. Typical cross sections of each street, roadway and
sidewalk to be constructed.
4. 2 .19. Location of proposed street lights, and pedestrian
lighting if required; sidewalks and fire alarm system.
4.2.20. Area
the plan in
information:
dimensions
a table
of the subdivision shall be shown on
format and include the following
• The total area which is being subdivided.
• The total area of buildable lots.
• The total area dedicated for street purposes.
• The total area of all drainage, sewer or utility easements,
exclusive of those utilities within the right-of-way.
• The total of areas reserved for parks, bikeways, and any
other public use on each sheet.
4. 2. 21. All Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as Zones A,
A2, A3, A4, AS, B, V4, V6, and Floodways as shown on the maps
titled "National Flood Insurance Program, FIRM, Flood Insurance
Rate Map" number 250257 0001 through 0003 and 0005, Town of
Weymouth effective date September 30, 1980, and numbers 250257
0004 and 0006 through 0009, Town of Weymouth, revised June 5,
1989; and the Floodway Fringe as shown on the ''National Flood
Insurance Program, Floodway, Flood Boundary and Floodway Map'',
numbers 250257 0001, 0004, 0008, and 0009 and numbers 0002 1
0003, 0006, 0007, Town of Weymouth, revised June 5 1 1989, and
number 0005 revised August 19, 1991, shall be shown on all
preliminary and definitive plans.
4. 2. 22. A declaration shall be noted on the definitive plan
21
Rev. 6/13/94
B\{ I 0 6 2 4 PG 5 5 7
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
declaring whether the proposed streets within the definitive
plan will be submitted for public acceptance or will be
maintained as private ways. See Section 4. 3. 5 for required
supplemental material in support the declaration.
4.3. Required Supplemental Material
4.3.1. Drainage Calculations
Drainage calculations shall be submitted in a suitable form
along with amplifying plans outlining drainage areas within and
affecting the subdivision. A plan shall also be submitted
showing the flow· path followed by all drainage discharging from
the subdivision to the primary receiving water course or other
large body of water.
Drainage design shall be based on:
•The rational formula (Q =CIA). The runoff coefficient "C''
shall be determined from the proposed use of land within the
watersheds with a minimum value of o. 3 O to be used. The
rainfall intensity shall be determined from the time of
concentration and the Yarnell curves. A five (5) year
frequency storm shall be used for street drainage, a ten (10)
year frequency storm for cross culverts with drainage areas
of ten (10) acres or less and a twenty-five (25) year
frequency storm for cross culverts with drainage areas in
excess of ten (10) acres. The minimum time of concentration
for street drainage shall be ten (10) minutes and for cross
culverts shall be thirty (30) minutes, or;
• Computer generated drainage models shall be based on U.S.
Soil conservation Service Technical Release #55 (ref.erred to
as TR55), "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds", or;
• Any different methodology for calculating drainage shall be
agreed to by the Board prior to submission of the definitive
plan.
4.3.2. Soil survey and Percolation Tests
soil survey data for the area within the definitive plan shall
be shown by a copy of the appropriate section of the Weymouth,
Norfolk Soil Map. Test borings and/or test pits shall be taken
on the centerline of the proposed right of way and at intervals
of every fifty (50) feet in either direction in those cases
where the soil map indicated a shallow depth to bedrock, a ledge
outcropping or vegetated wetland is found within ten (10) feet
of the right of way.
22
Rev. 6/13/94
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
Percolation test results shall be included for each proposed lot
within the definitive plan that is not to be connected to the
sanitary sewer system.
4.3.3. Environmental Impact Statement (EIS)
An environmental impact statement which shall clearly and
methodically assess the relationship of the implementation of
the proposed development to the natural and man-made environment
of the Town. The statement shall utilize a systematic,
interdisciplinary approach which will insure the integrated use
of the natural and social sciences and the environmental design
arts in the planning and designing of the proposed project. The
elements 6f statement shall be prepared by professionals
registered in Massachusetts to practice in their fields where so
specified or by authorities recognized in their field having
reached a professional status or its recognized equal.
To insure the adequate preparation and
statement, it is strongly recommended that a
prepared and submitted together with the
preliminary plan of the proposed development.
judgement of the
draft statement be
submission of the
It is intended that the statement be a guide to the Board in its
judgement and deliberation on the proposed development and its
compatibility with existing conditions and planning efforts of
the Town. Failure of the plans or of the impact statement of
the proposed development to indicate such compatibility may be
grounds for re-examination and/or the resubmission thereof at
the determination of the Board.
An environmental impact statement shall be required by each of
the following:
~ All subdivisions containing twenty (20) more dwelling units
(d.u.).
• All nonresidential subdivisions.
Further, the EIS concerning each character of subdivision shall
contain at least the elements required as noted below, except as
modified or required by the Board.
Each EIS shall consist of four (4) separate sections, each
section to address one of the following concerns:
• the environmental impact of the proposed development;
• any adverse environmental impacts which cannot be avoided
should the proposed development be implemented;
23
Rev. 6/13/94
Hi( I 0 5 ;; h pr, r:: r:: a
RULES AND REGti'L~TIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
• alternatives to the proposed development which are expressly
allowed or allowed by permit by the Zoning Bylaw; and
• all measures available, and those
minimize adverse environmental
beneficial impacts).
measures
impacts
to be used to
{or maximize
4.3.3.a. A Physical Element to consist of the following
sub-elements:
i. Air Pollution - Changes in local air quality caused by the
proposed development shall be predicted. Sources shall be
identified, and consideration shall be given to changes in air
quality both during construction and after completion of the
project. Except in large residential development (one hundred
(100] dwelling units or more) or in high density multifamily
development (Floor Area Ratio .JO or greater, see Zoning Bylaw
for a complete def ini ti on) and in nonresidential subdivision,
air pollution impact may be identified and expressed in relative
terms. For these large and/ or high density residential
development and for nonresidential development, the Board may
require a detailed, technical report to be prepared. This
sub-element shall consider not only impacts caused by the
proposed development and its alternatives, but also impacts on
it by adjacent existing or proposed developments.
ii. Noise Pollution - The same requirements for air pollution
sub-element shall govern.
iii. Surface and Sub-surface Water Pollution Impact of
storm water runoff on adjacent and downstream surface water
bodies and sub-surface ground water and the water table shall be
detailed. Coordination with State and Town water quality
agencies including the Board of Health and conservation
Commission is recommended so that necessary agreements and
responsibilities can be included in the study of the proposed
development and its alternatives. The relationship of the
proposed development to navigable streams and floodplains and
municipal water supply impoundments and reservations shall be
shown.
The impact on any public and/or private well within a four
hundred (400) foot radius of the subdivided property shall also
be considered.
iv. Soils - The potential dangers of erosion and sedimentation
caused by both the construction, operation and maintenance of
the proposed development and its alternatives shall be detailed
and may also be related to sub-element 4.3.3.a.iii, above. It
shall also deal with the compatibility of existing soils with
the proposed development.
24
Rev. 6/13/94
:w ! () 0c ') 1. or c:: c 0 01\ . <- .. ;, I lJ 0 0 SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
v. General Ecology - The relation of the proposed development
to the major botanical, zoological, geological and hydrological
resources of the site shall be examined. Consideration of these
resources adjacent to the site shall also be made where deemed
appropriate by the Board. Consideration shall also be given to
rare or endangered species of plant and wildlife found on the
site.
4. 3. 3. b. A Transportation Element to consist of the following
sub-elements:
i. Traffic Generation - Traffic assessment shall be provided in
a format and methodology acceptable to the Massachusetts D.P.W.
and the Executive Office of Environmental Affairs, MEPA Unit.
Information shall compare pre and post development in the
following areas, at a minimum: average daily traffic, traffic
composition, peak hours, peak hour volumes, turning movements,
reserve capacity, and levels of service.
ii. Street Maintenance - Methods, responsibility, and projected
cost to the Town shall be detailed. Coordination with the
Department of Public Works is recommended.
11i. Mass Transit Consideration shall be given to the
relation of the proposed development to existing mass transit
(bus, rail or other modes) and how the proposed development may
be served.
4.3.3.c.
engineer
following
A Public Utility Element prepared
registered in Massachusetts, to
sub-elements:
by a professional
consist of the
i. Water Supply and Distribution - The average daily and peak
flow; current pressures on the existing mains, method to supply
the buildings on the site including sizes of mains, existing and
proposed; and the cost and the proposed responsibility for
bearing or sharing the cost shall be detailed. Coordination
with the Department of Public Works is recommended so that
necessary agreements and responsibilities can be included in the
study of the proposed development and its alternatives.
11. Sewage Treatment - The average daily and peak demand; and
any unusual composition or concentration of component flows into
the public system, the method to serve the buildings on the site
including size of pipe, existing and proposed, the cost and
proposed responsibility for bearing or sharing the cost shall be
detailed. coordination with the Department of Public Works,
Massachusetts Water Resource Authority (MWRA) , and, if deemed
advisable, the Board of Health, is recommended.
25
Rev. 6/13/94
8!( I 0 S 2 L, PG 5 6 I
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
iii. Storm Water Drainage - The same requirements for the
water supply and distribution sub-element shall govern.
iv. Solid Waste The average weekly contribution; expected
contents; recycling potential; on-site incineration, reduction
or compaction; and method of deliver to the Town facilities
shall be detailed. coordination with the Department of Public
Works is recommended.
4.3.3.d. A Neighborhood and Community Element to consist of the
following sub-elements:
i. Schools The expected impact on the school system
pre-primary, primary and secondary levels, by type of housing
(single-family, garden apartment, townhouse, high rise, etc.),
and by bedroom (one-bedroom, two-bedroom, etc.). The number of
students; school bus routing changes if found necessary; and
impact if any on parochial systems. Coordination with the
School Department is recommended, particularly for large
residential developments.
ii. Police - The expected impact on police service, time and
manpower needed to protect the proposed development; provision
for special alarm or warning devices or agents and other needs
shall be presented. Coordination with the Police Department is
recommended. '
111. Fire Expected. fire protection needs; on-site fire
fighting capabilities; location of all hydrants within a five
hundred ( 500) foot radius of the subdivided property; on-site
alarm or other warning devices; fire-flow water needs, source
and delivery system and other needs shall be presented.
Coordination with the Fire Department is recommended.
iv. Recreation On-site recreation provisions shall be
detailed and off-site recreation demands shall be estimated.
Provision for public open space, either dedicated to the Town of
available to its residents shall be described. Open space
available primarily or exclusively for residents or employees
shall also be described. Coordination with the Park Commission
is recommended. l.
v. Existing Neighborhood Land Use - Compatibility with adjacent
or nearby existing land uses, or with firm private development
plans, if known, for adjacent or nearby land use changes to
occur during the life of the proposed development. If not
compatible, reasons therefor shall be detailed. consultation
with the Board is strongly recommended.
4. 3. 3. e. A Socio-Economic Element to consist of the following
sub-elements:
26
Rev. 6/13/94
·-·.11 ' ' :·· ···.~:~J2
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
i. Population In residential developments, the
population; ranges in expected family size by housing
bedroom count; ranges in expected income and other
social data shall be estimated.
overall
type and
relevant
ii. Affordable Housing - In residential developments, detail
the development considerations taken to provide affordable
housing opportunities. In particular discussion should focus on
consideration of those Weymouth households who have not been
able to expand the income to match the rise in housing rents and
prices and move into the rising housing market; in particular:
• the elderly;
• low and moderate income residents who would be first-time
buyers;
• single parents;
• victims of discrimination; and
• households with handicapped and special needs members.
iii. Employment - In all nonresidential developments and in
large residential developments the number and types of job
skills to be employed shall be detailed. This shall include
both construction labor and full-time work force when the
development is in operation; employment by shift; estimates as
to the amount of local labor which is intended to be used; and
minority-group labor opportunities. Coordination with the
Industrial Development Commission is recommended for industrial
and commercial development.
4. 3. 3. f. An Aesthetics Element to consist of the following
sub-elements:
i. Architecture The type or style of architecture of the
buildings shall be described; its relation to prevailing types
of architecture for similar buildings; and its compatibility
with the function of the building and to the architecture of
adjacent buildings. Sketches, photos, elevations and renderings
are encouraged to illustrate architectural appropriateness as
well as innovation. Consultation with the Inspector of
Buildings is recommended.
ii. Lighting The type, design, location, function and
intensity of all exterior lighting facilities shall be
described. Attention given to safety, privacy, security, and
daytime and nighttime appearance shall be detailed.
Consultation with the Massachusetts Electric Company and the
27
Rev. 6/13/94
··~I/ ' -· •* ,.-.,
' :: :,J ,j
RULES AND REGULATIONS .G.OVERl~ING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Street Lighting Committee is recommended.
iii. Landscaping
described including
with the Department
recommended.
Provisions for landscaping shall be
type, location and function. consul tat ion
of Public Works and the Park Commission is
iv. Visual - Attention given to views into the site and from the
site shall be described. Included shall be long-distance views
as well as to and from adjacent properties. Visual impact may
be related to the preceding sub-elements concerning the overall
aesthetics of the proposed development.
4. 3. 3. g. A Master Plans Element to detail the compatibility of
the proposed development and its alternatives .. to established
plans of record of the Board, Conservation Commission,
Department of Public works, Redevelopment Authority, and other
Town and State agencies as applicable. If not compatible,
reasons therefor shall be detailed.
4. 3. 3. h. A Mun ic ipa 1 Benefit I Cost Element - A primary part of
this element shall be an analysis of the net benefit or cost to
the Tm-m in dollars, as complete as is practicable. This
municipal benefit/cost analysis should follow standard and usual
procedures and parameters for measuring both the benefits to be
derived and costs to be incurred by the Town of Weymouth as a
result of the implementation of the proposed development. It
will be helpful to provide one or more benefit/cost analyses for
alternative uses to provide for a basis for comparison. Except
in unusual cases, or when the construction of a proposed
development is scheduled to take place in distinct and separate
phases and each phase may be functional and operable without any
or all of the others, the municipal benefit/cost analysis may
assume full and complete development and occupancy. In phased
development or in other unusual cases, the Board may require
more than one analysis (an analysis for each phase) and/or more
than one environmental impact statement. This element may also
estimate net benefits or costs of non-quantifiable environmental
impacts.
4. 3. 3. i. The EIS shall be in sufficient detail to enable the
Board to determine whether unavoidable impacts have been fully
recognized; whether alternatives to the proposed development
have been fully explored; and whether all reasonable measures to
minimize adverse or unavoidable impacts (or maximize beneficial
impacts) have been taken.
4.3.4. List all other local, state and federal permits required
and give the status of each at the time of filing of a
definitive plan. Listing shall indicate whether a permit is
required and if it has been filed and/or decided.
28
Rev. 6/13/94
'"'1.1 . . . - :
·.) ) ::.
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
4.3.5. Public/Private Way
A declaration shall be noted on the definitive plan declaring
whether the proposed streets within the definitive plan will be
submitted for public acceptance or will be maintained as private
ways.
If the statement intends the proposed roadway for acceptance as
a public way, the applicant shall be responsible for preparation
and submittal of a complete Street Acceptance application in
accordance with the Code of the Town of Weymouth, Chapter 110,
Article IV, street Acceptances. In support of such intention
the applicant shall provide:
• Documentation retaining fee ownership of the roadway and all
other lands to be turned over to the Town.
• Draft deeds, where applicable.
• Legal description of any access/egress rights and exclusions.
If the statement intends the proposed roadway as private ways,
the applicant shall propose provisions for the long term
maintenance of the way. In support of such intention the
applicant shall provide:
• Detail the ownership of the roadways and all other common
space to be retained in private ownership.
• A long term maintenance plan
identifies the responsibility,
future repairs.
for the infrastructure that
liability and funding for all
• All covenants or deed restrictions for lots within the
subdivision.
4.4. Review by Board of Health as to Suitability of the Land
At the time of filing of the definitive plan, the applicant
shall also file with the Board of Health one copy of the
Definitive Subdivision with such infornation in the nature of
percolation tests and deep test holes as the Board of Health may
require. The Board of Health shall within forty-five (45) days
after filing of the plan, report to the Board in writing
approval or disapproval of said plan.
If the Board of Health disapproves said plan, it shall make
specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots shown on such
plan cannot be used for buildings sites without injury to the
29
Hev. 6/13/94
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF·LAND
public health, and include such specific findings and the
reasons therefor in such report, and where possible, shall make
recommendations for the adjustment thereof, provided however, if
a municipal sewerage system will service the proposed
subdivision, then failure of the Board of Health to make such a
report within forty-five (45) days after the plan is filed with
their office shall be deemed approval by such Board. The Board
of Health shall send a copy of such report, if any, to the
person who submitted said plan.
Every lot so located that it cannot be served by a connection to
the municipal sewer system shall be provided with septic tank
and drain-field satisfactory to the Board of Health and/or the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Sanitary Code minimum standards as
the Board of Health shall determine.
4.5. Subdivision Plan Review
The Board may, as a matter of routine, transmit copies of a
definitive plan to other Town Agencies for their review and
comment. A copy of the plan may be forwarded, asking for
written statements with regard to the proposed improvements in
the following respect:
BOARD OF HEALTH
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS -
WATER & SEWER DIVISION
HIGHWAY DIVISION
ENGINEERING DIVISION
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
FIRE DEPARTMENT
POLICE DEPARTMENT
STREE'l' LIGHTING
COMMITTEE
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
Rev. 6/ 13/ 94
As to suitability of the land.
As to potential involvement with
G.L. Ch. 131, Sec. 40.
As to the design of the street
system, location of easements,
·monuments, drainage system, water
system, and, the sewerage system.
As to compliance with Zoning
Bylaw.
As to street name and to location
and adequacy of hydrants, and the
fire alarm system.
As to street name and vehicular
and pedestrian safety.
As to placement and design of
street lighting equipment.
As to school busing and
districting.
30
TAX COLLECTOR
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
As to payment of all property
taxes on the above referenced
property.
In addition, the Board reserves the right to send a copy of a
definitive plan to any other Town Official or Agency which, in
the opinion of the Board, may have jurisdictional authority in
some aspect relating to the parcel or the use proposed thereon.
Plans shall be forwarded for referral to Town Officials within
ten (10) days of submittal of a definitive plan. Town Officials
shall respond within twenty-five days (25) of receipt. In each
referral the Board will assume that the respective officials
have no comment if no statement is received within the specified
time frame.
4.6. Public Hearing
Before taking any action to approve, modify and approve or
disapprove a definitive plan, the Board shall hold a hearing at
which parties in interest shall have an opportunity to be heard,
in person or by agent or attorney. Notice of the time and place
of such hearing and of the subject matter, sufficient for
identification, shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town of Weymouth once in each of two ( 2)
successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than
fourteen (14) days before the date of the hearing and by mailing
a copy of such advertisement to the applicant and to all owners
of land abutting the land shown on the plan and shown on the
most recent tax list. A facsimile of the notice format is shown
below.
TO\VN OF \VEY/\.10UTH
(SEAL)
PLANNING BOARD
N<'lic.: is h<'r.:hy gi\\~n Clf o puhli.: h.:<1ring of thl! P!:111ning B\):ird of 111<: TowJ\ of \\'.:ynw\1\h und.:r J\1GL
Ch. 41, S.:c. T. a~ anh·ntied 10 b<! hdd nt;
_(lim~)_ P/\1
DAY. _(dote)_, 19 __
TO\\'N HALL
75 MlDDLE STREET
\\'EYMOVTH. MASSACl-IUS£1TS
on Ill<! upp!i~~iion of __ (nrp!i..:onl)_ r~1r 1Jw proi)c11y lo;~a\~d on _(11ddrcss)_, nlso shown on lhc \V.oymouth
Town Ati:.is Sh<!<!l _.Block_, Lot_ for a ~(ff)_ In! suhdivi~ion a~ shown <in a rl<in ..intitkd "_(1itl.o)~~,
drawn by _(dci-;igncr)_, dated __ . 19_. P!:in is 1\n fik :it thl' Planning Offit:c, Town Hall, 75 Middk
Strc.;l, Y...'.!ymnuth. 1'1A, ;md may be inspcct<!d hc!wccn 8:30 A.1\1. and ~:30 P.1\1 .. \111ndny thniugll Friday.
31
Rev. 6/13/94
''ll!
' -~ .. ::: ·.~ '"]
. ~ ,; I
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
for Lhe \\'cynwuth Planning Board
_(nam.:)_, Clrnir
_(num.:)_. Vice-C!rnir
_(nnm~)_. Clerk
Placement of said legal notice and notice to parties of interest
shall be the responsibility of the Board. Cost for said notice
shall be the responsibility of the applicant, separate from the
required filing fee.
4.7. Board Procedure
The procedure that the Board will follow with regards to
approval, disapproval or modification of the definitive plan
submitted by the applicant will be that as set forth in Chapter
41, Section 81-U of the General Laws, as amended. In summary,
the Board, after receiving the Plan and profiles, will review
the same to determine whether they are in compliance with its
adopted Rules and Regulations.
The Board shall review the plan for compliance with all
reasonable rules and regulations of other town agencies, not
otherwise covered by these Rules and Regulations, provided any
such regulation was brought to the attention of the Board prior
to the required public hearing.
Before approval of the plan, the Board shall establish that the
lots in the definitive plan are in conformity with the Weymouth
Zoning Bylaws and failure of the lots to so comply with be
adequate grounds for disapproval of the definitive plan.
The Board may, as a condition of granting a building permit
under G.L. Ch. 41, sec. 81-Y, impose. reasonable requirements
designed to promote the health, convenience, safety and general
welfare of the community and to benefit the Town. In such
event, the Board shall endorse such conditions on the plan to
which they relate, or set forth a separate instrument attached
thereto, to which reference is made on such plan and which shall
for the purpose of the subdivision control law be deemed to be
part of the plan.
All comments received by other Town Agencies shall be reviewed
by the Board for reasonableness and consistency with the purpose
of the Subdivision Control Law and these rules and regulations,
and if said findings are made, then said comments may be
attached as conditions to the plan.
The Board shall make a determination on a definitive plan within
either:
32
Rev. 6/13/94
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
• Ninety (90) days where a preliminary plan for a
nonresidential or a residential subdivision has been
submitted and acted upon, or where forty-five (45) days have
elapsed since submission of a preliminary plan.
• One hundred thirty-five ( 13 5) days where a preliminary plan
for a residential subdivision has not been submitted or where
forty-five (45) days have not elapsed since submission of a
preliminary plan.
The Board may extend the period permitted by statute between
submission of a definitive plan and action thereon upon written
request of the applicant.
4.8. Performance Guarantee
Before endorsement of the Board's approval of a definitive plan,
the roadway construction and utility installation shall be
secured by one, or in part by one and in part by the other, of
the following methods which may from time to time be varied by
the applicant with the written consent of the Board.
In the case of Sec. 4.8.1, 4.8.2 and 4.8.4 the Board shall
specify the time within such road;1ay and utility installation
shall be completed.
4.8.l. By a proper bond, sufficient in the opinion of the Board
to secure performance of the construction of ways and the
installation of municipal services required for lots in the
subdivision shown on the plan.
4.8.2. By a deposit of money or negotiable securities,
sufficient in the opinion of the Board to secure performance of
the construction of ways and the installation of municipal
services required for lots in the subdivision shown on the plan.
4.8.3. By a covenant, executed and duly recorded by the owner
of record, running with the land, whereby such ways and services
shall be provided to serve any lot before such lot may be built
upon or conveyed, other than by mortgage deed; provided, that a
mortgagee who acquires title to the mortgaged premises by
foreclosure or otherwise and any succeeding owner of such
premises or part thereof may sell any such lot, subject to that
portion of the covenant which provides that no lot shall be
built upon until such ways and services have been provided to
serve such lot; and provided, further, that nothing herein shall
be deemed to prohibit a conveyance by a single deed, subject to
such covenant, of either the entire parcel of land shown on the
subdivision plan or of all lots not previously released by the
33
Rev. 6/13/94
'"'11 : ·'\ • "' . :- ., ·- ,- fl_
RULE:S A~D :REG~LA~16~'s GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Board. A deed of any part of the subdivision in violation
hereof shall be voidable by the grantee prior to the release of
the covenant but n6t later than three years from the date of
such deed.
4.8.4. By delivery to the Board of an agreement executed after
the recording of a first mortgage covering the premises shown on
the plan or a portion thereof given as security for advances to
be made to the applicant by the lender, which agreement shall be
executed by the applicant and the lender and shall provide for a
schedule of disbursements which may be made to the applicant
upon completion of various stages of the work, and shall further
provide that in the event the work is not completed within the
time set forth by the applicant, any funds remaining undisbursed
shall be available for completion.
Any covenant given under
required by the Board of
inscribed on the plan or
referred to on the plan.
section 4.8.3 and any
Health or officer shall
contained in a separate
condition
be either
document,
The penal sum of any such bond held under clause 4.8.1. or any
deposit held under clause 4.8.2. or any amount of funds retained
pursuant to an agreement under clause 4.8.4. shall bear a direct
and reasonable relationship to the expected cost including the
effects of inflation, necessary to complete the subject work.
such amount or amounts shall from time to time be reduced so
that the amount bonded, deposited or retained continues to
reflect the actual expected cost of work rem9ining to be
completed.
4. 8. 5. Planning Board on covenants and performance guarantees
shall be subject to the following conditions where applicable:
(i) Before the Planning Board will release any covenant,
accept, reduce or release and performance guarantee that will
allow building on any lot the applicant shall present evidence
that vital access and necessary utilities are available at the
frontage of said lot for the purpose of protecting the safety,
convenience and welfare of the residents/users of the lot and to
provide for sanitary conditions for all structures to be
constructed thereon. Vital access shall at a minimum consist of
a base course of bituminous asphalt. Necessary utilities shall
consist of water and sewer mains. All proposed fire hydrants
within five hundred feet (500') shall be installed and tested.
The storm drainage system shall be complete for all portions up
gradient of the specific lot.
(ii). In all cases, the Board reserves the right to withhold
from the reduction of any performance guarantee an amount
suitable for rebuilding the base course if there is any
34
Rev. 6/13/94
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
indication that the pavement in its entirety will not be
complete with two (2) years.
(iii). Any request for final action on the performance
guarantee shall be accompanied with evidence that all
requirements necessary for the roadways to become public ways or
retained as private ways have been established and applied for,
as necessary.
(iv). The Planning Board shal.1 retain one percent
total improvement cost of the roadway construction
installation in a suitable performance guarantee
completion until:
(1%) of the
and utility
upon final
the Town Meeting takes action on public acceptance of the roads,
if the roadway was intended as a public way on the definitive
plan, or;
a period of twel.ve (12) months have elapsed since the Board
determined that said construction and installation has been
completed in accordance with said rules and regulations, if the
roadway was intended as a private way on the definitive plan.
(v) . At the
released to
roadway and
frame.
end of the specific deadline, the retainer shall be
the applicant following verification that the
utilities have not deteriorated during said time
4.9. Certlllcate of Approval or Disapproval
The Board may extend the period permitted by statute between
submission of a definitive plan and action thereon upon written
request of the applicant.
The action of the Board in respect to such plan shall be by
vote, copies of which shall be certified and filed with the Town
Clerk and sent to the applicant, return receipt requested, by
delivery or registered mail. If the Board modifies or
disapproves such plan, it shall state in its vote the reasons
for its action and shall rescind such disapproval when the Plan
has been amended to conform to the Rules and Regulations of the
Board and to the recommendations of the Board of Health.
Final approval shall be subject to the construction
specifications contained herein and to the rules and regulations
of the Department of Public Works and the Board of Beal th.
After the definitive plan has been approved and endorsed, the
Board shall return the original to the applicant.
Approval of the definitive pl.an does not constitute the laying
35
Rev. 6/13/94
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
out or acceptance by the Town of street(s) shown on the plan.
4.10. Endorsement of Approval on an Approved Plan
Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original
drawing of the definitive plan by the signatures of a majority
of the Board but not until:
• the statutory twenty (20) day appeal period has elapsed
following the filing of the certificate of approval (or
disapproval as the case may be, see Forms C-1 and C-2), of
the Board with the Town Clerk and said Clerk has notified the
Board that no appeal has been filed;
and
• the applicant has revised the definitive plan to note all
conditions of approval on said plan.
After the definitive plan has been approved and endorsed, the
Board shall return the original to the applicant. It is the
applicant's responsibility to properly record an approved plan
with the Registry of Deeds.
The endorsement of plan approval by the Board shall be valid for
recording purposes a period of six (6) months from the date of
said endorsement.
In the case of plans not recorded within six (6) months from
endorsement of approval, the applicant shall, prior to the
expiration of one (1) year approval period, request in writing
to the Board or the Town Clerk for a certificate that the
approval has not been modified, amended or rescinded, nor the
plan changed. Such a certificate shall upon application be made
by the Board or the Town Clerk receiving the application unless
the records of the Board or Town Clerk receiving the application
show that there has been such a modification, amendment,
rescission or change.
4.11. Recording an Approved Plan
The applicant shall be responsible for the recording of the plan
and any required support documentation in Registry of Deeds or
Land Court, as applicable.
The following items comprise the plans and documents which, when
applicable, are required to be recorded as part of the approved
definitive plan:
36
Rev. 6 / 13 / 9 4
··~1 / -~ -~ .:: -: ') . ""' 1 :.:_ SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
D Definitive subdivision, all sheets, endorsed by a majority of
the Planning Board members.
D certificate of approval of a definitive plan, Form c-1.
0 A properly executed conveyance of easements and utilities,
Form K.
0 A properly executed covenant Form H.
0 Any covenants or deed restrictions for lots within the
subdivision.
0 Any required documentation in support of the declaration
of Public/Private Way, as required in Sec. 4.3.5.
DA Municipal Lien Certificate, indicating
assessments and charges have been paid.
all taxes,
In accordance with the provisions of MGL Ch. 60, Sec. 23 the
Planning Board requires the applicant to record with a
definitive plan a municipal lien certificate indicating all
taxes, assessments and charges have been paid with a definitive
plan. The Planning Board will not authorize any construction of
the roadway, installation of utilities or release any lots for
the issuance of Building Permits unless a municipal lien
certificate is recorded with the plan indicating all taxes,
assessments and charges have been paid.
Within ten (10) days of the recording of the approved Definitive
Plan with all the documentation listed above, the applicant
shall notify the Board in writing presenting a copy of the
evidence of the recording of all plans, and documents. A copy
of the approved and recorded Definitive Plan and a copy of a
Certificate of Title duly sear·ched and executed by an attorney
or title company shall be submitted stating that the title to
the premises shown on said plan and appurtenances thereto is in
the applicant's name and free of all encumbrances.
No roadway
construction
for;;arded to
construction, utility installation or
may proceed until such notification
the Planning Board.
building
has been
Upon receipt of such notification, the Board shall notify the
applicant and Department of Public Works of authorization to
proceed on roadway and utility installation. The Board shall
also notify the Inspector of Buildings that any and all lots are
released for building purposes when the performance guarantee is
in the form of a bond, deposit or a lender's agreement.
37
Rev. 6/13/94
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
4.12. Reduction of Performance Guarantee
The penal sum of any such bond, or the amount of any deposit
held under Section 4. 8, may, from time to time, be reduced by
the Board and the obligations of the parties thereto released by
said Board in whole or in part, provided such reductions are in
conformity with the schedule set by the Board. If release is by
reason of covenant, a new plan of the portion to be subject to
the covenant may be required by the Board.
Any request for a reduction of performance guarantee shall be
accompanied with a progress plan showing the as-built portions
of all utility installations within the· area affected by such
request.
4.13. Release of Performance Guarantee
Upon completion of improvements required under Section 4.8,
security for the performance of which was given by bond,
deposit, agreement or covenant, or upon the performance of any
covenant with respect to any lot, the developer or owner, shall
by delivery or send by registered mail to the Town Clerk and the
Board a written statement that the said construction or
installation in connection with which such bond, deposit or
covenant has been secured, has been completed in accordance with
the requirements contained under Section 4. 8, such statement
shall be accompanied with an as-built plan.
An as-built plan shall consist of a plan and profile of the
roadway and all utilities prepared by a registered professional
in a format as described in the Code of the Town of Weymouth,
Chapter 110, Article IV, Street Acceptances, Section 110-13.
Each request for release of performance guarantee shall include
a statement, with copies of all suppbrtive evidence, prepared by
the legal representative of the applicant that all stipulations,
conditions and documents for the maintenance of the proposed
public/private way are in place.
If the Board determines that said construction or installation
has not been completed, it shall specify to the Town Clerk and
to the developer, in writing, by registered mail, the details
wherein said construction and installation shall have failed to
comply with requirements contained under Section V. Upon
failure of the Board to act on such application within
forty-five (45) days after the receipt of the application by the
Town Clerk and the Board, all obligations under the bond shall
cease and terminate by operation of law, and any deposit shall
be returned and any such covenant shall become void.
38
Rev. 6/13/94
"'l / . :. ; \
.·~
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
In the event that said forty-five (45) day period expires
without such specification, or without the release and return of
the deposit or release of the covenant as aforesaid, the Town
Clerk shall issue a certificate to such effect, duly
acknowledged, which may be recorded.
If the Board determines that said construction or installation
has been completed, it shall notify the Town Treasurer within
forty-five (45) days on a properly executed Form J - Release
Form, that it releases the interest of the Town in such bond or
deposit and that it shall be returned to the person or persons
who furnished same, or, in the case of covenant it shall issue a
written release of the covenant on a properly executed Release
Form.
4.14. Acceptance by the Town
Section 4.13. Public Way Acceptance/Private Way Maintenance.
Based upon the satisfactory inspection and receipt of a proper
retainer, as required in Section 4.8 the applicant shall either:
submit a proper application for public way acceptance to the
Board of Selectmen in accordance with the provisions of the Code
of the Town of Weymouth, Chapter 110, Article IV, Street
Acceptances, Section 110-13. Application shall note that the
original acceptance plan has been filed with the Planning Board
by way of an as-built plan under the Subdivision Control Law.
or;
notify by registered mail, a copy to the Planning Board, the
designated legal body responsible for the ~ong term upkeep and
maintenance of the roadway that a retainer is in place with the
Planning Board in accordance with the Planning Board's rules and
regulations.
The retainer, less any amount necessary for repairs, shall be
returned to the applicant when either:
The roadway has been accepted by Town Meeting.
or;
Twelve months have lapsed from the time the roadway was granted
a satisfactory final inspection report.
39
Rev. 6/13/94
".~ 1/ 1 ..
__ ,,t, I { _' ~· "" ': ,·::~ :'5 7 5
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
4.15. Definitive Plan Checklist
Subdivision Name:
Locus of Plan: Sheet(s) , Block(s) , Lot(s)
Street Locus: ---- ----- -----
Applicant's Name:
Applicant's Address:
Applicant's Telephone Number:'
Engineer:
Surveyor:
Owner's Name:
owner's Address:
Date submitted (Filed - Town Clerk): [SJ , 19_
Preliminary Plan filed within 7 months: r0~Y-e-s-,-u~No
Approval deadline: (if Yes then) [S+90]
(if NO then) [S+135)
Plans and forms complete: 0 Yes, 0 No
------' 19
If no, then comment on incomplete or inadequate items:
Number of lots:
Type of subdivision: 0 single family
0 commercia 1
40
Rev. 6/13/94
0 Multifamily
0 Industrial
SECTION 4 DEFINITIVE PLAN
Type of Road Construction:
0 Minor Street
0 Secondary Street
0 Major Street
Plans referrals to following
Board of Health
Agencies
sent
6S+10
Conservation Commission
Department of Public Works
Building Department
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
Fire Department
Police Department
Street Lighting Committee
School Department
(S+lO)
days]
received
6S+35 days]
0
0
D
0
0
0
D
Public Hearing: [HJ , 19_
Newspaper notices: (1st) (~H~-~1~4~],----- & (2nd) (H-7]-o--=----' 19
Notice filed with Town Clerk: [H+l4] 19
Notice mailed to abutters: [H+l4] 19
Planning Board Decision: 0 Approved, 0 Denied
Date of action: ,19 ---
Performance Guarantee: 0 Surety
0 Covenant
0 Deposit
D Lender's Agreement
Decision filed with Town C1erk: (DJ -----· ,19 ---
Applicant notified of decision: [DJ _____ , 19 _
Statutory appeal period ends: (D+20) _____ ,19 _ _
Endorsement of approval on original: ______ ,19 __ _
Plans and forms recorded: ______ ,19 __ _
Performance guarantee adjustments:
First request:
Developer submits inspection request to Board:
DPW inspection report received by Board:
Planning Board Action:
Action taken:
Second request:
Developer submits inspection request to Board:
DPW inspection report received by Board:
Planning Board Action:
Action taken:
4 0. 1
------' 19_
' 19
------' 19
------' 19
, 19
---' 19
Rev. 6/13/94
As-built plan filed with Board:
As-built plan forwarded to DPW:
Final request:
19
19
Developer submits inspection request to Board:
DPW inspection report received by Board:
Final inspection report received:
Public Acceptance request filed:
Public Acceptance voted:
12 month private way
period starts:
12 month private way
period ends:
Retainer released:
Planning Board Action:
Action taken:
Rev. 6/13/94
40. 2
19
19
19
19
19
19
19
' 19
, 19
5.1. Streets
5. l. l. Location
-~ '") :, .-.-:~ ·~ ....,! f)
.,. ~· : '" ·._, ,J
SECTION 5
DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in the
opinion of the Board, they will provide safe vehicular and
pedestrian travel and an attractive street layout in order to
obtain the maximum safety and amenity for future residents of
the subdivision, and they shall be in accord with the Rules and
Regulations of the Board.
The proposed streets shall conform in location, so far as
practicable, to any existing plans of the Board, to the Master
Plan or parts thereof adopted by the Board and, where required
by the Board, to the existing street system.
Provision satisfactory to the Board shall be made for
projection of streets, or for access to adjoining
whether or not subdivided.
the proper
property,
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining
property shall not be permitted, except where, in the opinion of
the Board, such strips shall be in the public interest.
5.2. Alignment
5.2.1. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than one
hundred and fifty feet (150') shall be avoided.
5.2.2. The minimum center line radii of curved streets shall be
as follows:
Major Street
Secondary Street
Minor street
one thousand feet (l,OOO')
four hundred feet (400 1 )
one hundred feet (100 1 )
5.2.3. A tangent at least one hundred and fifty feet (150 1 ) in
length shall separate all reverse curves on major and secondary
streets except where at least one (1) radius is five hundred
feet (500 1 ) or more.
5.2.3. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles. Any street intersecting between
eighty degrees (80°) and sixty degrees (60°) shall require a
waiver of this section of these rules and regulations. No
street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty
degrees (60°),
41
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
5.2.4. Property lines at street intersection shall be rounded
or cut back to provide for a radius, as follows:
On a minor and secondary street intersecting another minor or
secondary street the radius shall be not less than thirty feet
(30 1 ). However, when the intersection of two (2) streets varies
more than ten (10) degrees from a right angle, the radius of the
curve at the obtuse angle may be less and of the acute angle may
be greater than thirty (30) feet to the extent approved or
required by the Board.
On any street intersecting a major street the radius shall be
not less than forty feet (40'), However, when the intersection
of two (2) streets varies more than ten (10) degrees from a
right angle, the radius of the curve at the obtuse angle may be
less and of the acute angle may be greater than forty (40) feet
to the extent approved or required by the Board.
5.2.5. streets shall be laid out so as to intersect at
intervals in a range of six hundred feet (600') to twelve
hundred feet (1200') in length, unless otherwise specified by
the Board. In special instances the Board may approve an
easement for a future street, in lieu of actual construction of
a cross street.
5.3. Width
5.3.l. The minimum width of right-of-way shall be as follows:
Major Streets: sixty feet (60 1 ), A greater width shall be
considered for major streets with an estimated average daily
traffic (ADT) volume greater then 15,ooo. Any greater width
shall be determined using acceptable methodology to calculate ·
highway capacity and levels of service.
Secondary streets: fifty feet (50 1 ).
Minor streets: forty feet (40').
5.3.2. When a minor street will provide the only access for
lots fronting on a length in excess of eight hundred feet (800')
or where, on a secondary or major street, potential volume
warrants, the Board may require a greater right-of-way than that
specified above and may require construction of a divided
roadway.
5.4. Grade
5.4.1. The center line grade for any street shall not be less
42
. "
·"· . .., . . : -~ c:. '3 0 . : ~ .' . ~· l . SECTION 5 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
than one-half of one percent (0.5%).
5.4.2. The maximum center line grade for streets s~all be as
follows:
Minor Street:
Secondary street:
Major Street
eight percent (8%)
five percent (5%)
three percent (3%)
5.4.3. Where changes in grade exceed one percent (1%), vertical
curves will be provided. on streets designed with two (2)
vertical tangents, the algebraic difference shall not exceed
eight (8) percent. All summits of vertical curves shall be
constructed in a manner which provides visibility as follows:
Minor Street:
Secondary Street:
Major Street
two hundred (200) feet
two hundred-fifty (250) feet
three hundred (300) feet
5.4.4. Where a minor street grade is five percent (5%) or
greater within one hundred and fifty feet (150') of the
intersection of street right-of-way lines, there shall be
provided a leveling area of at least seventy-five feet (75 1
),
with a maximum grade of three percent (3%), and for all other
streets, a leveling area of at least two hundred feet (200 1 ),
with a maximum grade of two percent (2%).
5.4.5. The grade of any street, except in special instances,
shall be so designed that the surface run-off of water shall be
from the building line to the street. Where one side of a street
drops off so that surface water runoff cannot drain into the
street, provision must be shown for drainage tiles and catch
basins, with any easements needed, to prevent overflow onto
neighboring lots or erosion of banks.
5.5. Dead-end Streets
5.5.1. For the purposes of this section, any proposed street
which intersects solely with a dead-end street shall be deemed
to be an extension of the dead-end street. Dead-end streets and
their extensions, if any, shall not be longer than eight hundred
feet (800') unless in the opinion of the Board, a greater length
is necessitated by topography or other local conditions.
5.5.2. Dead-end streets, in residential subdivisions,
provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a
outside roadway diameter of at least ninety feet (90'),
property line diameter of at least one hundred feet
unless otherwise specified by the Board.
43
shall be
minimum
and a
(100 1
),
-~ !f
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND'·
5.5.3. Dead-end streets, in all nonresidential subdivisions,
shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a
minimum outside roadway diameter of at least one hundred feet
(100'), and a property line diameter of at least one hundred
twenty feet (120'), unless otherwise specified by the Board.
5.5.4. Dead-end streets shall
landscaped island with minimum
the center of the turn-around,
intended to connect with another
time.
be provided with a circular
radius of thirty feet (30') at
if the dead-end street is not
street at some future point in
5.5.5. The Board may require a roadway layout from the end of
the dead-end street to adjacent property, not a part of the
subdivision. In such cases, .. the portions of the turn-around
wider than the normal right of way width shall be shown as a
roadway easement. If a dead-end street is subsequently extended
beyond the required turn-around, any easement on that portion of
the turn-around included in said extension, shall terminate
upon the approval and recording of a certificate by the Board
of the construction of said extension.
5.6. Curb Cuts
5.6.l. Driveways in subdivisions containing one (1) and/or two
(2) family dwellings only shall be at least ten feet (10') wide
and have a curb return at the roadway of two feet (2;) in
radius, and shall have an opening of at least sixteen feet (16')
at the gutter line.
5,6,2. Driveways for multiple dwellings and all nonresidential
uses shall be at least sixteen feet (16 1 ) wide and have a curb
return at the roadway of two feet (2 1 ) in radius, and shall have
an opening of at least twenty feet (20') at the gutter line.
5.6.3. Where "Cape Cod berms" or no curbs
flare should have a three foot (3') radius.
not be within sixty-five feet (65 1 ) of the
center line of intersecting streets.
exist, the driveway
Driveway cuts shall
intersection of the
5.6.4. If driveways
right-of-way to the edge
of not less than one
percent (8%), but the
right-of-way shall be
Sections in Appendix A.
5.7. Easements
slope from the edge of the street
of the pavement, there shall be a grade
percent (1%) but not more than eight
grade between the sidewalk and the
only as shown on the Standard cross
5. 7 .1. Where utilities cross lots or are centered on rear or
44
SECTION 5 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
side lot lines, easements shall be provided of a width of at
least twenty feet (20 1 ).
5.7.2. Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course,
drainage way, channel or stream, the Board may require a storm
water or drainage easement or drainage and proper side slope to
conform substantially to the lines of such water course,
drainage way, channel or stream and to provide for construction
or other necessary purposes.
5.7.3. Access easements to park and conservation land shall be
provided, if required by the Board, and shall be at least twenty
feet (20 1 ) wide.
5.7.4. A utility easement shall be granted at the end lot(s) of
all dead-end subdivisions for the future utility looping, the
location of this easement shall be determined by the Department
of Public Works.
5.7.5. The Board and the Department of Public Works shall be
provided with a complete copy of all temporary easements which
clearly explains the extent and duration.
5.8. Open Space
Before approval of a plan the Board may also, in proper cases,
require the plan to show a park or parks, suitably located for
playground or recreation purposes or for providing light and
air. The park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area in
relation to the land being subdivided and to the prospective
uses of such land and shall be at least equal to one (1) acre
of land for each twenty (20) single family dwelling units or
fraction thereof shown on the plan. It shall be equal to three
(3) times the floor area of all other dwelling units, and ten
(10) percent of the land area for all nonresidential
subdivisions. The Board may by appropriate endorsement on the
plan, require that no building be erected upon such park or
parks without its approval for a period of three (3) years. Each
area reserved for such purpose shall be of suitable area,
dimensions, topography and natural character for the purposes
of a park and/or playground. The area or areas shall be so
located as to serve adequately all parts of the subdivision as
approved by the Board. The Board may require that the area or
areas reserved shall be located and laid out so as to be used
in conjunction with similar areas of adjoining subdivisions or
of probable subdivisions. Any land so reserved shall be graded
to dispose properly of surface water and shall be left in
condition for the purpose intended, as required by the Board.
The owner of land acquired in this manner shall receive just
compensation, as provided in G.L. Ch. 41, Sec 81Q.
45
'"'!/
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND -~ ·~,
5.9. Protection of Natural Features
Due regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as
trees, wooded areas; water courses, scenic points, historic
spots, and similar community assets, which, if preserved, will
add attractiveness and value to the subdivision. Any clearance,
cutting, thinning or other disturbance to trees six inches {6")
or over in diameter measured four feet {4 1 ) above finished
ground level {dbh), located within ten feet (10 1 ) of an existing
or proposed street right-of-way line, or other natural
vegetation shall be prohibited unless deemed both proper by the
Board and not in conflict or contradiction to the intent of
these rules and regulations. Any such proposed clearance shall
be shown on the plan and written reasons therefor may be
requested by the Board.
5.10. Lot Drainage
Lots shall be prepared and graded in such a manner that
development of one shall not cause detrimental drainage on
another; if provision is necessary to carry drainage to or
across a lot, an easement or drainage right-of-way of minimum
width of twenty feet (20 1 ) and proper side slope shall be
provided. Storm drainage shall be designed in accord with the
specifications of the Board. Where required by the Board or
Board of Health, the Applicant shall furnish evidence as to any
lot or lots to either Board that adequate provision has been
made for the proper drainage of surface and underground waters
from such lot or lots.
5.11. Fire Hydrants
Hydrants
on one
approved
shall be provided every five hundred (500) running feet
side of each street unless a greater distance is
by the Chief of the Fire Department in writing.
In any case there shall be a minimum of one (1) hydrant in each
subdivision.
Hydrants shall right opening, Mueller Centurion or an approved
equal, with the barrel and top painted yellow and the caps
painted green. Any difference shall be of a style approved both
by the Fire Department and the Department of Public Works.
The hydrant isolation valve shall be right opening.
46
'> .... - ·'""" ..... ·: :-:_~ :.) ;j .:;
SECTION 5 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
5. 12. Sidewalks
No sidewalk is required on a minor street in a subdivision where
the land is zoned for single family usage and there are four (4)
or less lots fronting on said street.
A sidewalk is required on one side of a minor street in a
subdivision where the land is zoned for single family usage and
there are more than four (4) lots fronting on said street.
A sidewalk is required on both sides of a street in all other
cases.
Sidewalks shall be a minimum width as follows:
Minor streets:
Secondary & Major streets
5.13. Grass Plots, Trees
four feet (4')
six feet (6 1 )
5.13.1. A grass plot shall be provided on
roadway between the pavement and sidewalk
occupy all the remaining area not paved.
each side of
areas, and
each
shall
5.13.2. Street trees of a species approved by the Department of
Public Works shall be planted on each side of each street in a
subdivision, except where the definitive plan showed trees to
be retained which are healthy and adequate. such trees shall be
located outside of the right-of-way as shown in Standard Cross
Sections (see Appendix A) aproximately at forty foot (40')
intervals; and be not closer than five feet (5 1 ) nor more than
ten feet (10') from said right-of-way line.
See Standard Cross Sections in Appendix A.
5.14. Utllltl es
All utilities shall be placed underground at the time of initial
construction.
5.15. Fire Alarm System
One (1) fire alarm box may be required, if requested by the
Chief of the Fire Department, for each one thousand (1000)
linear feet or fraction thereof of street within the
subdivision. Exact location of boxes shall be specified by the
Chief of the Fire Department and indicated on the plan. The
circuit shall be installed so that it may be connected with a
circuit on a Town way adjoining the subdivision. See sec. 6.15.
47
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
5.16. Street Names
Street names shall be approved by the Board to provide names in
keeping with the character of the Town. Proposed street names
shall not duplicate nor bear phonetic resemblance to the name of
existing public ways or any other way qualified to afford
frontage under G.L. Ch. 41 1 Sec. 81-L.
5.17. Blkeways, Walkways
5.17.1. Public bikeways or pedestrian walkways may be required
by the Board to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, parks, shopping, transportation, open spaces and/or
community facilities or other such reason as the Board may
determine. These may or may not be part of normal sidewalk
prov1s1on 1 but they shall not be a part of any lot in the
subdivision.
5.17.2. Design Standards
0 Minimum right-of-way width: fifteen feet (15')
0 Minimum pavement width: ten feet (10')
0 Maximum gradient:
one-hundred feet
elsewhere.
five percent (5%) for segments less
(100') in length. Three percent
0 Minimum center line radius: twenty-five feet (25')
5.18. 100 Year Flood Plain Criteria
then
( 3 % )
Subdivisions abutting or containing special Flood Hazard Areas
designated as Zone A, A2 1 A3 1 A4, AB, V4, V5 as shown on the
maps titled "National Flood Insurance Program, FIRM, Flood
Insurance Rate Map" number 250257 0001 through 0003 and 0005,
Town of Weymouth effective date September 30, 1980, and numbers
250257 0004 and 0006 through 0009 Town of Weymouth, revised June
5, 1989; and the Floodway Fringe as shown on the "National Flood
Insurance Program, Floodway, Flood Boundary and Floodway Map",
numbers 250257 0001, 0004, 0008, and 0009 and numbers 0002,
0003, 0005, 0006 0007 Town of Weymouth revised June 5, 1989
shall incorporate the following design criteria:
5.18.l. Mitigative measures shall be demonstrated and explained
to minimize flood damage and the dangers thereof.
5.18.2. Public utilities and facilities shall be designed to
48
SECTION 5 DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
minimize flood damage and prevent infiltration of flood waters
into the system.
5.18.3. New and replacement water systems shall be designed to
minimize the infiltration of flood waters.
5.18.4. Sanitary sewers and septic systems shall be designed to
prevent infiltration of its contents into flood waters.
5.18.5. All drainage within the proposal shall be designed to
adequately drain all flood waters and not to increase dangers of
flood damage.
49
!~ I
.;. /\ '- / ' .' • i /
t . . "·; ' . .' /
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
50
6.1. General
SECTION 6
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
6.1.1. It is the intent that no street or way through private
property shall be accepted by the Town unless the same be
previously constructed and completed in accordance with the
Standard cross Sections, Street Layout Plan, Profile, the Rules
and Regulations of the Town of Weymoutn, Department of Public
Works, and the following specifications.
6.1.2. To insure high quality and uniformity of construction
and unless otherwise specified, all the work and the materials
used in the work to be done shall conform to the requirements of
the "Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Public Works,
Standard specifications for Highways and Bridges", (MDPWSS) most
recent edition, and the Special Provisions included hereinafter,
hereinafter referred to as the Standard Specification.
Appropriate illustrations are found in "Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, Department of Public Works, Construction
Standards", (MDPWCS) most recent edition,
6.1.3. Supplementing the aforesaid Standard Specifications,
certain specifications or special provisions shall apply
particularly to the work to be done hereunder. References in the
following specifications, unless otherwise stated, are to the
aforesaid Standard Specifications, amendments or addenda. These
specifications and special provisions shall take precedence and
shall govern when they are stricter.
6. 1. 4. To
in these
particular
facilitate reference
specifications is
section as contained
where appropriate, each section
noted in parenthesis with the
in the Stand.ard Specifications.
6.1.5. Wherever in the documents referred to
above, the following terms, or pronouns in
used, the intent and meaning shall be
substitution as follows:
"Commonwealth" - Town of Weymouth
in Section 6.1.2.
place of them are
interpreted by
"Department" - Department of Public Works, Town of Weymouth
"Engineer" The Director of Public works of the Town of Weymouth
acting directly or through an authorized representative; such
representative acting within the scope of the particular duties
entrusted to him.
6.1.6. The extent of work required shall be completed in accord
with these rules and regulations and as conditioned in the
51
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND :j)(
1
l) '~ ,~ ,, ::s J 8 8
approved plans.
6.1.7. Offset stakes shall be set under the direction of a
Registered Land Surveyor at fifty {50) foot intervals and at
each sewerage and drainage structure and at each hydrant, to
indicate the location and the exact amount of cut, fill or
grade.
6.1.8. Prior to starting work on any construction operation the
Board and the Department of Public Works shall be notified.
Upon completion on any construction operation, it shall be
approved by the proper Town authority and/or utility company
prior to starting work on the succeeding operation (see Section
7 • 4) •
6.1.9. The developer shall have the approved plans and profiles
that are on file in the Board office corrected and certified by
his Engineer to show the actual as-built locations and profiles
of all streets, ways and utilities and any changes authorized by
the Board (see Section 4.12).
6.2. Grading (Reference: MDPWSS, Division II, Section 1.00.)
The roadway shall be graded and prepared for pavement as
follows:
6.2.1. Improvements to minimize adverse environmental impact
shall be installed in accordance with all details as shown on
the approved definitive plan. In the absence of details on said
plans, environmental controls shall follow procedures as
contained in "Erosion and Sedimentation Control Guidelines", by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Environmental
Protection, or procedures acceptable to the Weymouth
Conservation Commission.
6.2.2. Clearing and grubbing of the entire area of such street
or way shall be performed to remove all stumps, brush, roots and
like material which may exist upon the surface. care shall be
taken to protect all trees within ten (10) feet of the
right-of-way as identified in Section 4.2.17.
6.2.3. Roadway earth excavation shall remove all materials
encountered down to the true surface of the subgrade, or to
suitable material in areas where unsuitable material exists, in
preparation for foundation of roadway, sidewalks, driveways and
berms. Approved materials obtained from the excavation may be
used in fills as required if, in the opinion of the Director of
Public Works they are suitable.
6.2.4. When in the
suitable material is
opinion of the Director of PUblic Works
not available within the limits of the
52
SECTION 6 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
roadway location to form the subgrade or sub-base, the developer
shall obtain such additional material from other sources in
accordance with this section and as may be approved by the
Director of Public works.
6.2.5. In all streets in residential subdivisions all soft or
spongy material below the subgrade surface shall be removed to
a depth determined by the Director of Public Works and the
space thus made shall be filled with special gravel borrow,
containing no stones over six (6) inches in their largest
diameter.
6.2.6, In all nonresidential subdivisions and in all major
streets all soft or spongy material below the subgrade surface
shall be removed to a depth determined by the Director of
Public Works and the space thus made shall be filled with two
(2) courses the first of which be special gravel borrow, eight
(8) inches thick, containing no stones over six (6) inches in
their largest diameter. The second course shall be crushed
stone four (4) inches thick.
6.2.7. Gravel sub-base or foundation containing no stones
having any dimensions greater than six (6) inches shall be
spread on the surf ace of the sub-grade to the minimum prescribed
depth in conformity with requirements of MDPDSS, Section
Ml.02.0, Type a.), for furnishing gravel borrow.
6.2.8. Final grading, rolling and finishing including the
shaping, trimming, rolling and finishing of the surface of the
sub-base prior to application of gravel for surfacing of the
roadway and base courses for walks or loam for berms shall be in
accordance with this section and as directed by the Director of
Public Works.
6.2.9. Embankments within or adjoining the right-of-way shall
be evenly graded and pitched at a slope of not greater than two
(2) horizontal to one (1) vertical in fill. Where cuts are made
in ledge, other slopes may be determined with the approval of
both the Board and the Director of Public Works. Where terrain
necessitates greater slopes, retaining walls, terracing,
fencing, or rip-rap may be used either alone or in combination
to provide safety and freedom from maintenance, but must be done
in accordance with plans filed with and approved by the Board.
Whenever embankments are built in such a way as to require
approval by the Board, the developer must furnish to the Town
duly recorded access easements free of encumbrances for
maintenance of the slopes, terraces or retaining walls. All such
slopes shall be grassed in accordance with the Specifications
for the area between the roadway and sidewalk or roadway and
boundary of the right-of-way.
6.2.10. At the conclusion of this step the roadway shall be
53
~11
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND :;·,
staked in
installed
Markers.
all locations where permanent monuments are to
as provided in section 6.13. Road Bounds and
6.3. Pavement (Reference: MDPWSS, Division II, Section 4.00.)
; ' ; : "•; '-) .• ~ :-_,A \., i - l., 3 0
'~ ',,; ,._ ": : '• ......
be
Lot
6.3.1. Roadways shall be constructed for the full length of all
streets within the subdivision and shall have the same curb
radius required in section 5.2. The center line of all roadways
shall coincide with the center line of the street right-of-way
unless a deviation is approved by the Director of Public Works.
The minimum and maximum widths of roadway pavement shall be as
follows:
Minor Streets - Twenty-eight feet (28 1 ) Minimum.
Secondary Streets - Thirty-three feet (33 1 ) Minimum.
Major Streets - Pavement width shall be determined by the Board
based on the results of a traffic analysis and the requirements
necessary to provide for an acceptable level of service.
6.3.2. The wearing surfaces of minor streets shall be of Class
I Bituminous Concrete Pavement, Type I-1. This type of pavement
shall be composed of mineral aggregate, mineral filler and
bituminous material, plant mixed and laid hot. The pavement
shall be constructed in two (2) courses. The base course shall
be three (3") thick, and the riding surface course shall be one
and one half inches (l.5011 } thick. A final pavement depth after
rolling shall be four and one half inches (4.5 11 ) thick upon the
prepared surface and in conformity with lines, grades and
typical cross-section shown on plans. Material and construction
methods shall conform to all other requirements of the MDPWSS,
except that no such construction shall be undertaken before
March 30th of any year nor after November 1st of any year
without written permission of the Director of Public Works.
6.3.3. The wearing surfaces of secondary streets shall be of
Class I Bituminous Concrete Pavement, Type I-1. This type of
pavement shall be composed of mineral aggregate, mineral filler
and bituminous material, plant mixed and laid hot. The pavement
shall be constructed in three (3) courses. The base course
shall be three (3 11 } thick, a binder course shall be one and one
quarter inches (1.25") thick and the riding surface course shall
be one and one quarter inches ( l. 25 11 ) thick. A final pavement
depth after rolling shall be five and one half inches (5.5 11 )
thick upon the prepared surface and in conformity with lines,
grades and typical cross-section shown on plans. Material and
construction methods shall conform to all other requirements of
the MDPWSS, except that no such construction shall be
undertaken before March 30th of any year nor after November lst
54
:1_ !( .'l
SECTION 6 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
of any year without written permission of the Director of Public
Works.
6.3.4. The wearing surfaces of major streets shall be of Class
I Bituminous Concrete· Pavement, Type I-1. This type of pavement
shall be composed of mineral aggregate, mineral filler and
bituminous material, plant mixed and laid hot. The pavement
shall be constructed in three (3) courses. The base course
shall be three and one half inches (3.511 ) thick, a binder course
shall be one and one quarter inches (1.2511 ) thick and the riding
surface course shall be one and one quarter inches (1.25")
thick. A final pavement depth after rolling shall be six inches
(6 11 ) thick upon the prepared surface and in conformity with
lines, grades and typical cross-section shown on plans. Material
and construction methods shall conform to all other requirements
of the MDPWSS, except that no such construction shall be
undertaken before March 30th of any year nor after November lst
of any year without written permission of the Director of Public
Works.
6.4. General for all utllltles (Reference: MDPWSS, Division II, Sections 1.00 & 2.00.)
6.4.1. Installation
shall conform to
Department of Public
and materials
the standards
Works.
unless otherwise
of the Town of
specified
Weymouth
6.4.2. Excavation for structures, including foundations for
drains, sewers and water pipes, walls and other structures shall
be made to the depth as indicated on the Definitive Plan or
established by the Director of Public Works as appropriate.
Rock excavation designated as Class B encountered in trench
excavation shall be removed as directed by the said Director.
6. 4. 3. All drain, sewer, gas and water pipes, unde.rground
utilities, and other structures shall be installed to the
right-of-way line upon the completion of roadway sub-base, this
is to insure that a minimum three foot (3') cover is over all
utility lines.
6.5. Sewerage
6.5.1. All subdivisions shall be connected to the public
sewerage system in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the Department of Public Works, Sewer Division.
6,5.2. Public sewers shall be designed according to
professional engineering practices and in accordance.with the
requirements of the standards of the Public Works Department.
6.5.3. Public sewers shall be not less than eight inches (8") in
55
'"IJ/ RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND:)1'.
diameter; house services not less than six inches (6").
6.5.4. Manholes shall be located at every change in grade or
horizontal alignment but not more than three hundred (300) feet
apart.
6.5.5. Sewer ejector pumps may be permitted at the discretion
of the Director of Public Works.
6.6. Water
6.6.1. Public water mains shall be class one hundred and fifty
(150) cement-lines, cast iron pipe or approved to be equal by
the Board of Public Works and shall not be less than eight
inches (8") in diameter. Hydrants shall be located as specified
in Section 5. ll.
6.6.2. Each hydrant shall be served directly from the water
main through a six inch (6") lateral connection. The connection
shall include a six inch (6") isolation valve. rt shall be gated
with a six inch (6 11
) bottom valve and shall have two (2), two
and one-half inch (2 1/2") hose outlets and one (1) five inch
(5") pump outlet.
Water main gate valves shall be located in such number and
locations that lines by individual block may be isolated for
maintenance purposes.
6.6.3. Every subdivision shall be connected to the
water system by the developer.
6.7. Storm Drain System (Reference: MDPWSS, Division II, Section 2.00.)
public
6.7.1. Adequate disposal of surface and sub-surface water shall
be provided and pipes, manholes and catch basins shall be
provided according to the sizes and depths as indicated on the
plans and in conformity with the MDPWSS, and shall be built on
both sides of the roadway at intervals not to exceed three
hundred feet (300 1), unless otherwise approved by the Director
of Public works and at such other places as deemed necessary by
the said Director to assure adequate drainage of all low points
and to provide proper runoff of storm water. In no instances
shall catch basins be located along a driveway cut.
6.7.2. The standard depth of catch basins shall be two (2) feet
six (6) inches below the invert of lowest drain. Manholes shall
be constructed to the required depth at each junction point and
as shown on the plan. Pipe culvert and pipe drains shall be in
conformity with the requirements of MDPWSS for installation of
pipes.
56
S!( SECTION 6 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
6.7.3. Cement concrete pipe and reinforced concrete pipe (used
on all cross drains under pavements) shall be installed
according to the size as shown on the plans. No backfilling of
pipes shall be done until the installation has been inspected by
the Director of Public Works. All drainage trenches shall be
filled with clean gravel borrow in accordance with MDPWSS,
section 7.0o.
6.7.4. Where sub-drains are required they shall be constructed
in conformance with MDPWSS.
6.7.5. Where adjacent property is not subdivided or where all
the property of the applicant is not being subdivided at the
same time, provision shall be made for the extension of the
utility system by continuing the mains the full length of
streets and to the exterior limits of the subdivision, at such
grade and size which will, in the opinion of the Board, permit
their proper extension at a later date.
6.8. Non-munlclpal Utilities (Reference: MDPWSS, Division II, Section 3.00.)
6.8.1. Gas mains
Shall be installed if gas connection is available. The Boston
Gas Company shall be notified by the developer upon approval of
the Definitive Plan so that installation of gas mains may be
completed without undue delay.
6.8.2. Telephone lines
Shall be installed underground in accord with the regulations of
the New England Telephone Company in conformity with MDPWSS.
6.8.3. Electric lines
Shall be installed underground in accord with the regulations of
the Massachusetts Electric Company. The Board may permit
transformers, switches and other such equipment to be placed on
the ground in approved locations, screened from view with
evergreen shrubbery.
6.8.4. Other utilities
Other utilities such as cablevision, if installed, shall be
installed underground in accord with accepted engineering
practice.
6.9. Sidewalks (Reference: MDPWSS, Division II, Section 7.00.)
6.9.1. Sidewalks shall be constructed within the subdivision,
57
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
separated from the pavement area by a seeded grass plot, minimum
of two (2 1 ) wide.
6. 9. 2. The sidewalk sh.all extend the full length of the
as follows:
• None Minor residential streets with four (4) or
less dwellings.
• 1 side Minor residential streets
• 2 sides - All minor nonresidential, secondary and
major streets.
street
6.9.3. sidewalks shall be a minimum width of four feet (4 1 ) on
minor streets and six (6') feet on secondary and major streets.
6. 9. 4.
of two
eight
grades
Bituminous concrete sidewalks having a minimum thickness
inches (2 11 ) after compression, shall be constructed on an
inch (8 11 ) gravel foundation to the required lines and
accordance with these specifications.
6.9.5. If cement concrete sidewalks are desired, they shall be
constructed as directed by the Director of Public Works in
conformity with the MDPWSS,
6.9.6 Handicapped access for all sidewalks shall be in accord
with the "Rules and Regulations" of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Architectural Barriers Board and the MDPWCS. This
shall be coordinated with section 6.10 curbs, below.
6.10. Curbs
6.10.1. A bituminous concrete berm - Type "A", as defined in
MDPWCS, commonly referred to as a "Cape Cod berm", shall be
provided along each side of all minor streets except as noted in
Section 6.10.3. below.
6.10.2. Cement concrete curbs of six (6) inches in height shall
be provided along each side of all secondary and major streets
except as noted in Section 6.10.3. below.
6.10.3. Granite curbs of six (6) inches in height and of type
VA4, as defined in MDPWSS, Section M9, shall be provided on all
roadways where any of the following conditions are present:
• At intersections along the roadway the distance of the arcs
of the curves plus a straight section at each end of eight
feet (8 1 ).
• On the side of all curves with a radius less than two
58
. '
SECTION 6 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
hundred and fifty feet (250'), except the turnaround outer
radius on a dead end street and around landscaped islands.
6.10.4 All cement concrete and granite curbs end with
transition pieces to blend into the adjoining roadway edge.
6.10.5 Handicapped access for all curbs shall be in accord
with the "Rules and Regulations" of the commonwealth of
Massachusetts Architectural Barriers Board and MDPWCS. This
shall be coordinated with Section 6.9 Sidewalks, above.
6.11. Street Lighting
6.11.1. Street and
conform to the type,
the Town of Weymouth
Selectmen.
pedestrian lighting shall be installed to
style and specifications in general use in
unless otherwise specified by the Board of
6.11,2. Within all subdivisions, street and pedestrian light
stanchions shall be located at the entrance to and at all
intersections within subdivisions and shall be installed in
accord with the procedure required by the Massachusetts Electric
Company.
In addition, the following criteria shall also apply:
• All multifamily and nonresidential subdivision shall provide
additional street and pedestrian light stanchions spaced in
accord with standards routinely used by the Street Lighting
committee and Massachusetts Electric Company.
• All single family subdivision shall have a pole lantern as
contained in Section 6.11.4, however in cases where the
layout of the lots within a single family subdivision will
result in unlighted distances greater than two hundred (200)
feet, the Board reserves the right to require additional
lighting.
6.11.3 Street light stanchions and street lights shall be
located in the rear grass plot or in the median, if there is
one, but shall not be nearer than twenty five feet (25 1 ) from
the intersection of two (2) streets, measured from the
intersection of the tangents of the intersecting street curb
lines. If street lights are located in the median, the Board may
require pedestrian lighting placed in the grass plot.
6.11.4. Each lot in a single family residential subdivision
shall have a pole lantern installed in the front yard equipped
with a photo-sensitive device which automatically activates the
lantern at the times the street lights are activated.
59
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
6.12. Landscaping
6.12.1. Material specifications for a grass plot shall follow
MDPWSS.
6.12.2.
profiles
The slope of the grass plot shall be as shown on
and standard Cross Sections (see Appendix A),
the
6.12.3. Each tree shall be at least twelve feet (12') in
height; two inches (2") in caliper measured four feet (4') above
the approved grade (dbh); shall be planted each in at least
one~half (1/2) cubic yard of topsoil, supported by tree supports
as shown in the Standard cross Sections (see Appendix A).
6.12.4. All deciduous street trees shall be clear of any
branches from the approved grade level to a point seven feet
(7') above ground level.
6.12.5. The developer will be liable for
elements so planted as to their erectness and
twelve (12) months after planting.
all landscaping
good health for
6.12.6.
shrub or
(6") or
erosion.
All cut bankings shall be planted with a low growing
vine and wood chipped to a minimum depth of six inches
seeded with a deep rooted perennial grass to prevent
6.13. Road Bounds and L.ot Markers
6.13.1. Road bounds shall be installed on street lines at all
points of curvature, and at all points of change in direction.
6.13.2. Lot markers shall be installed at each point where the
lot line intersects the street right-of-way, and at all other
points where, in the opinion of the Board, permanent lot markers
are deemed necessary.
6.13.3. Road bounds shall be a standard permanent granite or
reinforced concrete marker of not less than four (4') in length
and not less than six inches (6") in width and breadth and shall
have a three-eighth (3/8") inch drill hole or lead plug with pin
in the center of the top surface. Said road bounds shall be
installed at the time of final grading with the top flush with
the top final graded surface.
6.13.4 Lot markers shall be of a permanent nature and a
recognized style generally available to land surveyors, that do
not have to conform to Land court specifications and provided
further that said markers are easily distinguished from road
60
RI( I 0 G 2 L1 PG 5 9 7 SECTION 6 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
bounds.
6.13.5, The placement and accurate location of all road bounds
and lot markers shall be certified by a Registered Land surveyor
and properly located on the Acceptance Plans.
6.14. Street and Traffic Signs
6.14.1. Street name signs shall be installed from the time of
rough grading at the intersection of such street with any other
street.
6.14.2. Street name signs
intersection to conform to
Department of Public Works.
shall be installed
standards established
at
by
each
the
6.14.3. Traffic control signs shall be designed and installed
in conformance with the u.s. Department of Transportation,
Federal Highway Administration, Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
6.15. Fire Alarm System
The fire alarm system shall be installed in accord with the
specifications of the Weymouth Fire Department. See Section
5. 15.
6.16. Blkeways, Walkways (Reference: MOPWSS, Division II, Section 7. oo.)
6. 16. l. Except
are required,
MDPWSS.
as specified herein, where bikeways and walkways
they shall be constructed in conformance with
6.16.2. Specifications of 6.9.3-4.
bikeways and walkways.
(Sidewalks) shall apply to
6.16.3. For the length of each bikeway and walkway there shall
be a crown equivalent to one-half an inch (l/2 11 ) per foot of
width to provide for proper drainage. Leveling areas at
intersections with sidewalks shall be shown in details.
6.17. Maintenance of Improvements
For the purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and
welfare of the Town's inhabitants, for the provision of adequate
access to all of the lots in a subdivision by ways that will be
safe and convenient for travel; for reducing the danger to life
and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing safety
61
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
I' c; ,~:; '/f
81( I 0 6 2 L),
in the case of fire, flood, panic and other emergencies1 under
the authority of G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. SlM as amended, the applicant
or his successor shall provide for the proper maintenance and
repair of improvements under this Subsection of the Rules and
Regulations during the construction and for the period of twelve
(12) months after the completion of the construction of said
improvements or until the Town votes to accept such improvements
whichever comes first.
62
7.1. Waivers
SECTION 7
ADMINISTRATION
strict compliance with the requirements of these Rules .and
Regulations may be waived when, in the judgement of the Board
such action is in the public interest and not inconsistent with
the Subdivision Control Law.
Any request for
regulations may
definitive plan,
4.
a waiver for any section of these rules and
be submitted independently or as a part of a
in accordance with the requirements of Section
Before the Board grants any waiver for any section of these
rules and regulations the Board must first make a statement of
finding, which clearly gives forth all reasons why such a waiver
is deemed proper and that it will not be detrimental to the
purposes of these rules and regulations.
7.2. Reference
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations,
reference is made to G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. Bl-K to SlGG, inclusive.
7.3. Building Permit
7.3.1. No building shall be erected within a subdivision without
written permission from the Board.
7.3.2. The Inspector of Buildings shall not issue any permit for
the erection of a building until he is first satisfied· that the
lot on which the building is to be erected is not within a
subdivision or that a way furnishing the access to such lot as
required by the subdivision control law is shown on a plan
recorded or entitled to be recorded under G.L. Ch. 41, Sec.
81-X, as amended and that any condition endorsed thereon
limiting the right to erect or maintain buildings on such lot
have been satisfied or waived by the Board, and in the event
that more than one (1) building for dwelling purposes be erected
or placed or converted to use as such on any lot, that the
Inspector of Buildings is satisfied that consent has been
obtained from the Board in accord with these Rules and
Regulations, G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. Bl-Y, and amendments thereto.
7.4. Inspections
7.4.l. Inspection(s) shall be arranged by the developer with the
63
f 1 BK I 0 6 2 lf PG 6 0 0
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND
Director of Public Works for that purpose prior to the
construction of streets and the installation of utilities and
during construction as specified herein at each significant
construction stage.
7.4.2. Inspection(s) shall be requested in writing at least five
(5) working days in advance of each inspection to the Director
of Public Works.
7.4.3. The Board may establish the order of the required
inspection and may require satisfactory completion of one (1)
step before the subdivider proceeds to the next. It may require
tests to be done by the subdivider as a condition for approval
when in the opinion of the Board it is advisable.
7.4.4. The Department of Public Works shall forward to the Board
the date of inspection and the date of inspection report, if
any, subsequent to each inspection.
7.4.5. Failure to comply with the inspection procedure may
necessitate removal of improvements at the expense of the
applicant or rescission of the approval of the plan in accord
with G.L. Ch. 41, Sec. 81-W.
7.5. Validity
If, in any respect, any provision of these Rules and Regulations
in whole or in part, shall prove to be invalid for any reason,
such invalidity shall only affect the part of such provision
which shall be invalid and in all other respects these Rules and
Regulations shall stand as if such invalid provision had not
been made, and they shall fail to the extent, and only to· the
extent, of such invalid provision, and no other provision of
these Rules and Regulations shall be invalidated, impaired or
affected thereby.
64
8!( I 0 6 2 l+ PG 6'0 I
A
abutters ... 8, 12, 17, 18, 1
access ... 1, 2, 4, 6, 9, 41,
42, 45, 48, 53, 61, 63
alignment .......•.... 41, 56
ANR Plans ................. 7
applicant ........ 2, 11, 12,
15, 29, 33, 35, 40, 46, 62
approval ..... 2, 3, 5, 7, 8,
11, 15, 17, 29, 30, 32, 33,
35, 36, 40, 1, 44, 45, 53,
57, 64
as-built .......... 38, 2, 52
B
base course ...... 53, 54, 55
bench mark ............ 2, 20
bikeways ..... 20, 21, 48, 61
binder course ........ 54, 55
bituminous concrete ..... 54,
55 I 58
bituminous concrete berm
Type "A" ................. 58
Board of Heal th .... 2, 11,
14, 15, 16, 24, 25, 29, 30,
34, 35, 1, 46
Board of Public Works .... 56
Board of Zoning Appeals .. 8,
13 / 19
bond ......... 33, 34, 38, 39
building construction .... 37
Building Department ..... 14,
15, 16, 30, 1
building permit ...... 32 1 63
c
cablevision .............. 57
Cape Cod berm ........ 44, 58
cast iron pipe ........... 56
catch basins ............. 56
cement concrete .......... 59
cement concrete curbs .... 58
cement concrete pipe ..... 57
cement concrete sidewalks.SS
center line .............. 41
certificate of approval .. 37
Certificate of Title ..... 37
certified by .............. 2
clearing ................. 52
Code of the Town of
Weymouth, Chapter 110 .... 29
65
c
Conservation Commission 14,
15, 16, 24, 28, 30, 1
covenant .33, 34, 37, 38, 39
curb cuts ................ 44
cut bankings ............. 60
D
dead-end street ...... 43, 44
Dead-end streets ......... 44
definitive plan ..... 3, 5,
15, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 36,
4 7 I 52
definitive subdivision ... 37
Department of Public Works
.. 8, 14, 15, 16, 21, 25, 26,
28, 30, 35, 37, 1, 45, 46,
47, 51, 52, 55, 61, 64
deposit ......... 34, 38, 39
developer ........ 3, 60, 63
Director of Public Works
..... 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56,
57, 58, 64
draft environmental impact
statement ................ 13
drainage .... 12, 20, 21, 22,
45, 46, 49, 56, 61
drainage areas ........... 22
drainage calculations ... 13,
17 I 22
drainage courses ..... 13, 18
drainage design .......... 22
drainage models .......... 22
drainage structure ....... 52
drainage system ... 1, 14, 3 O
drainage trenches ........ 57
drainage, rational formula
..••..••••••••••••••••••.• 2 2
drainage, TR55 ........... 22
E
earth excavation ......... 52
easement .. 3, 12, 14, 17,
19, 20, 21, 30, 37' 42, 43,
44, 45, 46, 53
electric lines ........... 57
embankments .............. 53
engineer ............. 12, 18
Engineering Division .. 8,
14' 30
environmental impact
statement ............ 17, 23
F
fee ......... 5, 6, 7, 12, 17
fire alarm ... 21, 30, 47, 61
Fire Department ..... 14, 15,
16, 26, 30, 1, 46
fire hydrant .20, 46, 52, 56
flood plains ............. 13
Floor Area Ratio ......... 24
Form A .................... 7
Form B ................... 12
Form c ............... 17, 37
Form D ................... 1 7
Form E ........... 12, 17, 18
Form K ..............• 17, 37
Forms C-1 ................ 36
Forms C-2 ................ 36
frontage ...... 4, 5, 8, 9,
10 I 19
G
gas mains ................ 57
gate valve ............... 56
General Laws .............. 3
grade .... 44, 45, 46, 52,
53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58
grade changes ............ 43
grade elevations ......... 20
graded ................... 60
grade, center line ... 42, 43
grade, maximun ........... 43
grade, street ........ 42, 43
grade, suitable ........... 9
grading .................. 53
granite curbs ........ 58, 59
grass plot ....... 47, 59, 60
grass plots ........•..••. 47
gravel foundation ........ 58
gravel sub-base .......... 53
grubbing ................. 52
H
handicapped access .. 58, 59
inspection .............. 64
Inspector of Buildings .. 10,
27 I 63
66
L
landscaped island ........ 44
ledge outcropping ........ 22
lender's agreement ....... 34
1 ot ....................... 3
lot drainage ............. 46
lot markers .............. 60
M
maintenance plan ......... 29
major street .......•... 4,
16, 1, 41, 42, 43, 47, 53,
54 1 55 I 58
manholes ................. 56
Massachusetts Electric
Company .............•.... 2 7
Massachusetts Water Resource
Authority ................ 25
MDPDSS ................... 5 3
MDPWCS ............... 51, 58
MDPWSS ..... 51, 52, 54 1 55,
56' 57' 58' 61
minor street ....... 4, 16,
40.1, 41, 42, 43, 47, 54, 58
monument ... 3, 8, 14, 19,
30' 54
More than one building for
dwelling purposes ........ 6
Municipal Lien Certificate
•.•.••••••••••......••...• 3 7
municipal services ........ 3
0
offset stakes ............ 52
open space ............... 45
owner .............. 3, 7, 12
p
Park Commission ...... 26, 28
pavement ................. 47
pedestrian light stanchions
.••••................. 21, 59
pedestrian walkways ...•.. 48
percolation test .. 17, 20,
22' 29
performance guarantee ... 34,
35, 36, 37
person .................... 3
photo-sensitive device ... 59
pipe culvert ............. 56
pipe drains ..........•... 56
Planning Board agent ...... 3
p
pole lantern ............. 59
Police Department ... 14, 15,
16, 26, 30, 40.1
preliminary plan ...... 3, 5,
11, 12' 15, 33
private way ........... 17,
29, 37, 39
private well ........ 20, 24
Professional Engineer .. 2,
15, 18, 40
public acceptance ........ 22
public hearing ... 8, 9, 31,
32, 40.1
public way ..... 1, 4, 9, 17,
19, 37, 39, 48
public well .......... 20, 24
R
recorded .................. 4
Redevelopment Authority ... 28
Registered Land surveyor
...... 2, 12, 15, 18, 19, 40,
52 I 61
Registry of Deeds .. 4, 20, 36
reinforced concrete pipe .. 57
riding surface .....•. 54, 55
rip-rap .................. 53
road bounds .............. 60
roadway ................... 4
rock excavation .......... 55
s
secondary street .......... 1
School Committee ..... 14, JO
School Department ..... 16, 1
secondary street ..... 4, 16,
41, 42, 43, 47, 54, 58
sewage disposal systems ... 20
sewer .................... 12
Sewer Division ... 14, 30, 55
sewer ejector pumps ...... 56
sewer pipe ............... 20
sewerage structure ....... 52
sewerage system ....... 1,
14, 30, 55
sidewalk ......... 21, 47, 58
sidewalks ........ 47 1 57, 58
soil survey .......... 17, 22
solar energy ........... 1, 2
Special Flood Hazard Areas
...................... 21, 48
storm drain system ....... 56
67
s
storm drains ............. 20
storm water drainage ..... 26
street acceptance ........ 29
street light stanchions .. 21,
59
street lighting ... 1 1 14,
J 0 I 59
Street Lighting Committee
....... 14, 16, 28, 30, 40.1
street names ... 13, 14, 30,
48
street sign .............. 61
street trees ............. 47
storm water drains ....... 21
subdivision .. 1, 3 1 4, 5, 6,
11, 63
Subdivision Control Law .. 1,
2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11, 32,
63
subdivision plan .... 2, 5, 6
subdivision, multifamily.24,
44, 59
subdivision, nonresidential
..... 11, 23, 24, 27, 33, 44,
45, 53, 58, 59
subdivision, residential
11, 24, 26, 27, 33, 43, 53,
58
subdivision, single family
.................. 45, 47, 59
subgrade surface ......... 53
sub-drains ............... 57
T
TAX COLLECTOR ............ 31
telephone lines .......... 57
test boring ....... ~ .. 20, 22
test pit ................. 22
topography ............... 13
Town ...................... 6
Town Clerk ..... 2, 4, 7, 8,
9, 11, 17, 20, 36, 38
Town Meeting ............. 39
Town of Weymouth Datum
...................... 13, 20
traffic sign ............. 61
trees .................... 4 7
trench excavation ........ 55
BK I 0 6 2 Li PG 6 0 4
u
underground utilities .. 47,
55
utilities ........•.... 1, 47
v
vegetated wetland ... 13, 18,
22
vertical curves •......... 43
volume of traffic ......... 5
w
waiver ............... 41, 63
walkway .......... 20, 48, 61
water ....•....•.......... 12
Water Division ......• 14, 30
water main .....•..... 20, 56
water system ...... 1, 14, 30
Wetlands Protection Act .13,
14, 18, 30
width .................... 42
z
Zoning Bylaw .........• 1, 5,
9, 14, 15, 19, 24, 30, 32
zoning classification .. 8,
13
zoning district ... 8, 13, 19
68
8f( I 0 5 2 L} PG 6 0 5
APPENDIX A ROADWAY CROSS SECTIONS
69
• It
40'
It
2'_' Cal. \'( 5' I B' 12' } 12' • 8' I Min. ~\ , "' 1 i • 1 i •
__,
0
4' 4" LOAM
t.. SEED
6"
~
318" PER FT.
GAS
ELEC.,CABLE J: II I DRAW
& FIRE ALARM l· l.!::d=:!J
UTIL. ·
POLE
9'
15'
2'
CAPE COD BERM
'
SEWER WATER
10' MIN.
SEPARATION
J "
I 4 PERI FT.
~ 5' lill
I
l
HYO. 8" GRAVE
SURF ACE - I~· BIT. CONC. TYPE I-I
BASE - 3" BIT. CONG. TYPE H
SUBGRADE - 12" GRAVEL
CROSS SECTION
MINOR STREET WITH NO SIDEWALK
w w w
1. ~- r9i. ~I i •
01.23456 12 IB
SCALE
~·· ~:·
40' LAYOUT
SCALE: I" = 6'
--··---
Amended July 15, 1994 H-1
It
'
1 ·
~ J ....
2u Cal.
Hin. -l> 5' 8'
4'
J_ ' I tJ
~I
4" LOAM
& SEED_/ Ii
HYO~
ELEC., CABLE
& FIRE A~ARM
12'
6'!
d_J
3 "
I 8 PER FT.
I 11 I ~
i i\ ,~
40'
l 12'
CAPE COD BERM
It
8'
4'SIDEWALK
I ..
'4 PERI ~T·s·
2' ,,:, ~ 2'
' '
C.D =
0
CJ\
N
..r:-
0
G')
, .~ \\ I rr
I \L S"GRAV/l
CJ\
0
-...J
\ \ITJJA1N
1· GAS
- SEWER T WATER 4" LOAM
l SEED
UTIL.
POLE
9' 10' MIN.
SEPARATION 15'
. SURF ACE - 11' BIT. CONC. TYPE H
BASE - 3" BIT. CONC. TYPE H
SUBGRADE - 12" GRAVEL
CROSS SECTION
MINOR STREET WITH SIDEWALK ON ONE SIDE
,......_....__ --2
01·23456
SCALE
12 18
40' LAYOUT
SCALE: I" = 6' Amended July 15, 1994 H-2
2"
Cal
Min
-µ
f~~ pl ~
I
ff_ 50' R.O.W. ![_ lyJ\
.5 ' 8' -6"' 16'-6" i 16'-6" -6" 8' -5· I' •
4' 6'SIDEWALKl . j,_ 4' 2· ·r 2·
"'\ I - .; I
~ 3 " 18 PER FT. CURBING\ I' 114 PER ,FT. ~ 11 ~/--
' I ' I I ~
.... // ~ I \ ' ~
• ~ I ~ ~ t
ELEC., CABLE ~ -( GAS HYDRANT ""'' FIRE ALARM DRJt 4 ~ -E ~- 4" LOAM &
SEWER WATER SEED
UflL.
-8" GRAVEL == -
9._6 .. POLE 10' MIN. o
°' 17' SEPARATION N
.;:-
CJ
GJ
a>
0
CROSS SECTION co
SECONDARY STREET
RIDING SURF ACE - 1f BIT. CONC. TYPE H
~ I I 50' LAYOUT BINDER - I~ BiT. CONC. TYPE 1-1
0123456 t2 18 SCALE: !" = 6' BASE COURSE - 3" BIT. CONG. TYPE H
• "'".ALF ·• ·o·,,:/";,.• ___ ..,_,18Gl.. _.:: __ _:_12:._~YL H ~
-· ·-·--·-- ------··- -- -- -- - - -·
2"
Cal
ain
' ..> ""; -
'~~~
)
-
5' 8' r-6''
~
4 l 4'
i:-s!· ' " r1
""" A it1 ' ' " ' Ill
..., ,_ I/ ''
• ~
..., ELEC., CABLE & \ ~
w FIRE ALARM D~ilN
q_
UTIL.
POLE
14'-6"
22'
~.
0 I 2 3 4 .5 6 12
SCALE
. ---- --··--··
VARIES
4
I
18
~ r~
60'~ R.0.W. It
~ VARIES
.-6n
8' ~
•
6'SIDEWALK1
2' · I' 2'
r-- - - .. "
31 I' lt4 P~!- FT
8
PER FT.
CURBING~ H --1
H-1 I } " 1 I I "
l-
GAS ct_
4" LOAM l. HYDRANT '
SEWER WATER SEED == - 8" GRAVEL -c::;
10'. MIN. CJ'
N
SEPARATION J,:-
--c.
G:
.CJ
- c:
IJ:
CROSS SECTION
MAJOR STREET
RIDING SURFACE - I{ BIT. CONC. TYPE 1-1
60' LAYOUT BINDER -If BIT. CONG. TYPE I-l
SCALE : I " = 6' BASE COURSE -=1' BIT. CONC. TYPE I-1
SUBGRADE - 18' GRAVEL . H-4
,_,_.,
'
WEYMOUTH ST AND ARD CAPE COD BERM
ROADWAY 2'-0" ,,
G"
l 112" BIT. CONCRETE TYPE I-1
~ 11 11/i"rBINDER' I I Ill l I I I l I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I i I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I I];·~~~;
o t -.' . o.• : - ·. ·o , <1f
•6 1-r·'' u'# I ·.·1 •
• '(} •'
• : b b
0 b ,
l •'" 1 1 I '(/' •
_'i.),.0.14
!~~-,···
15" MIN. GRAVEL FOUNDATION
· ··~··1 ~, .. ~· ~;c
, , .
• {I
"' . . 1• , ,/) . . . • n ·~ • J •
'0·.r!(J,
0.. .!'f. . ."• •
'
APPENDIX B SUBDIVISION FORMS
75
81{ ! 0 6 2 L; PG 6 I I
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
APPLICATION FOR ENDORSEMENT OF PLAN
"APPROVAL UNDER SUBDIVISION CONTROL LAW NOT REQUIRED"
Date:
To the Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth:
The undersigned wishes to record the accompanying plan and requests a
determination by said Board that approval by it under the Subdivision
Control Law is not required.
1. The undersigned believes that such approval is not required
because the division of land shown on the accompanying plan is not a
subdivision because every lot shown thereon has the amount of frontage
required by the Weymouth Zoning Bylaw and said frontage is on either:
a public way, namely, , or a way, namely,
~-,~~w~h-1r·c~h,--~~t~h-e~--,T~o-w-n~-=c1erk certifies is
m--a~i-n~t-a-ir'n_e_d-=---a-n~d~u-s_e_d,,_a-s~a~public way; or,
a way, namely, , shown on a plan therefore
approved and endorsed in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law;
or,
a way, namely, , in existence when the
Subdivision Contr-0•1--=L~a-w--,b~e-c~a-m-e~e~f~f~e-c-t~1~·v-e~~(ATM 1958), having, in the
opinion of the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable grades and
adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in
relation to the proposed use of the land.
2. The division
subdivision for the
not apply):
of land shown on the accompanying plan is not a
following reasons(s), (use this if 1. above does
3. The owner's title to the land is derived under deed recorded in:
(Provide recording information for all lots affected.)
FORM A - page l of 2
Bl( I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 1 2
Norfolk Registry of Deeds, Book~~~~-' Page ~~~~ and/or,
Land court District Certificate of Title No.
Applicant's Signature
Applicant's Address
Telephone Number
Owner's Signature and address if
not the applicant
FORM A - page 2 of 2
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A PRELIMINARY PLAN
To the Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth:
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under Chapter 41,
Section 81-L, for approval of a proposed subdivision shown on a plan
entitled
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
By dated ,19~~ being land-,...b_o_u_n_d_e_d,__a-s~~f-071~1-o_w_s_:~~~~- -~~~~~~~~~~
Town Atlas Sheet , Block Lot#
hereby submits -s-a~i-d,.-_p_l_a_n~ as a PRELIMINARY subdivision plan in
accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Weymouth Planning
Board and makes application to the Board for approval of said plan.
The undersigned's title to said land is derived from
by deed
Registry
dated and recorded in the
of De-e"d-s-=B-o-o"k~~~~~ , Page ,
Norfolk District
registered in the
Registry District of the Land Court,
~c-e-r~t-i-f~i~c-a-t~e~-o~f-=T~i~t"l_e__,N~o~.~~~~~
Received by Town Clerk
Date
~~~~~~~~~~-
Applicant's Signature~~~~~~~~~Applicant's
Address
~~~~~~~~~~-
Telephone Number
owner's Signature
and Address if no-t~~~~~~~~~~~
the Applicant~~~~~~~~~~~~~
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-
FORM B
PLANNING SOARD 81{ I 0 6 2 Li PG 6 I 4
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF DEFINITIVE PLAN
To the Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth:
The undersigned, being the applicant as defined under Chapter 41,
Section 81-L, for approval of a proposed subdivision shown on a plan
entitled
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~...,-~~~~~~~--~~~-~--:-=:-~~ by dated ,19~--
being land bounded as follows:
Town Atlas sheet ,block Lot#
~h-e_r_e~b-y~-s-u-b'm-,i~t-s~s-a-i'd~p-1,..-a-n~a-s a DEFINITIVE plan in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations of the Weymouth Planning Board and makes
application to the Board for approval of said plan.
The undersigned's title to said land is derived from
by deed dated and recorded in the Norfolk
District Reg~i-s~t-r-y~~o-f.,,-~=D-e-e~d's~--;B~o-o-k,.- , Page ,
registered in the Registry District of the Land Court,
Certificate of Title No. and said land is free of encumbrances
except for the following:
Said plan has () has not () evolved from a preliminary plan submitted
to the Board on 19 _ and approved (with
modifications) ()~-~(~d~i-s_a_p_p_r_o_v_e_d~)--(,...,-) on
19 ---
The undersigned hereby applies for the approval of said DEFINITIVE
plan by the Board, and in furtherance thereof hereby agrees to abide
by the Board's Rules and Regulations. The undersigned hereby further
covenants and agrees with the Town of Weymouth, upon the approval of
said DEFINITIVE plan by the Board:
1. to install utilities in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the Planning Board, the Public Works Department, the Board of
Health, and all general as well as Zoning Bylaws of the Town of
Weymouth, as are applicable to the installation of utilities
within the limits of ways and streets;
2. to complete and construct the streets or ways shown thereon
accordance with Section V of the Rules and Regulations of
Planning Board and the approved DEFINITIVE plan, profiles
FORM c - page l of 2
in
the
and
81( I 0 6 2 L• PG 6 I 5
cross sections of the same. Said plan, profiles, cross sections
and construction specifications are specifically, by reference,
incorporated herein and made a part of this application. This
application and the covenants and agreements herein shall be
binding upon all heirs, executors, administrators, successors,
grantees of the whole or part of said land, and assigns of the
undersigned; and
3. to complete the aforesaid installations and construction within
one (1) year from the date hereof.
Received by Town Clerk
Date
Time
Signature
Applicant's signature ~~~~~~~~~~~
Applicant's Address ~~~~~~~~~~~~
Telephone Number
owner's Signature~~~~~~~~~~~~~
and Address if not
the Applicant~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
FORM c - page 2 of 2
Bl( I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 I 6
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL OF A DEFINITIVE PLAN
It is hereby certified by the Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth,
Massachusetts, that at a duly called and properly posted meeting of
said Planning Board, held on ,19~-' it was voted
to approved a definitive plan
entitled:
submitted by:
originally filed with the Planning Board on
concerning property located
with the following conditions:
A copy of this certificate of approval is to be filed with the
Weymouth Town Clerk and a copy sent to the applicant.
A true copy, attest:
Clerk, Weymouth Planning Board WEYMOUTH PLANNING BOARD
FORM C-1
8!{ I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 I 7
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
CERTIFICATE OF DISAPPROVAL OF A DEFINITIVE PLAN
It is hereby certified by the Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth,
Massachusetts, that at a duly called and properly posted meeting of
said Planning Board, held on ,l9~_it was voted to
disapprove a definitive plan entitled:
submitted by:
originally filed with the Planning Board on.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
concerning property located
for the following reasons:
A copy of this certificate of disapproval is to be filed with the
Weymouth Town Clerk and a copy sent to the applicant.
A true copy, attest:
Clerk, Weymouth Planning Board
WEYMOUTH PLANNING BOARD
FORM C-2
Bl( I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 I 8
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
DESIGNER'S CERTIFICATE
To the Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth:
In preparing the plan entitled ,
I hereby certify that the above named plan and accompanying data is
true and correct to the accuracy required by the current Rules and
Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in Weymouth,
Massachusetts, and my source of information about the location of
boundaries shown on said plan were one or more of the following:
1. Deed from
recorded in the
page _ _
2. Other plans, as follows
3. oral information furnished by
4. Actual measurement on the ground from a starting point established
by
5. Other sources
(Seal of Engineer
of Surveyor)
signed:
(Regist_e_r_e~d'"""'P=-r-0-f""e-s-s"'"i_o_n_a-=1--=E=-n-g-1..-'n_e_e_r_o_r_
Registered Land surveyor)
Address
FORM D
B!( I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 I 9
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
CERTIFIED LIST OF ABUTTERS
To the Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth:
The undersigned,
of a proposed
being an applicant for approval of a definitive plan
subdivision entitled
submits the following sketch of the land in the subd1v1s1on listing
the names of the adjoining owners and the abutters to the adjoining
owners in their relative positions and indicating the address of each
abutter on the sketch or in a separate list, including owners of land
separated from the subdivision only by a street.
Signature of Applicant
Address
~~~~~~~~~~~ ,Massachusetts
To the Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth:
This is to certify that at the time of the last assessment for
taxation made by the Town of Weymouth, the names and addresses of the
parties assessed as adjoining owners to the parcel of land shown
above where as above written, except as follows:
Assessor
FORM E
Bl( I 0 6 2 L; PG 6 2 0
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETIS
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE BY SURETY COMPANY
Know all men by these presents that
as Principal, and
a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the state
of and having a usual place of business
in ,as surety, hereby bind and
obligate themselves and their respective heirs, executors,
administrators, successors and assigns, jointly and severally, to the
Town of Weymouth, a Massachusetts municipal corporation, in the sum
of Dollars, ( $ ) •
The condition of this obligation is that if the Principal shall fully
and satisfactorily observe and perform in the manner and in the time
therein specified, all of the covenants, conditions, agreements,
terms and provisions contained in the application signed by the
Principal and dated ,19 under which approval
of a definitive plan of a certain subdivision, entitled
and dated ,19 , has been or is hereafter granted by
the Weymouth Planning Board, then this obligation shall be void, less
10% for the necessary period, otherwise it shall remain in full
force and effect and the aforesaid sum, reduced as necessary, shall
be paid by the Town of Weymouth as liquidated damage.
The Surety hereby assents to any and all changes and modifications
that may be made of the aforesaid covenants, conditions, terms and
provisions to be observed and performed by the Principal, and waives
notice hereof.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and seals this day
of , 19 ---
Principal
Surety
by A~t-tor-ne-y--F-ac-t -----------
FORM F - page l of 2
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Then personally appeared , the abo\·e named
principal, and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be the free
act and deed of said parties before me.
Notary Public
My commission expires
IN WITNESS WHEREOF we have set our hands and seals this -------- day of , 19 _
a majority of the Planning Board
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
----------~' 19 _
Then personally appeared , one of the above named
members of the Planning
acknowledged the foregoing
said parties before me.
--=,..--~--:=--::"::---- Bo a rd of Weymouth, Massachusetts, and
instrument to be the free act and deed of
Notary Public
My commission expires
Approved as to form:
by:
--(-na-me-),- T-ow-n -c-ou-ns-el- ----~
FORM F - page 2 Of 2
BK I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 2 2
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE SECURED BY DEPOSIT
Know all men by these presents that
hereby binds and obligates himself/itself/his/its executors,
administrators, devises, heirs, successors and assigns to the Town of
Weymouth, a Massachusetts municipal corporation, in the sum of
Dollars, ($ ) , and has secured this
obligation by the deposit with the treasurer of said Town of Weymouth
of said sum in money or negotiable securities with proper stock
powers.
The condition of this obligation is that if the undersigned or his/its
executors, administrators, devises, heirs, successors and assigns
shall fully and satisfactorily observe and perform in the manner and
in the time herein specified, all of the covenants, conditions,
agreements, terms and provisions contained in the application signed
by the Principal and dated ,19 , under
which approval of definitive plan of a certain subdivision,
entitled ·~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
and dated ,19 has been or is hereafter granted
by the Weymouth Planning Board, then this obligation shall be void;
otherwise, it shall remain in full force and effect and the aforesaid
security for said sum shall become and be the sole property of said
Town of Weymouth as liquidated damage.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned has hereunto set his hand and seal
this
Then personally
principal, and
Principal
By:
Title
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
appeared , the above named
acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be the free
FORM G - page l of 2
act and deed of said parties before me.
Notary PUblic
My commission expires ~~~~~~~-
IN WITNESS Wl!EREOF we have set our hands and seals this
day of , 19~~
a majority of the Planning Board
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
~~~~~~~~~~· 19~~
Then personally appeared , one of the above named
members of the Planning
acknowledged the foregoing
said parties before me.
~---,,~----.~--,,----=-~~ Board of Weymouth, Massachusetts, and
instrument to be the free act and deed of
Notary Public
My commission expires
Approved as to form:
by:
~~~~..,---,,,.-...~~~~-,-~~~~~ (name), Town Counsel
FORM G - page 2 of 2
,,_:
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
COVENANT
Know all
submitted
Weymouth
certain
men by these presents that whereas the undersigned has
an application dated , 19 , to the
Planning Board for approval of a definitive plan of a
subdivision entitled
and dated
19 and has requested the Board to appr_o_v_e_s_u_c~h~-p~l-a-n--w~i~t~h-o_u_t
requiring a performance bond,
NOW THEREFORE, THIS AGREEMENT WITNESSETH that in consideration of the
Weymouth Planning Board approving said plan without requiring a
performance bond, and in consideration of one (1) dollar in hand
paid, receipt whereof is hereby acknowledged, the undersigned
covenants and agrees with the Town of Weymouth as follows:
1. The undersigned will not sell any lot in the subdivision or erect
or place any permanent building on any such lot until the
construction of ways and municipal services necessary to serve
adequately such lot has been completed in the manner specified
in the aforesaid application, and in accordance with the
covenants, conditions agreements, terms and provisions thereof.
2. This agreement
administrators,
undersigned.
shall be binding upon the executors,
devisees, heirs, successors and assigns of the
It is the intention of the undersigned and it is hereby understood
and agreed that this contract shall constitute a covenant
running with the land included in the aforesaid subdivision and
shall operate as restrictions upon said land.
It is understood and agreed that lots within the subdivision
shall, respectively, be released from the foregoing conditions
upon the recording of a certificate of performance executed by a
majority of said Planning Board and enumerating the specific lots
to be so released.
3. The undersigned represents and covenants that undersigned is the
owner* in fee simple of all the land included in the aforesaid
subdivision and that there are no mortgages of record or otherwise
on any of said land, except such as are described below and
subordinated to this contract, and the present holders of said
mortgages have assented to this contract prior to its execution by
the undersigned.
*If there is more than one owner, all must sign.
FORM H page l of 2
81{ I 0 6 2 L~ PG 6 2 5
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, applicant as aforesaid, does
hereunto set his hand and seal this day
of 19 ---
Owner(s)
if not
------------~A pplicant
Description of Mortgages:
Applicant
Address
(Give complete names and Registry of Deeds reference)
Assents of Mortgagees:
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Then personally appeared the above named
-------------~
and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be
free act and deed, before me.
Notary Public
My Commission expires: ------------
FORM H page 2 of 2
BK I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 2 6
AGREEMENT
the
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE SECURED BY LENDER'S AGREEMENT
made this date
"applicant" of
between the Town of
hereinafter
Weymouth
referred
~h-e_r_e_i~n-a-f~t~e-r~~r-e-f~e-r_r_e_d~--:-t-0 1
as
and
to as
and
the
"lender" of
construction
·subdivision
of
of
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,..--' to
ways and installation of municipal services
secure
in the
land shown on a plan entitled
KNOW ALL MEN by these presents that the applicant and the Planning
Board of the Town of Weymouth have executed a covenant, dated
, and recorded in the Norfolk Registry of ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Deeds; (Book and Page) ; that the applicant has
secured an extension of credit from the lender; and that the applicant
and lender hereby bind and obligate themselves, their, or its
executors, administrators, devisees, heirs, successors and assigns,
jointly and severally to the Town of Weymouth, a Massachusetts
municipal corporation, acting through its Planning Board in the sum of
and have secured this obligation by
the lender retaining said sum of money of the principal sums otherwise
due to the applicant to insure the performance by the applicant of all
covenants, conditions, agreements, terms and provisions contained in
the following documents, which documents relate to the above realty.
l. Application of Approval Definitive Plan, date of receipt by Town
Clerk:
2 •
3.
The subdivision control law and the Planning Board's
Regulations governing this subdivision and dated May
revised September 22, 1980.
Rules
24,
and
1974,
The conditions included in the Certificate of Approval
by the Planing Board relating to this project.
issued
4. The definitive plan as qualified by the Certificate of Approval.
This agreement shall remain in full force and effect until the
applicant has fully and satisfactorily performed all obligations.
Upon completion to the satisfaction of the Planning Board, by the
applicant of obligations as specified in the following schedule:
FORM I - page 1 of 4
81( I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 2 7
State of construction
or installation to
be completed
Date when
construction and
installation
is to be
completed
sum to be
retained
--------------------------------------------------------------------
the interest of the Town in such funds retained by the lender shall be
released, that portion of the agreement covering a specific stage of
work shall become void, and the lender may disburse such funds which
have been held as security for a specific stage of construction of
ways and installation of municipal services as specified, any funds
remaining undisbursed shall be made in whole, or in part, by the
lender to the Planning Board for the benefit of the Town of Weymouth
to the extent of the reasonable cost to the Town of completing such
construction or installation as specified in this agreement. Any
unused portion of such funds will be released by the Planning Board
and may be disbursed by the lender to the applicant upon completion of
the work by said Town.
The Town of Weymouth acting by and through its Planning Board hereby
agrees to release the following lots numbers , as
shown on a from the operation of the above
referenced covenant given pursuant to Section 81-U of Chapter 41, the
Subdivision Control Law without receipt of a bond or deposit of money ,~,•
and further to accept this agreement and the funds in the amount
specified herein to be retained by the lender as security for the
performance of the project as aforesaid. Upon delivery of this
agreement to the Planning Board, said lot(s) shall be released as
herein specified.
The lender hereby agrees that none of the funds retained as security,
as specified herein, shall be disbursed to the applicant without prior
written release of said funds by the Planning Board.
Any amendments to this agreement and/or to the aforesaid security
shall be agreed upon in writing by all parties to this agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF we have set our hands and seals this
day of , 19~~ --------
a majority of the Planning Board
FORM I - page 2 of 4
81( I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 2 8
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
SS
Then personally appeared ~~~~~~~~~~~' one of the above named
members of the Planning Board of Weymouth, Massachusetts, and
acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be the free act and deed of
said parties before me. ·
Notary Public
My commission expires
Approved as to form:
by:
~~~~~~~~~~~~,--~~~~~ (name), Town Counsel
(applicant)
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Then personally appeared , the above named
applicant, and acknowledged the foregoing instrUlllent to be the free
act and deed of said parties before me.
Notary Public
My commission expires
(Lender)
By:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ Signature of authorized
representative of the lender
FORM I - page 3 of 4
81{ I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 2 9
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
~~~~~~~~~' 19~~
Then personally appeared ~~~~~~~~~~' the authorized
representative of the lender, and acknowledged the foregoing
instrument to be the free act and deed of said parties before me.
Notary Public
My commission expires
FORM I - page 4 of 4
81{ I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 3 0
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE/COVENANT RELEASE FORM
The undersigned, being a majority of the Planning Board of the Town of
Weymouth, hereby certify that:
The requirements for the construction of ways and municipal services
called for by the
Performance Guarantee and dated- -------- 19 (and/or) by,
The Covenant dated 1 19 and recorded in
District Deeds, Book---------~, Page (or registered
in
Document
Has been
Planning
entitled
Land Registry District as
No. and noted on certificate of Title No.
in Registration Book _______ ,Page _____ ,)
completed/partially completed) , to the satisfaction of the
Board to adequately serve the enumerated lots shown on Plan
----------" recorded by the
-=--,.------------Registry of Deeds, Plan
Book , Plan (or registered in
said Land Registry District, Plan Book , Plan
77
--.......,-.,.-.,--,---------) and said lots are hereby released from
the restrictions as to sale and building specified thereon.
Lots designated on said Plan as follows:
Executed as a sealed instrument this ____ ~---~day
_______ ,19 _ .
Planning Board
of the Town of
Weymouth
FORM J page 1 of 2
of
81( I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 3 I
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Then personally appeared , one of the above named
members of the Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth, Massachusetts,
and acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be the free act and deed
of said Planning Board of the Town of Weymouth, Massachusetts, and
acknowledged the foregoing instrument to be the free act and deed of
said Planning Board, before me.
Notary Public
My commission expires~~~~~~~~~~
FORM J page 2 of 2
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
CONVEYANCE OF EASEMENTS AND UTILITIES
----------------, of ~c-o-u-n-t-y-, -M,-a-s-sa-c,h-u.s.e,tt.s-, -fco=r- -g-o-od~ -a-n'd
adequate consideration, grant to the Town of Weymouth a municipal
corporation in Norfolk County, Massachusetts, the perpetual rights and
easements to construct, inspect, repair, renew, replace, operate and
forever maintain, water and sewer mains and drainage systems with any
manholes, pipes, conduits, easements and other appurtenances thereto,
and to do all acts incidental thereto, in, through and under the
following described land:
And, for the consideration aforesaid, the said grantor does hereby
give, grant, transfer and deliver unto the Town of Weymouth all water
and sewer mains and drainage systems, manholes, pipes, conduits,
easements and all appurtenances thereto that are now or hereafter
constructed or installed in, through, or under the above described
land by the grantor and the grantor's successors and assigns.
The granter warrants that the aforesaid easements are free and clear
of all liens or encumbrances, that he (it) has good title to transfer
the same, and that he will defend the same against claims of all
persons.
For grantor's title see deed from~--------~---------
dated ,19 , and recorded in
District Registry of Deeds, Boo~k-- ,Page_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-r---~-,-o-r
under Certificate of Title No. ___ ·~·---~--=-' registered
in District of the Land Court,
Book , Page _____ _
And (to be completed if a mortgage exists)
(name and address)
The present holder of a mortgage on the above described land,
which mortgage is dated ,19 and recorded
in said Deeds, Bo~o~k-~---------,Page , for
consideration paid, hereby releases unto the Town forever from the
operation of said mortgage, the rights and easements hereinabove
granted and assents thereto.
Authorized Signature of Mortgagor signature of owner
FORM K page l of 2
IN WITNESS WHEREOF we have hereunto set our hands and seals this
~~~~~~~~~~~day of ,19~~~~~~~~
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS
Then personally appeared the above named.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~and
acknowledged the foregoing to be~~~~~~~~~~~free act and
deed, before me.
Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
FORM K page 2 of 2
81( I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 3 4
Pl.ANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
PRELIMINARY REFERRAL FORM
Subject: Preliminary Subdivision Plan Date:
Locus:
BOARD OF HEALTH
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
WATER DIVISION
SEWER DIVISION
ENGINEERING DIVISION
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
FIRE DEPARTMENT
POLICE DEPARTMENT
STREET LIGHTING
COMMITTEE
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
- As to suitability of the land.
- As to potential involvement with MGL
Ch. 131, Sec. 40.
- As to the design of the street system,
location of easements, monuments,
drainage system, water system, and, if
applicable, the sewerage system.
- As to compliance with zoning By-law.
- As to street name and to location and
adequacy of hydrants, and the alarm
system.
- As to street name and vehicular and
pedestrian safety.
- As to placement and design of street
lighting equipment.
- As to school busing and districting.
The attached Preliminary Plan was submitted to the Planning Board on
May we have your comments and
subdivision by no later than
recommendations concerning this
Please return this form
with your comments and recommendations to
COMMENTS:
Thank you,
Planning Director
FORM L-1
BK I 0 6 2 4 PG 6 3 5
PLANNING BOARD
TOWN OF WEYMOUTH, MASSACHUSETTS
DEFINITIVE REFERRAL FORM
Subject: Definitive Subdivision Plan Date:
Locus:
BOARD OF HEALTH
CONSERVATION COMMISSION
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
WATER DIVISION
SEWER DIVISION
ENGINEERING DIVISION
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
FIRE DEPARTMENT
POLICE DEPARTMENT
S'.rREET LIGHTING
COMMITTEE
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
- As to suitability of the land.
- As to potential involvement with MGL
Ch. 1311 sec. 40.
- As to the design of the street system,
location of easements, monuments,
drainage system, water system, and, if
applicable, the sewerage system.
- As to compliance with Zoning By-law.
- As to street name and to location and
adequacy of hydrants, and the alarm
system.
- As to street name and vehicular and
pedestrian safety.
- As to placement and design of street
lighting equipment.
- As to school busing and districting.
The attached Definitive Plan was submitted to the Planning Board on
May we have your comments and recommendations concerning this
subdivision by no later than Please return this form
with your comments and recommendations to
COMMENTS:
Thank you,
Planning Director
FORM L-2

ZONING
120 Attachment 1
Town of Weymouth
Table 1
Schedule of District Regulations
[Amended April 1971 ATM by Art. 47, approved 8-24-1971; February 1972 STM by Art. 6, approved 5-8-1972; October 1972 STM by Art. 8, approved 12-6-1972; June 1976 STM by Art. 26, approved 10-18-1976; February
1979 STM by Art. 1, approved 4-19-1979; May 1983 ATM by Art. 48, approved 8-26-1983; February 1985 STM by Art. 7, approved 6-3-1985; May 1985 ATM by Art. 44, approved 7-25-1985; May 1987 ATM by Arts. 51 and
52, approved 8-27-1987; May 1990 STM by Arts. 1, 2, 3, approved 8-29-1990; May 1990 STM by Art. 52, approved 9-13-1990; May 1992 ATM by Arts. 34 and 37, approved 10-1-1992; May 1997 ATM by Art. 40, approved 8-
11-1997; May 1998 ATM by Art. 43, approved 10-23-1998; 1-17-2017 by Ord. No. 16-150; 8-10-2020 by Ord. No. 20-093]
District Type of Use
Minimum Lot
Size
(square feet)
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet per dwelling unit)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Front Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum Side Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent of lot
area) Maximum Height
R-1 One-family 25,000
(See §§ 120-51,
120-52, 120-53.1
and 120-53.2)
25,000 120
(See §§ 120-51, 120-
52, 120-56, and 120-
59.1)
18
(See § 120-54)
10; 20 feet of any
dwelling
(See § 120-55)
24 or 1/5 of depth of lot,
whichever is less
(See § 120-55)
30% 2 1/2 stories, not to
exceed 35 feet
R-2 Mixed residential 10,000 for single-family and
nonresidential, plus 5,000 per
each additional residential unit
to a maximum of 3 total units
75; 75 feet of
frontage
18
(See § 120-54)
10
(See §§ 120-54, 120-55
and 120-59)
10; 20 feet from any other
dwelling
30% for
building; 25%
minimum for
landscaping
(See § 120-
62.1)
3 stories, not to
exceed 35 feet
R-3 Garden-type multiple 15,000
(See § 120-52)
One- to two-unit residence
buildings: 15,000
All 3-or-more-unit buildings for
multiple-family residential use
based on FAR of 0.25
(See § 120-6)
20
(See §§ 120-52, 120-
56 and 120-59.1)
20
(See § 120-54)
20
(See § 120-55)
20
(See § 120-55)
Minimum 20%
landscaped area
(See § 120-
62.1)
3 stories, not to
exceed 35 feet
R-4 Multiple 15,000 All units in all multiple-family
residential building based on
FAR of 0.30.
(See § 120-6, “floor area ratio”)
120
(See §§ 120-56 and
120-59.1)
40 plus 5 feet
for each setback
for each story
above 3rd floor
(See § 120-54)
20 plus 2 feet for each
story above the 3rd floor
(See § 120-54)
30 or 1/2 the building
height, whichever is
greater
(See § 120-54)
Minimum 20%
landscaped area
(See § 120-
62.1)
6 stories, not to
exceed 80 feet
(See § 120-57)
NCD Neighborhood center 7,500
(See § 120-58)
(See § 120-22.3) 50
(See §§ 120-52 and
120-56)
18
(See § 120-56B)
10
(See §§ 120-55 and 120-
59)
10
(See §§ 120-55 and 120-
59)
None 2 1/2 stories, not to
exceed 35 feet
HT Highway transition;
residential office and
small-scale commercial
15,000; FAR of 0.25 75; 60 feet of
frontage
20 10
(See § 120-59)
10
(See § 120-59)
50%; 25%
minimum for
landscaping
(See § 120-
62.1)
3 stories or 45 feet,
whichever is less
120 Attachment 1:1 Supp 6, Jan 2021
WEYMOUTH CODE
District Type of Use
Minimum Lot
Size
(square feet)
Minimum Lot Area
(square feet per dwelling unit)
Minimum Lot
Width
(feet)
Minimum
Front Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum Side Yard
Depth
(feet)
Minimum Rear Yard
Depth
(feet)
Maximum Lot
Coverage
(percent of lot
area) Maximum Height
MS Medical-related
services
15,000 60; 60 feet of
frontage
(See § 120-56)
20 10, inclusive of walkways
and driveways, 5 feet of
which shall be landscaped
(See § 120-59)
10, inclusive of walkways
and driveways, 5 feet of
which shall be landscaped
(See § 120-59)
75% for
building and
paved areas;
25% minimum
for landscaping
(See § 120-
62.1)
3 stories or 45 feet,
whichever is less; 6
stories or 80 feet
whichever is less, by
special permit by the
Planning Board
B-1 Limited business 10,000
(See § 120-58)
100
(See §§ 120-56 and
120-58)
30, excluding
signs
10
(See § 120-59)
10
(See § 120-59)
50% and
minimum
landscaped area
(See § 120-
62.1)
6 stories, not to
exceed 80 feet
(See § 120-57)
B-2 General business None All units in multiple-family
residential buildings based on
FAR
(See § 120-6, “floor area ratio”)
None None None
(See § 120-59)
None
(See § 120-59)
None 6 stories, not to
exceed 80 feet
(See § 120-57)
I-1 Industrial park 20,000 100
(See §§ 120-56 and
120-60)
40 25
(See §§ 120-61 and 120-
62)
None
(See § 120-62)
80% and
minimum
landscaped area
(See § 12-62.1)
6 stories, not to
exceed 80 feet
(See § 120-57)
PIP Planned industrial park 43,560 (1 acre) 150
(See §§ 120-56 and
120-60)
40 plus 5 feet of
setback for each
story above 3rd
floor
(See §§ 120-
34H, and 120-
54)
25
(See §§ 120-34H, 120-61
and 120-62)
25
(See §§ 120-34H and 120-
62)
60%, paved and
buildings,
landscaped
(See § 120-
62.1)
3 stories, not to
exceed 35 feet; up to
6 stories, not to
exceed 80 feet, by
special permit from
the Planning Board
I-2 General industrial None None None None
(See § 120-62)
None
(See § 120-62)
None 6 stories, not to
exceed 80 feet
(See § 120-57)
POS Public facilities and
open space
None 40 feet; 40 feet of
frontage
20 10
(See § 120-59)
10
(See § 120-59)
75% for
building and
paved areas;
25% for
landscaping
3 stories or 35 feet,
whichever is greater
120 Attachment 1:2 Supp 6, Jan 2021